
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/07723/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision Promulgated            |
|On 17 July 2017                       |On 20 July 2017                 |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     J M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr T Ruddy of Jain Neil and Ruddy, solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS



1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of any information regarding
   the proceedings which would be likely to lead members of  the  public  to
   identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity direction  made  by  the
   First-tier Tribunal.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Ross promulgated on 24 April  2017,  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal on all grounds




3. The Appellant was born on 18 June 1982 and is a national  of  Sri  Lanka.
   On  12  July  2016,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Ross ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision.


5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 17 May  2017  Judge  M  J  Gillespie
   gave permission to appeal stating

      1. The appellant seeks  permission  to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Ross)  promulgated  on  24
      April 2017, whereby it dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
      decision of the respondent to refuse to grant a protection claim or  a
      human rights claim.


      2. The points raised in the proposed  grounds  of  appeal  are  fairly
      arguable.


      3. Permission is granted.

The Hearing

6. (a) Mr Ruddy, for the appellant, moved the grounds of appeal. He took  me
to [15] and [18] of the decision, where the Judge finds that the  fact  that
the appellant does not provide the name of a man who,  he  claims,  informed
the authorities of his LTTE activities until  his  witness  statement  is  a
factor which mitigates against the appellant's credibility.  Mr  Ruddy  took
me to question 125 of the asylum interview record,  and  told  me  that  the
appellant had not previously been asked to name the informant.  He  told  me
that it was unfair for the Judge to hold the timing  of  the  disclosure  of
the informant's name against the appellant.

(b) Mr Ruddy took me to [16], [17] and  [18]  of  the  decision  and,  after
reminding me that it is accepted that the appellant was  forcibly  recruited
into LTTE, told me that the Judge had given inadequate consideration to  the
background materials placed before. In the grounds of appeal Mr  Ruddy  sets
out  the  references  that  were  made  to  the  background   materials   in
submissions. He told  me  that  the  Judge  did  not  take  account  of  the
background materials and that, at [17], the Judge refers  to  one  paragraph
only in the background materials lodged by the respondent. He told  me  that
between [15] and [19], the Judge has failed to set out adequate reasons  for
his decision, and fails to demonstrate a careful analysis  of  the  evidence
placed before him. He told me that the failures were  material  because,  in
considering the risk categories set out in GJ and  Others  (post-civil  war:
returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), the Judge  is  required  to
consider the perception of the authorities. He told me that the  superficial
treatment the Judge gave to the evidence in this case demonstrates that  the
Judge did not consider the risk categories in GJ adequately.

(c) Mr Ruddy turned to [20] of the decision, where the Judge  considers  the
medical report from Dr Neil Dignan. He told  that  inadequate  consideration
was given to Dr Dignan's report, and reminded me that Dr Dignan  found  that
some of the  appellant's  injuries  are  consistent  with  level  D  of  the
Istanbul protocol, yet all the Judge does  is  repeat  an  extract  from  Dr
Dignan's findings, and does not analyse the  evidence  adequately.  He  then
turned to [21] and emphasised that, there,  the  Judge  appears  to  use  Dr
Dignan's conclusions as a reason for rejecting the  appellant's  account  of
detention and torture in May 2015.

(d) Mr Ruddy turned to [22], [23], [24] and [25] of the decision,  and  told
me that there the  Judge  misinterpreted  the  evidence  and  made  findings
against the appellant based on a misunderstanding  of  the  evidence  placed
before him. He turned [26] of the decision and  told  me  that  the  adverse
credibility findings demonstrate that the  Judge  did  not  properly  engage
with the evidence led, and that the findings made by the Judge are based  on
errors of fact made by the Judge.

(e) Mr Ruddy turned to [28] of the decision, and told me  that  the  Judge's
consideration of section 8 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  (Treatment  of
Claimants etc) Act 2004 is flawed. He insisted that a mandate  demonstrating
the date upon which he was instructed by the  appellant  was  produced,  and
has not been considered by the Judge. He told me that [29] to  [32]  of  the
decision are inadequately reasoned.

(f) Mr Ruddy told me that the inadequacy of findings of fact  and  the  lack
of reasoning contained in the decision indicated  that  the  Judge  has  not
given anxious scrutiny to each strand of evidence placed  before  him,  that
the Judge wrongly interpreted evidence and failed to consider other  strands
of evidence. He told  me  that  the  cumulative  effect  of  those  failings
amounts to a material error of law. He urged me to set  the  decision  aside
and to remit this case to the First-tier to be determined of new.

7. For the Respondent, Mr Matthews  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law, material or otherwise. He told me  that  the  grounds
of appeal did not identify errors of law but were immaterial and  irrelevant
arguments amounting to disagreements with the  conclusions  reached  by  the
Judge. He told me that the conclusions reached by the Judge are well  within
the range of reasonable conclusions available to the  Judge,  and  that  the
grounds of appeal amount to little more than an attempt to re-litigate  this
case. He urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.




Analysis

8. At [12]  and  [13]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  identifies  that  the
determinative issue is the appellant's account of arrest  and  detention  in
May 2015. At [14] of the decision, the Judge considers the  risk  categories
set out in GJ. At [15] of the decision, the  Judge  records  the  undisputed
fact that the appellant worked as a driver for LTTE between 1998  and  2003.
At both [14] and [17], the Judge makes reference to background materials.

9. At [16], the Judge declares that he found the appellant's evidence  about
his LTTE activities to be vague and lacking in specification. At  [18],  the
Judge doubts the appellant's account because 12 years pass between his  last
LTTE activity and the date of his claimed  detention.  At  [19],  the  Judge
declares that the appellant's account lacks plausibility. That  is  all  the
consideration the Judge gives to the issue which (the Judge says at [12]  of
the decision) is the determinative question. In essence, the  Judge  rejects
the appellant's claim to be detained and tortured in  May  2015  because  he
finds the appellant's account to be  vague,  lacking  in  specification  and
implausible.

10. At [20], the Judge records the findings of Dr Dignan, but does not  give
consideration to the Istanbul protocol, and at [21] says

      Accordingly, I find that the appellant's account of being detained and
      tortured in May 2015 is not credible.

11. From a straightforward reading of [21], it  is  not  clear  whether  the
Judge finds that it is Dr Dignan's report alone which  leads  to  a  finding
that the appellant is not credible. From a straightforward reading  of  [12]
to [21] of the decision, it is not clear why the  Judge  finds  either  that
the appellant's account  is  vague  and  incredible  or  that  the  positive
findings of Dr Dignan add nothing to the appellant's account.

12.   In M(DRC) 2003 UKIAT 00054 the Tribunal said  that  it  was  wrong  to
make adverse findings of  credibility  first  and  then  dismiss  an  expert
report.  Similarly, in  Ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469, Forbes  J  found
that an Adjudicator had been wrong to use adverse credibility findings as  a
basis for rejecting medical evidence without first considering  the  medical
evidence itself.   In Mazrae (2004) EWCA Civ 1235 the Court of  Appeal  said
that the Adjudicator's approach  to  credibility  was  flawed  in  that  she
appeared to have reached an adverse finding on credibility based  solely  on
the appellant's own account, a finding which she went  on  to  say  was  not
shaken by the background material and an expert  report,  having  considered
them separately.

13. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

14. Despite the fact that the Judge goes on  to  make  credibility  findings
between [22] and [29] of the decision, the Judge makes it clear  that  those
findings relate to the appellant's account of his escape from Sri Lanka  and
his journey to the UK. There is an inadequacy  of  analysis  and  reasoning,
and an inadequacy of findings  of  fact,  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
evidence of detention and torture in May 2015. Detention and torture in  May
2015 is the fulcrum of the appellant's claim. The Judge does not  adequately
explain why he found the appellant to be neither credible  nor  reliable  in
relation to the core aspects of his claim. The Judge does not make  reasoned
findings of fact in relation to the appellant's  account  of  detention  and
torture in May 2015. The Judge did not carefully analyse the report from  Dr
Dignan, nor did he incorporate those  findings  into  findings  of  fact  in
relation to the appellant's account of events in May 2015.

15. These are material errors of law. I therefore find that the decision  is
tainted by material errors of law and cannot stand.  I  must  therefore  set
aside.

16. I have already found material errors of law in the fact-finding  process
carried out by the First-tier in the decision promulgated on 24 April  2017.
I therefore find that I cannot substitute my own  decision  because  of  the
extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach  a  just  decision  in
this appeal.


Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

19. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Glasgow  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Ross.



Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

21. I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on  24  April  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 20 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


