
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07126/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 April 2018                               |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                           mr abdula aziz camonko
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson (instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant,  Mr  Camonko,
    who is a citizen of Mali in relation to the  rejection  of  his  asylum
    claim  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  Decision   and   Reasons
    promulgated on 25th September 2017 Judge Macdonald  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed his appeal.   The  challenge  to  that  Decision  is
    contained in quite detailed grounds which found favour with  the  Judge
    of the Upper Tribunal who granted permission.

 2. Essentially the Appellant's claim was that he came from  the  north  of
    Mali, in particular Kidal, and he had operated for many years,  fifteen
    in total, trading between  that  area  and  the  capital  Bamako.   The
    evidence was that he had been travelling  on  a  fortnightly  basis  to
    Bamako staying for a couple of days and then returning.   He  did  that
    for fifteen years until 2014.

 3. The situation in Mali descended into chaos in 2012  and  in  particular
    the northern area from which the Appellant came has been the subject of
    conflict,  fighting  and  human  rights  abuses  against  the  civilian
    population since 2012.  The Appellant's claim is that he fled from  his
    home area because of the violence and fighting and because he was asked
    to fight and travelled to Bamako.  It is his claim that when in  Bamako
    he was arrested, detained overnight and released the next day.  He says
    because an acquaintance of his told him he would be killed  if  he  did
    not get out that person arranged for his release and for him  to  leave
    the country on payment of 5,000,000 Mali  francs.   The  Appellant  did
    indeed flee the country via Belgium to the UK where he claimed  asylum.



 4. The Appellant's representatives had adduced an expert  report  from  Dr
    Wing dated August 2015.  I have to say that having seen  a  great  many
    experts report this one is exceedingly thin.  It is four pages long and
    I have to say also strays into matters more  properly  for  the  Judge.
    Most of what she says is opinion and of course she is  entitled  to  an
    opinion if indeed she is an expert and I have no reason to suppose that
    she is not.  However at paragraph  9  she  says  it  is  reasonable  to
    believe that Mr Camonko was detained upon his  arrival  in  Bamako  and
    subsequently able to bribe his way out of jail.  In Mali corruption  is
    rampant in the judicial system.  She is essentially suggesting that the
    Appellant's claim is credible.  That is a matter for the Judge.

 5. The first ground relied upon in attempting to  show  an  error  of  law
    argues that the Judge rejected the opinion of the expert concerning his
    being able to secure his release through payment of a bribe and suggest
    that the reasons the Judge gave for disbelieving that part of the claim
    were either mistaken or irrelevant.  They point to the  fact  that  the
    Judge said at paragraph 63 of the judgment that the expert had given no
    indication as to what documents had been considered.   The  Judge  does
    indeed say that and it is also  the  case  that  the  expert  sets  out
    paragraph 7 of her report the documents that she had before her.  Those
    effectively were the Appellant's  statement,  the  solicitor's  letter,
    basically the asylum documents.  What she does  not  refer  to  is  any
    independent evidence or country information that  she  is  basing  that
    opinion on and that is what I find the Judge was saying.

 6. The first ground also talks about the Judge making  comment  about  the
    expert being in the USA and not interviewing the  Appellant  and  makes
    the point quite rightly that an expert  can  give  an  opinion  without
    meeting an Appellant.  However that still does not mean that the  Judge
    has to accept the expert's opinion on a credibility finding that he has
    made and he gave reasons for finding.  The Judge found the  Appellant's
    claim to have been arrested  and  detained  in  Bamako  to  be  without
    credibility on the basis that he was detained only  overnight,  he  was
    not questioned at all, he was not  mistreated  at  all  and  even  more
    tellingly he was able to keep the substantial amount of money  that  he
    had on him; hardly the actions of a corrupt  authority.  If  they  were
    open to taking bribes then one would have thought they would also  have
    been open to removing the Appellant's money from him.   The  Judge  was
    entitled to find for the reasons he gave, which  are  all  sustainable,
    that that incident never happened.

 7. The Judge found that the Appellant would be at risk in  his  home  area
    based not only  on  the  expert  report  but  on  the  general  country
    information which makes it quite clear that the north of the country is
    not safe for anybody.  The Judge having  so  found  that  then  had  to
    consider whether it would be unduly harsh to expect  the  Appellant  to
    relocate to the capital.  In that regard the grounds suggested that the
    Judge again failed to take proper note of the expert's opinion that  he
    would be viewed with suspicion, he will be considered a spy, he will be
    at risk of being arrested again.  However the Judge disbelieved that on
    the basis that firstly he had not been  detained  the  first  time  and
    secondly that he was a frequent and regular visitor who must  have  had
    numerous acquaintances in Bamako.

 8. The grounds suggested it was speculative of the Judge to find  that  he
    would have friends and colleagues in Bamako.  That however  is  not,  I
    find, the case.  For somebody who for fifteen years had been travelling
    on a  fortnightly  basis  and  staying  for  two  days  trading  it  is
    inconceivable that he  would  not  have  colleagues  and  acquaintances
    there.  The Judge also noted that he had one  particular  colleague  to
    whom he had entrusted a considerable amount of money to.  That supports
    the finding that he has colleagues to whom he could turn in that  area.
    More tellingly is the fact that his own evidence was that his  wife  is
    in Bamako.  She presumably considers it safe to be  there  because  she
    travelled there from the north.

 9. The essential criticism therefore that the Judge was  not  entitled  to
    reject the expert evidence for the reasons he gave I find to be without
    merit.  The Judge has given detailed reasons as  to  why  he  made  the
    adverse credibility findings and why it would not be unduly  harsh  for
    this particular Appellant to relocate in safety to Bamako and for those
    reasons the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

10. No application for an anonymity direction.  One was  not  made  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I do not make one either


Signed                              Date 13th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
