








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07072/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 9 May 2019                       |On: 20 May 2019                      |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                                    M B P
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS





    Direction Regarding Anonymity


    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, who  was  born  on  1  June
    1999. He appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge promulgated on 26 February 2019, dismissing his  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights claims.


 2. The appellant comes from Helmand Province. He arrived in the  UK  on  7
    September 2011, when he was twelve years old. In the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 16 December 2011, on the appellant's  original  asylum
    claim, it was accepted that his father  worked  for  the  Americans  in
    Afghanistan.  He  claimed  that  his  parents  had  been  murdered  for
    politically motivated reasons. The  respondent  stated  that  he  could
    relocate to Kundoz Province where he had an aunt.


 3. His asylum appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  on  16  May
    2012. It was noted that the respondent  accepts  that  the  appellant's
    parents were killed by the Taliban because his father was  working  for
    the United States.


 4.  The  respondent  granted  him  5  years  discretionary  leave  as   an
    unaccompanied asylum seeking child in 2011 until 1 December  2016.  His
    application for further leave was refused on 12 July 2017 on the  basis
    that he could safely relocate to Kabul.


 5. Ms Kiai, who did not represent the appellant at his appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 11  February  2019,  submitted  that  the  Judge
    erroneously stated at [12] that  the  respondent  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claim that his father was killed because of  his  work  for
    the American army in Afghanistan. In addition he  wrongly  stated  that
    the respondent did not find the appellant to be credible regarding  his
    account of his parent's death at [13]. The  principles  in  Deevaseelan
    were thus not followed. The original decision was the starting point.


 6. The Judge made a material error of fact  as  to  the  position  of  the
    respondent which affected his assessment. At [34] and [35] he  went  on
    to reject the appellant's biographical account,  without  reference  to
    the fact that this account had been agreed between the parties and that
    he had accordingly not heard evidence on it. That resulted in his going
    on to rely  on  the  appellant's  lack  of  credibility  at  [36]  when
    concluding that the appellant had not made a genuine effort to  contact
    his aunt in Kundoz and when rejecting the psychiatric  evidence  of  Dr
    Ellis at [37].


 7. Ms Kiai further submitted that the Judge failed to consider the country
    expert reports of Dr Giustozzi and  Mr  Foxley,  or  give  reasons  for
    rejecting the reports. Both experts stated that the appellant would  be
    at risk of targeted persecution in his home area and in  Kundoz  (where
    his aunt lived) because of his father's work for the Americans, and the
    circumstances relating to the murder of his  parents.  Mr  Foxley  also
    believed that he would be  at  risk  of  serious  harm  on  account  of
    indiscriminate violence in Helmand and Kundoz and that he would  be  at
    risk of destitution and exploitation in Kabul.


 8. In finding at [35] that there was a lack of evidence  to  suggest  that
    the Taliban were likely to find the appellant in Kundoz;  and  that  at
    the time of his arrival he did not have a political profile because  of
    his age whilst in the country and has not been politically active;  and
    that there was a lack of evidence to  suggest  that  the  Taliban  have
    continued to show an interest  in  him  whilst  he  has  been  in  this
    country, the Judge failed to acknowledge, consider or engage  with  the
    opinion of those experts,  that, notwithstanding his age when  he  left
    Afghanistan, he would be perceived by the Taliban as a  sympathiser  of
    the international forces, that he would be targeted on that account and
    that the risk would extend to  Kundoz.  Nor  did  the  Judge  give  any
    reasons for rejecting their opinion.


 9. Nor, she submitted, did the Judge acknowledge or consider  the  opinion
    of Mr Foxley that the appellant could not safely relocate to Kabul. Nor
    did his consideration of internal relocation at [38] take into  account
    any of the country background evidence that  the  appellant  submitted,
    which post dated the decision in AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2018] UKUT 0118.


10. That evidence demonstrated that there had been major reports from UNAMA
    and EASO regarding the increased number of civilian casualties in  2017
    and 2018. The background evidence was produced from  page  350  in  the
    bundle. The Judge failed to consider whether this evidence justified  a
    departure from AS. Nor did he give any adequate reasoning as to why the
    facts could not be distinguished from the conclusions in AS. He  failed
    to give weight to the UNHCR's opinion dated 2018 where the  advice  for
    the first time was that Kabul should not be relied on  as  an  internal
    relocation alternative for anyone, including healthy, single men.


11. Ms Kiai asserted - ground 5 - that the Judge dismissed the  psychiatric
    evidence on inadequate or irrational reasons. It was not disputed  that
    the appellant arrived in the UK with  serious  mental  health  problems
    which had gradually improved with support and stability. Dr Ellis,  the
    consultant  psychiatrist,  found  that  the  appellant  was   presently
    suffering from PTSD of "mild severity."


12. His removal from the UK would remove several protective factors in  his
    life and would likely lead to a significant deterioration in his mental
    health. He had a history of self harm and his risk of suicide would  be
    increased. The appellant's present vulnerabilities  would  also  reduce
    his ability to access healthcare and meaningful employment. The  report
    showed that he would not have access  to  mental  healthcare  in  Kabul
    which would make him highly vulnerable to exploitation.


13. She submitted  that  the  Judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  Dr  Ellis's
    evidence are flawed. His report must be seen in the light of  the  lack
    of credibility surrounding the claim of his lack of  contact  with  his
    family in Afghanistan. Even if he is suffering from PTSD, the Judge  in
    reliance on AS concluded that he could cope in Kabul  with  or  without
    family support. At [39] he stated that the extent of his PTSD is  mild,
    with a suggestion that it would  deteriorate  which  was  in  his  view
    speculative.


14. Ms Kiai submitted that the Tribunal in  AS  held  that  the  particular
    circumstances of an individual applicant must be taken into account  in
    the context of conditions in the place  of  relocation,  including  his
    age,  nature  and  quality   of   support   networks/connections   with
    Kabul/Afghanistan, their psychological and  mental  health,  and  their
    language, education and vocational skills, when determining  whether  a
    person  falls  within  the  general  position  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single adult male in good health  to
    relocate to Kabul even if he does not have any specific connections  or
    support network there.


15. She submitted that it was meaningless to describe Dr Ellis's  prognosis
    as speculative. He carried out  'a  forward  looking'  risk  assessment
    which was based on his medical expertise  and  proper  reasoning.  Both
    experts had built into their assessments of his vulnerability, the fact
    that he had learned English and that he had been brought to the UK at a
    tender age.


16. Finally,  she  contended  that  the  social  worker  gave  unchallenged
    evidence that the  appellant  required  more  support  than  a  typical
    nineteen year old and that when he experienced difficulties  he  tended
    to become upset, harmed himself and had thoughts  of  suicide.  He  had
    never lived independently.


17. The social worker did not believe that the appellant would be  able  to
    function or look after himself without a support network. Although  the
    evidence was referred to by the Judge at [27], he failed to consider it
    at all in his assessment of the  appellant's  ability  to  relocate  to
    Kabul.  The  social  worker's  evidence  was  also  relevant   to   the
    circumstances  to  be  considered  under  headnote  [iii]  of  AS;  the
    application of country guidance determination in  AA  (Afghanistan)  CG
    [2012] UKUT 0016 on which the appellant relied; and to the  conclusions
    of Dr Ellis and Mr Foxley.


18. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow submitted that  the  submissions
    amount to a disagreement with the reasoned findings of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. AS is the recent country guidance. Although the situation  in
    Kabul is not perfect,  the  authorities  are  able  to  provide  stable
    conditions.


19. Dr Ellis in his report at 8.6.2, acknowledges that it is  difficult  to
    predict how precisely the prospect  of  forced  return  to  Afghanistan
    would result in a significant deterioration in his mental health.


20. Mr Tarlow submitted that it was for the Judge to decide what weight  to
    give to the report.


21. The finding at [37] that even if the appellant is suffering from  PTSD,
    he is likely with or without family support  to  be  able  to  cope  in
    Afghanistan and particularly in Kabul, was a finding open to the Judge.
    Similarly, his finding at [39] that the extent of his PTSD is mild  and
    the suggestion  that  it  would  deteriorate  is  speculative  and  was
    similarly open to him.  The  Judge  noted  that  he  has  improved  his
    education in the UK and would have learned skills  which  would  be  of
    assistance to him on his return. He has shown  resilience  in  arriving
    here at a tender age with no knowledge of this country.


22. It was open to the Judge to conclude that he was not  going  to  depart
    from the country guidance in AS.


23. Taken as a whole, the determination can stand.


24. In reply, Ms Kiai submitted his finding that notwithstanding  the  fact
    that he had PTSD, the appellant could cope, does  not  properly  engage
    with  the  country  guidance  decision  at  headnote  [iii].  All   the
    particular circumstances must be taken into account.


25. Nor did the Judge properly engage with the evidence or explain why  the
    appellant could relocate safely. No adequate reasons have  been  given.
    She submitted that the expert did not find  that  the  appellant  could
    return with mental health problems. The Judge did not grapple with  his
    opinion.


26. Nor did he give proper reasons for distinguishing AS,  which  has  been
    considered by the Court of Appeal. It  dealt  with  a  mistake  in  the
    country guidance case about indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan. The
    Tribunal  had  found  that  the  proportion  of  the  Kabul  population
    suffering death or serious injury in security incidents was "less  than
    0.01." The actual figure, which was undisputed, is  "around  0.1".  The
    difference was thus between less than 1  in  10,000  and  around  1  in
    1,000. In the circumstances, AS still remains country guidance and will
    need to be distinguished by pointing to the Court of Appeal judgment.



    Assessment


27. Counsel who represented the  appellant  at  his  asylum  appeal  on  11
    February 2019 has produced a short  statement  dated  8  May  2019.  Mr
    Tarlow did not object to its admission.


28. Counsel stated that at the end of the brief oral evidence, both she and
    the presenting officer made submissions.  During  her  submissions  she
    reminded the Judge that the truth of the appellant's account of  events
    in Afghanistan had not been challenged by the Home Office.


29. Mr Tarlow submitted that any error made by the Judge, even if based  on
    the erroneous premise that the respondent had rejected the  appellant's
    account  of  events  in  Afghanistan,   was   not   material   in   the
    circumstances.


30. It is evident however, that the Judge did base his assessment  on  that
    incorrect premise.


31. He also failed  to  treat  the  previous  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davison as his starting  point.   He  had  accepted  the
    appellant's account. He did not refer to that determination or  to  the
    acceptance of the appellant's account  of  events  leading  up  to  his
    flight from Afghanistan.


32. In the circumstances, the Judge rejected the  appellant's  biographical
    account without noting that this account had been  agreed  between  the
    parties and which is the reason why he had not therefore heard evidence
    on that account.


33. That  credibility  finding  in  turn  affected  his  finding  that  the
    appellant had made genuine efforts  to  contact  his  aunt  in  Kundoz.
    Further, the appellant's diagnosis of PTSD must be seen in the light of
    the lack of credibility surrounding  his  lack  of  contacts  with  his
    family in Afghanistan [37].


34. Nor did the Judge engage with the opinions of the two experts that  the
    appellant would be perceived by the Taliban as  a  sympathiser  of  the
    international forces and would be targeted on that account.  That  risk
    moreover would extend to Kundoz. No reasons were given  for  discarding
    their opinions.


35. It was not in dispute that the appellant arrived in the UK with serious
    mental health problems which had improved with support  and  stability.
    As noted, he was presently suffering from PTSD of  mild  severity.  His
    removal would accordingly remove  several  protective  factors  in  his
    life, leading to a significant deterioration in his mental  health.  Dr
    Ellis noted that he had a history of self harm, and his risk of suicide
    would be increased. Given his vulnerabilities, it was  noted  that  his
    ability  to  access  healthcare  and  meaningful  employment  would  be
    reduced. Mr Foxley was of the opinion that the appellant would not have
    access to mental healthcare in Kabul, rendering him  highly  vulnerable
    to exploitation.


36. In considering whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  a
    single adult to relocate to Kabul, even if he does  not  have  specific
    connections or support networks there, the Tribunal in AS dealt with an
    adult male in good health. The Tribunal  however  also  underlined  the
    fact that the particular circumstances of the individual must be  taken
    into account in the context of conditions in the place  of  relocation.
    In particular, this included not  only  his  age  and  the  quality  of
    support network or connections that he may have but also  his  physical
    and mental health.


37. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider the implications of  the
    appellant's mental health in concluding that he could  cope  in  Kabul.
    Moreover, Dr Ellis made a prognosis of the likely implications for  the
    appellant on return based on his medical expertise. He has set out  the
    basis for his concerns.


38. Both experts have taken into account that  the  appellant  had  learned
    English and that he had been brought to the UK at  a  tender  age.  The
    Judge's finding  at  [39]  that  the  appellant  had  shown  tremendous
    resilience by arriving in the UK at the tender age of  twelve  when  he
    had no knowledge of this country and that  he  is  "not"  -  presumably
    'now' -  an adult with more life experience, did not factor in  whether
    his  current  vulnerabilities  would  reduce  his  ability  to   access
    healthcare  or  proper  employment.  Nor  was  his   vulnerability   to
    exploitation in these circumstances considered.


39. Nor did the Judge consider as part of that assessment, the evidence  of
    Mr Robert Young, the appellant's social worker.   He  stated  that  the
    appellant required more support than a typical nineteen  year  old  and
    that when he experienced difficulties, he tended to become upset,  harm
    himself and had suicidal ideation. He had never lived independently. Mr
    Young did not believe that he would be able to function or  look  after
    himself without a support network. Although that evidence was  referred
    to by the Judge at [27] he failed to consider its significance  in  the
    context of assessing his ability to relocate to Kabul.


40. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
    of an error on a point of law. I accordingly set the decision aside.


41. The parties agreed that if that conclusions was reached, this is a case
    which should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    decision to be made.


42. I find that the extent of judicial fact finding which is necessary  for
    the decision to be re-made is extensive. In the circumstances,  I  find
    that this is a proper case to remit.


    Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is set aside.


    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, Hatton Cross, for  a
    fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


    Anonymity direction continued.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer  Signed and dated 16 May 2019


