
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07871/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|At a remote hearing via Skype for Business|On 08 December 2020              |
|                                          |                                 |
|On 26 November 2020                       |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                  VASAN [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Muquit, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Introduction

      1. This decision should be read alongside my 'error of  law'  decision
         sent on 23 September 2020, in which I found that  the  decision  of
         the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 6 January 2020  ('the  2020
         FTT), contained errors of law such that it was  set  aside,  to  be
         remade in the Upper Tribunal ('UT').

      2. I now remake the  decision  arising  from  the  appellant's  appeal
         against the respondent's decision dated 1 August 2019 to refuse his
         international protection and human rights claims. As agreed at  the
         'error of law' hearing and confirmed in  the  appellant's  skeleton
         argument before me, the appeal  is  now  limited  -  the  appellant
         places no reliance  upon  his  international  protection  claim  or
         Article 3, ECHR; he contends  that  his  particular  circumstances,
         including his private life, are such  that  his  appeal  should  be
         allowed on Article 8, ECHR grounds.

      3. Although the FTT made an  anonymity  direction,  the  appellant  no
         longer relies upon his claim for international protection.   I  did
         not grant an anonymity order for the purposes of my 'error of  law'
         decision, and no application for anonymity has been made before me.

Background

      4. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, now aged 50.   He  entered
         the  United  Kingdom  ('UK')  in  1998,  when  he  claimed  asylum.
         Although his asylum claim was refused and a subsequent appeal to  a
         Special Adjudicator dismissed in a decision dated 13 December  1999
         ('the 1999 decision'), the appellant made  further  submissions  to
         remain in the UK on 15 March 2002.  I was not told why there was  a
         lengthy delay in responding to these submissions or the  basis  for
         the grant, but the appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain
         ('ILR') on 15 September 2014.

      5. The appellant was convicted of fraud on 19 March 2015 and sentenced
         to 30 months imprisonment.    The  respondent  issued  him  with  a
         deportation order on 4 November 2016, having refused his asylum and
         human rights claims.  The appellant appealed against this  decision
         to the FTT but did not pursue submissions on asylum,  only  Article
         8, albeit the FTT made adverse findings on the asylum claim.

Resumed hearing before the UT

      6. At the beginning of the resumed  hearing  before  me,  the  parties
         agreed that the appellant should be treated as  vulnerable  in  the
         light of the contents of an independent psychiatric report dated 28
         October  2020,  prepared  by  Dr  Pranveer  Singh,   a   Consultant
         Psychiatrist.  Mr Muquit submitted that there was no need  to  make
         structural adjustments to the hearing itself but that the requisite
         caution should be applied to questions asked and  the  approach  to
         the appellant's answers.  Mr Bates agreed with  this  approach  and
         the hearing proceeded on this basis.

      7. Each party relied upon their respective  bundle  of  materials.   I
         confirmed that prior  to  the  hearing  I  had  read  both  bundles
         together with the respective written submissions.  Mr  Muquit  also
         submitted a helpful document summarising some of the  key  evidence
         relied upon by the  appellant.   The  parties  were  also  able  to
         clarify the following with  a  view  to  narrowing  the  issues  in
         dispute:

          i) The appellant would be  called  as  a  witness  and  would  be
             subject  to  cross-examination  but  at  all  material  times,
             treated as a vulnerable witness.

         ii) The appellant's friend, who wished to be  referred  to  as  Mr
             Nathan, would also be called as a witness and  cross-examined.
             Time was taken to check Mr Nathan's immigration history in the
             UK. Mr Bates confirmed that he was satisfied  that  Mr  Nathan
             came from Sri Lanka to the UK as a student  in  1979  and  was
             naturalised as a British citizen in 1992.

        iii) Mr Bates agreed that the OASYS report dated 15 May 2017 relied
             upon by the appellant assessed him as having a low risk of re-
             offending in  2017,  and  this  remained  unaltered  with  the
             passage of time.  When I asked whether the risk could  now  be
             said to be  very  low  as  the  appellant  has  been  entirely
             compliant, Mr Bates submitted that this  was  to  be  expected
             given the deportation proceedings.

         iv) Mr Bates accepted Dr  Singh's  diagnosis  that  the  appellant
             suffered from moderate depressions  but  did  not  accept  his
             conclusion  that  there  would  be  a  deterioration  in   the
             appellant's mental health condition upon return to Sri  Lanka.
             Mr Bates noted in this regard that Dr Singh  did  not  address
             the availability  of  treatment  in  Sri  Lanka  or  that  the
             appellant's fears in Sri Lanka are not well-founded.

          v) Both representatives placed reliance upon  country  background
             evidence on mental health facilities in Sri Lanka contained in
             the respondent's Country  Policy  and  Information  Note,  Sri
             Lanka: Medical  treatment  and  healthcare,  July  2020  ('the
             CPIN').

         vi) Both representatives agreed expressed broad  agreement  as  to
             the applicable legal framework when undertaking an  Article  8
             assessment in the context of  the  deportation  of  a  foreign
             criminal.  I drew their attention  to  the  recent  Strasbourg
             judgment of Unuane v UK, App no. 80343/17 (24 November  2020).
             They were both familiar with it and agreed that this  did  not
             materially change the complexion  of  the  guidance  that  has
             recently been provided by the Court of Appeal on this issue.

        vii) Mr Muquit confirmed that he did not rely  upon  Article  3  or
             international protection, and the appellant's case was  firmly
             predicated upon Article 8 only.   As to Article 8,  Mr  Muquit
             accepted that Exception 2 in s.  117C(5)  of  the  Nationality
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') did not apply
             because the appellant had no family life for the  purposes  of
             Article 8 in the UK.  Mr  Muquit  also  acknowledged  that  s.
             117C(4)(a) could not be met but that (b) and (c) were  met  in
             such a strong way  that  they  amounted  to  "very  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in  Exceptions  1
             and 2" required to outweigh the requisite public interest, for
             the purposes of s. 117C(6).

      8. I heard evidence from the appellant and Mr Nathan.  They  confirmed
         the truth of their respective witness statements  and  were  cross-
         examined briefly.  I asked a few questions to clarify matters.

      9. I then heard helpful detailed submissions from each representative.
           Mr  Bates  invited  me  to  find  that  the  seriousness  of  the
         appellant's offending was such that there remained  a  very  strong
         public interest in his deportation notwithstanding his low risk  of
         reoffending.  He submitted that this public interest could  not  be
         outweighed by the appellant's lengthy but weak  private  life.   Mr
         Muquit reminded me that the public interest  is  multi-faceted  and
         flexible.  Upon careful scrutiny I  should  find  that  the  public
         interest in this appellant's deportation is weak and in  any  event
         outweighed by the very compelling circumstances of  his  case.   He
         relied in particular upon the appellant's length of stay outside of
         Sri Lanka and his particular vulnerabilities,  which  he  submitted
         constituted very significant obstacles to his  re-integration  with
         Sri-Lanka.  I address  the  representatives'  submissions  in  more
         detail when I make my findings below.

     10. At the conclusion of the  hearing  both  representatives  confirmed
         that they were content that the hearing, which took place over  the
         course of some four hours via Skype  for  Business,  was  conducted
         fully and fairly and they had no concerns whatsoever.   We  took  a
         number of breaks and the process was explained to the appellant  at
         every stage.  The representatives were satisfied, as  was  I,  that
         this mode of hearing involved no  prejudice  to  the  interests  of
         either party. This was a public  hearing  as  I  sat  in  court  at
         Manchester CJC.  I am  satisfied  that  the  mode  of  hearing  was
         necessary, appropriate and proportionate.

Legal framework

     11. The proper approach to the relevant Article 8 balancing exercise in
         a case such as this,  where  a  deportation  order  has  been  made
         against a foreign national, is to be found in  paragraphs  398-399A
         of the Immigration Rules and Part 5A (s. 117A-D) of the  2002  Act.
         It is  generally  unnecessary  for  a  tribunal  to  refer  to  the
         Immigration Rules in a case such as this where there is no  dispute
         that the relevant provisions are reflected within Part 5A - see  HA
         (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ  1176  at  [22].   I  therefore  turn
         immediately to the relevant text of Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

             "117A Application of this Part

             (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required
                  to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                  Acts -

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                      family life under article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
                  tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                      117B, and

                  (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                      criminals to the considerations listed in section
                      117C.

             (3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest question' means
                  the question of whether an interference with a person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is justified
                  under article 8(2).

             117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
             all cases

               1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
                  the public interest.

             ...

             (4)  Little weight should be given to -

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                      is established by a person at a time when the person
                      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
                  established by a person at a time when the person's
                  immigration status is precarious

             ..."

     12. S. 117B is followed by this at s. 117C:

             "Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
             foreign criminals

               1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                  interest.

               2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
                  criminal, the greater is the public interest in
                  deportation of the criminal.

               3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation unless
                  Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

               4) Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                      integration into the country to which C is proposed
                      to be deported.

               5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child
                  would be unduly harsh.

               6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced
                  to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the
                  public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                  compelling circumstances, over and above those described
                  in Exceptions 1 and 2..."

     13. Foreign criminals who fall within s. 117C(3) because they have been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12  months  but
         less than four years have been referred  to  in  the  case  law  as
         'medium offenders', in contrast to those with a  sentence  of  four
         years or more, who are described as 'serious offenders'.

     14. As I set out above, at the hearing before me,  there  was  no  real
         dispute between the parties as to the applicable  legal  framework.
         The dispute turned upon the application of the  factual  matrix  to
         the governing legal test in s. 117C(6) in the 2002 Act, as informed
         by the remainder of Part 5A and the criteria to  be  considered  as
         part of the relevant balancing exercise contained in the Strasbourg
         authorities on Article 8.  It  was  undisputed  that  although  the
         appellant was a 'medium offender' and not a 'serious offender'  for
         the purposes of s. 117C, ss. (6) still applied  to  him  -  see  NA
         (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA 662, [2017] 1  WLR  207  at  [25]  to
         [27].

     15. As set  out  above,  the  parties  accepted  that  Unuane  did  not
         materially change the complexion of  the  recent  Court  of  Appeal
         guidance in HA (Iraq).  At [29(A)] Underhill LJ made it clear  that
         in a case such as this wherein it is accepted that the appellant is
         a 'medium  offender'  who  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Exceptions:

             "... a full proportionality assessment is  required,  weighing
             the interference with the article 8 rights  of  the  potential
             deportee and his family against the  public  interest  in  his
             deportation. In conducting that assessment the  decision-maker
             is required by section 117C (6)  (and  paragraph  398  of  the
             Rules) to proceed on  the  basis  that  "the  public  interest
             requires  deportation  unless  there   are   very   compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in  Exceptions  1
             and 2"."

     16. In short, the parties agreed that Part 5A of the 2002 Act  provides
         scope for all relevant factors to be  taken  into  account  in  the
         proportionality assessment and that, in considering  whether  'very
         compelling circumstances' for the purposes of s. 117C(6) exist, the
         tribunal should consider the proportionality test required  by  the
         Strasbourg Court - see [27] and [38] of  HA  (Iraq)  and   [81]  of
         Unuane.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  when  I  refer  to  'very
         compelling circumstances' during the course of this decision, I  am
         merely using this as shorthand for the full expression contained in
         s. 117C(6) i.e. "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
         those described in Exceptions 1 and 2...".

     17. In my judgment, the parties were correct to adopt the position they
         did.  After all, as set out at [82] of Unuane, in Hesham Ali v SSHD
         [2016] UKSC 60 Lord Reed made it clear at [46]  that  it  was  "the
         duty of appellate tribunals, as  independent  judicial  bodies,  to
         make their own assessment of the proportionality of deportation  in
         any particular case on the basis of their own findings  as  to  the
         facts and their understanding of the  relevant  law",  although  he
         acknowledged that in doing  so  "they  should  attach  considerable
         weight to [the policy adopted by the Secretary  of  State]."   This
         was re-emphasised by Lord Reed in R (Agyarko) v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC
         11,  where  he  highlighted  that   the   test   remains   one   of
         proportionality.  These  Supreme  Court  decisions  turned  on  the
         application of the Immigration Rules alone and before the advent of
         Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  However, as the Court of Appeal explained
         at [46] to [50] of Akinyemi v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2098, [2020] 1
         WLR 1843, ('Akinyemi (no. 2)') the underlying  principles  relevant
         to the assessment of the weight to be given to the public  interest
         and Article 8 have not been changed by the introduction of the new
         regime in Part 5A, and Hesham Ali remains authorative.  The purpose
         of the new regime was to give statutory force, accompanied by  some
         re-wording, to principles which had already been established in the
         case-law relating to the Immigration Rules.  Subsequent authorities
         have  highlighted  the  continued  importance   of   conducting   a
         proportionality exercise after the implementation of s.  117C.   As
         Underhill LJ went on to observe in HA (Iraq) at [30]:

             "It will be convenient to refer to the  second  stage  as  the
             exercise "required by section 117C(6)" or similar phrases, but
             that is arguably slightly  misleading.  The  second  stage  is
             necessary not because  of  section  117C(6)  but  because  the
             effect of article 8 is that a  proportionality  assessment  is
             required in every case (at least where the issue  is  raised):
             what section 117C(6) does is to prescribe the weight that  has
             to be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  deportation  when
             carrying  out  that  assessment  (in  a  case  where   neither
             Exception applies)."

     18. The public interest  is  movable  and  in  certain  cases  must  be
         approached flexibly for the reasons outlined in Akinyemi No.  2  at
         [39] to [52].  In other words,  although  there  may  be  few  such
         cases, it must be recognised that there will  be  cases  where  the
         circumstances in the individual  case  reduce  the  legitimate  and
         strong public interest in removal - hence the flexible approach  to
         the public interest.  A full assessment of the public interest must
         then be balanced against an assessment of  the  Article  8  factors
         said either on  their  own  or  cumulatively  to  constitute  'very
         compelling circumstances'.  The flexibility of the public  interest
         does not mean that the  s.  117C(6)  test  is  anything  less  than
         "extremely demanding".  As Underhill  LJ  put  it  at  [38]  of  HA
         (Iraq):

             "The effect is clear:  circumstances  will  have  to  be  very
             compelling in order to be sufficiently compelling to  outweigh
             the strong public interest in deportation."

     19. That remains the test under s. 117C(6) and it is the  test  that  I
         apply.

     20. The list of relevant factors to consider when  applying  that  test
         "is not closed" (see GM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1630  at
         [31]) and requires "a wide-ranging exercise", so as to ensure  that
         Part 5A produces a result  compatible  with  Article  8  -  see  NA
         (Pakistan) at [29] and [32] as endorsed in HA (Iraq) at [33].  This
         means that the foreign criminal is permitted to rely  upon  matters
         relevant to one or both Exceptions as well as his ability  to  meet
         these  in  conjunction  with  other   factors   collectively.    In
         particular, the concept of private life, as set out  in  Strasbourg
         authorities such as Uner v The Netherlands [2006] 45  EHRR  14  and
         summarised in Akinyemi No. 2 at [46]-[51] is wide.   This  includes
         social ties with relatives and  friends  as  well  as  ties  formed
         through employment and participation in communal  activities.   The
         totality of social ties between settled migrants and the  community
         as well as social identity must be carefully considered  -  see  CI
         (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 at [57] to [59].

     21. The wide-ranging evaluative  exercise  required  under  s.  117C(6)
         clearly includes an application of the principles in the Strasbourg
         authorities to ensure compatibility with the UK's obligations under
         Article 8 and must be accommodated within the  statutory  scheme  -
         see NA (Pakistan) at [29] and [38]; HA (Iraq) at [28] and Unuane at
         [72-75] and [81-83].    The  Strasbourg  authorities  set  out  the
         relevant criteria to use in order to assess  whether  an  expulsion
         measure was necessary in a democratic society and proportionate  to
         the legitimate aim pursued.  The respective weight to  be  attached
         to these criteria will inevitably vary according  to  the  specific
         circumstances of each case - see Unuane  at  [78].  These  criteria
         (for an Article 8 case not relying upon family  life)  include  the
         following inter alia:

             -    the nature and seriousness of the offence committed;

             -    the length of the stay in the UK;

             -    the time elapsed since the offence was committed and  the
             conduct during that period;

             -    the nationalities of the various persons concerned;

             -    the seriousness of the difficulties the person is  likely
             to encounter in the country to which the applicant  is  to  be
             expelled;

             -    the solidity of social, cultural and family ties with the
             host country and with the country of destination.

     22. This is a case in which it was conceded that  the  requirements  of
         the Exceptions cannot be  met.   Nevertheless,  facts  and  matters
         relevant to the assessment of whether an Exception  applies  remain
         relevant to the overall assessment,  and  could  be  sufficient  to
         outweigh the public interest in deportation either,  if  especially
         strong, by themselves or in combination with other factors.  It  is
         therefore important to assess  matters  relevant  to  Exception  1,
         including the appellant's social and cultural ties to  the  UK  and
         the extent of any obstacles to re-integration with Sri  Lanka.   As
         the Court put it in NA (Pakistan) at [29] (as endorsed in HA (Iraq)
         at [33]):

             "... [A] foreign  criminal  is  entitled  to  rely  upon  such
             matters, but he would need to be able to point to features  of
             his case of a kind mentioned in Exceptions 1  and  2  (and  in
             paras. 399 or  399A  of  [the  Rules]),  or  features  falling
             outside the circumstances described in  those  Exceptions  and
             those paragraphs, which made his  claim  based  on  Article  8
             especially strong." (my emphasis)

     23. At [32] of NA (Pakistan) the Court specifically addressed the  case
         of medium offenders, as follows:

             "... [I]n the case of a medium offender, if all [the potential
             deportee] could advance in support of his Article 8 claim  was
             a 'near miss' case in which he fell short of bringing  himself
             within either Exception 1 or Exception  2,  it  would  not  be
             possible to say that  he  had  shown  that  there  were  'very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2'. He would need to have a far stronger case
             than that by reference to the interests protected by Article 8
             to bring himself within that fall back protection. But  again,
             in principle there may be cases in which such an offender  can
             say  that  features  of  his  case  of  a  kind  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and  2  have  such  great  force  for  Article  8
             purposes  that  they  do  constitute  such   very   compelling
             circumstances, whether taken by themselves or  in  conjunction
             with other factors relevant  to  Article  8  but  not  falling
             within the factors  described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2.  The
             decision maker, be it the Secretary of State  or  a  tribunal,
             must look at all the  matters  relied  upon  collectively,  in
             order to determine whether they are sufficiently compelling to
             outweigh  the  high  public  interest  in  deportation."   (my
             emphasis)

     24. Only "a very strong claim indeed"  will  be  successful,  requiring
         "very compelling reasons" to outweigh the "strong  public  interest
         in the deportation of foreign nationals" - per Lord  Reed  at  [37]
         and [38] of Hesham Ali.  Generally,  "every  foreign  criminal  who
         appeals against a deportation  order  by  reference  to  his  human
         rights must negotiate a formidable hurdle before  his  appeal  will
         succeed" and "needs to be in a position  to  assemble  and  present
         powerful evidence" - per Lord Wilson at [55]  of  R  (Blyndloss)  v
         SSHD [2017] 1 WLR 2380.   The  cases  in  which  circumstances  are
         sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high  public  interest  in
         deportation will be "rare" - see NA (Pakistan) at [33].

Findings

Factual findings

     25. In making my findings I bear  in  mind  as  a  starting  point  the
         adverse  credibility  findings  in   the   1999   decision.     The
         Adjudicator rejected the appellant's claim to  have  been  arrested
         and detained by the authorities during which time he was questioned
         about the LTTE.  He also rejected his claim to have  been  targeted
         by the LTTE but found that in any event he could relocate away from
         his home area in northern Sri Lanka to  Colombo.   I  note  however
         that this decision makes no clear reference to the relevant country
         background material relevant to Tamils living in the north  of  Sri
         Lanka at this time and the apparent plausibility of the appellant's
         account when viewed in that context - see GJ and others (post-civil
         war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC),  which
         contains references to the history of the conflict in Sri Lanka.

     26. I also acknowledge the adverse credibility  findings  made  by  the
         2020 FTT at [43] to [46].  The asylum claim was formally  withdrawn
         before me  and  it  was  therefore  unnecessary  to  address  those
         findings in my  error  of  law  decision.   However,  some  of  the
         findings are undermined by the errors of law vitiating the decision
         on Article 8 grounds.  At [12] of my  'error  of  law'  decision  I
         concluded that the FTT erred in its approach to  the  OASYS  report
         before it.  This undermines the findings at [44]  and  [45].    The
         finding at [46] rejecting the appellant's account of not being able
         to trace his family members in Sri Lanka has not engaged  with  the
         country background evidence relevant to the widespread  killing  of
         civilians around 2009, when  the  appellant  lost  touch  with  his
         family.  Indeed, I note that the respondent regarded this claim  to
         be plausible at [46] and [47] of the decision under appeal.

     27. The appellant has provided a  consistent  account  over  a  lengthy
         period that he lost contact with his parents in around 2009.   This
         is consistent  with  the  background  evidence  and  I  accept  his
         evidence.  I note that the appellant told Dr Singh that he used  to
         support his parents and brother in  Sri  Lanka  and  worried  about
         them.  Mr Bates did not pursue this issue in cross-examination.  Mr
         Bates focussed his efforts understandably on apparent weaknesses in
         the  appellant's  private  life  and  the  appellant's  ability  to
         overcome obstacles in Sri Lanka.  Mr  Bates  did  not  dispute  the
         genuineness of the appellant's  subjective  beliefs  but  submitted
         they are well-founded.

     28. I accept that although there have been adverse credibility findings
         made regarding the appellant, he provided  credible  oral  evidence
         before me on the main themes relevant to his Article  8  claim:  he
         has some friendship ties in the UK albeit he has found it difficult
         to develop these more  because  of  his  mental  health  since  his
         imprisonment; he has no friendship or family ties remaining in  Sri
         Lanka; he feels 'scared to death' to return to Sri Lanka because he
         believes that he will have 'no life' there and will be subjected to
         serious harm for reasons relating to  his  claimed  history,  Tamil
         ethnic origin and absence of any support,  such  that  he  will  be
         entirely unable  to  secure  employment  and  accommodation.   This
         evidence was supported by Mr Nathan  and  is  consistent  with  the
         contents of the OASYS report and Dr Singh's  comprehensive  history
         of the matter in his report.  The previous decision-makers did  not
         have the benefit of a report from  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist  and
         therefore did not treat the appellant as vulnerable.  I  note  that
         an adjournment to obtain psychiatric evidence was made to the  2020
         FTT but refused.

Approach to S. 117(6) / proportionality balancing exercise

     29. As the Exceptions in s. 117C are clearly not met in this case it is
         unnecessary to take that 'shortcut' (see [60]  of  HA  (Iraq)).   I
         therefore proceed directly to the proportionality assessment to  be
         determined under s. 117C(6), with a  view  to  considering  whether
         there are 'very compelling circumstances'  which  are  sufficiently
         compelling to outweigh the strong public interest  in  deportation.
         I turn first to the public interest side of the scales in this case
         before then conducting the 'wide-ranging exercise'  of  considering
         all the circumstances pertinent to this  appellant,  on  the  other
         side of the scales.  Each of these assessments and then the overall
         balancing exercise inevitably involves the weighing of  'pros'  and
         cons' and I do so, albeit I have not found it helpful to explicitly
         categorise the relevant factors in this manner, in this  particular
         case.





Public interest

     30. Respect must be paid to the high level of importance given to the
         public interest in deporting foreign criminals and I remind myself
         of the guidance I set above in this respect.  The public interest
         is multi-faceted and it is important to carefully evaluate the
         particular facets of the public interest in this case.

Nature and seriousness of offending

     31. I begin with the seriousness of the offending, which is directly
         relevant to s. 117C(6) itself (see HA (Iraq) at [91] to [95]) and
         comprises one of the most important of the Strasbourg criteria set
         out above.  The authorative measure of the degree of seriousness is
         the sentence imposed, as explained in the sentencing comments.

     32. The appellant has committed an offence involving dishonesty and
         fraud of an undoubtedly concerning nature, as evidenced by the
         length of the prison sentence.  Mr Muquit submitted that the
         appellant self-evidently could not be described as a 'serious
         offender' for the purposes of Part 5A, as he was sentenced to 30
         months imprisonment and must therefore be considered a 'medium
         offender'.  Mr Bates submitted that it is relevant that this
         sentence was significantly above the minimum level to qualify the
         appellant as a 'medium offender', given the bracket begins at 12
         months.   It is sufficient to categorise the seriousness of the
         appellant's offending by reference to Part 5A in this way: although
         a 'medium offender' the length of sentence is a clear indicator
         that his offence must be regarded as serious, albeit his sentence
         was below the requisite four years to be categorised as a 'serious
         offender'.  The sentence of 2.5 years is just beyond the half way
         of the range for a 'medium offender'. In any event, I treat the
         appellant as having committed an offence of sufficient seriousness
         to attract a sentence of 30 months, no more and no less.

     33. That being said, as noted in Unuane at [87], the Strasbourg Court
         has tended to consider the seriousness of a crime in the context of
         the balancing exercise not merely by reference to the length of the
         sentence imposed but also by reference to the nature and
         circumstances of the particular criminal offence or offences
         committed and their impact on society as a whole.  In that context,
         the Court has consistently treated crimes of violence and drug-
         related offences as being at the most serious end of the criminal
         spectrum.  This is not such an offence.  In addition, it represents
         a 'one-off' for the appellant.  The appellant was of good character
         and employed full time for many years prior to the single offence
         and has not re-offended.

     34. The sentencing judge's comments are comprehensive and run to 10
         pages.  The appellant and his then partner (with whom he no longer
         has any contact) were each convicted of one count of fraud.  This
         included the setting up of a bogus company which then lead to the
         fraudulent withdrawal of �274,000.   The partner pleaded guilty and
         the judge regarded this as unsurprising as the evidence against her
         was "overwhelming".   The judge observed that the evidence against
         the appellant "wasn't quite as obvious" and he pleaded not guilty,
         but he was convicted by a jury.  The judge noted that there were
         implements at their property being used as part of a "fraud tool
         kit", and two messages to the appellant's phone revealed his
         individual involvement.

     35. Mr Muquit focussed upon the mitigating features identified by the
         judge.  These include: the fact that the case fell in the "second
         category of medium culpability" for fraud; the appellant was
         considered "fairly low down the chain of the fraud"; and was "used"
         by others.  I also note the sentencing judge described the
         appellant as a "sorry character. He came from Sri Lanka 17 years
         ago...here is certainly absolutely no evidence of any previous
         misconduct, no criminal convictions and it is a great shame that
         after a history of 17 years of hard work he now finds himself in
         this position".  It appears that the appellant was not regarded as
         someone who gained in any significant way relative to the value of
         the fraud.  Indeed, the judge observed that the appellant and the
         partner were living "on top of each other" in a single small room
         in a "fairly impecunious environment".

     36. As Mr Muquit submitted, the offence itself was non-violent, limited
         in temporal scope both in terms of the period offending itself  and
         relative to the period of unblemished  good  character  up  to  its
         perpetration.   On the other hand, although the appellant was found
         to be fairly low down the chain of the fraud, he was  convicted  of
         individual involvement in it.  As Mr Bates  emphasised,  the  fraud
         involved a significant loss and was part of a wider operation.   It
         was  not  a  victimless  crime.   This  sort  of  offending  causes
         considerable upset and uses up huge resources that could be  better
         used elsewhere.  In addition, the judge found  that  the  appellant
         and the partner both played an equal part even though he sought  to
         blame her.  These, together  with  the  sentencing  comments  as  a
         whole, are all matters I weigh in  the  assessment  of  the  public
         interest when conducting the balancing exercise.

     37. I note that the appellant has consistently maintained and continues
         to maintain his innocence of this offence.  He has  explained  that
         the partner was duped to assist a friend and she used his phone  to
         access the internet without him being aware of  her  actions.   The
         appellant has been convicted of the offence of fraud and I  do  not
         in any way go behind that conviction.  The  appellant  was  clearly
         convicted and sentenced to  30  months  imprisonment,  and  I  must
         approach  the  public  interest   with   that   firmly   in   mind,
         notwithstanding his denial.

Time elapsed since offence committed / conduct during that period / risk  of
re-offending / rehabilitation

     38. After reviewing the relevant authorities, Underhill LJ concluded at
         [141] of HA (Iraq) that positive evidence of rehabilitation, and
         thus a reduced risk of re-offending, cannot be excluded from the
         overall proportionality exercise.  Where a tribunal is able to make
         an assessment that the foreign criminal is unlikely to re-offend,
         that is a factor which can carry some weight.

     39. I appreciate that tribunals should be cautious about their ability
         to make findings on the risk of re-offending, and will usually be
         unable to do so with any confidence based on no more than the
         undertaking of prison courses or mere assertions of reform by the
         offender or the absence of subsequent offending for what may be a
         relatively short period.  Although I have not been provided with
         any up to date forensic assessment of the appellant's risk of re-
         offending, I am satisfied that this is one of those rare cases
         where I have sufficiently cogent material to confidently make an
         assessment of this.

     40. First, over five years have elapsed since the appellant's
         conviction and four years have elapsed since his release. During
         his imprisonment and since his release, it is undisputed that the
         appellant's conduct and compliance with the law has been exemplary.
          Indeed, upon his release the appellant was able to persuade his
         former employer to re-employ him in the position of trust he held
         before his conviction.  This employment continued without incident
         until the appellant was told by the respondent that as a result of
         the deportation order he was no longer permitted to work.  I bear
         in mind that much of this period has coincided with the full glaze
         of deportation proceedings.  Mr Bates submitted that it was
         inevitable that the appellant would stay out of trouble whilst
         threatened with deportation.  The appellant has done more than that
         - he has done his very best to live an entirely law-abiding,
         productive and useful life since his conviction.

     41. Second, Dr Singh has set out a compelling and detailed account of
         the impact of the appellant's conviction, subsequent imprisonment
         and threat of deportation upon him.  It has been no less than
         serious and life-changing. Prior to his imprisonment (when he was
         in his late 40s) the appellant suffered no mental health concerns.
         As a consequence of it he became a "changed person" who experienced
         persistent mental and emotional stress of a significant nature and
         intensity.  He developed an adjustment disorder and this progressed
         to moderate depression - see 15.1 to 15.5 of Dr Singh's report.
         Having considered the appellant's evidence, including his oral
         evidence together with this report, I am satisfied that the
         appellant's conviction and imprisonment with the associated
         deportation proceedings, have frightened him to such an extent that
         he seriously considered suicide as the only viable option during
         the course of his imprisonment.  He has been frightened to his very
         core and this has played a pivotal role in his firm commitment,
         which I accept, to staying very far from any type of individual or
         circumstances that might lead to any type of criminal offending.

     42. Third, there is forensic evidence to assist the risk assessment
         process in the form of an OASYS assessment dated 15 May 2017, in
         which he was assessed by the probation service to be a low risk of
         re-offending.  It is important that the author of the report took
         into account the appellant's denial of the offence but nonetheless
         assessed him as motivated to address offending behaviour and
         concluded that he recognised "the impact and cost of offending to
         victim, community/wider society".  Probation officers are skilled
         at assessing the rehabilitation generally of 'deniers', as well as
         the thinking and behaviour skills.  The conclusions in the OASYS
         report were not disputed by Mr Bates.  Although this assessment is
         of some vintage and over three years old, it has not been submitted
         that it has proven to be inaccurate.

     43. Having considered all the evidence holistically, I am satisfied
         that since May 2017 the appellant's risk has reduced further such
         that in all the circumstances it can now be described as very low.
         I am satisfied that it is most unlikely that he will re-offend.
         Although the 's. 72 presumption' is no longer relevant and has not
         been relied upon by Mr Bates, for completeness I do not accept the
         appellant is a danger to society.

Deterrence and public concern

     44. As Underhill LK noted in HA (Iraq) at [141] the weight which
         rehabilitation bears will vary from case to case, but it will
         rarely be of great weight bearing in mind that the public interest
         in the deportation of criminals is not based only on the need to
         protect the public from further offending by the foreign criminal
         in question but also on wider policy considerations of deterrence
         and public concern.  These are particularly relevant here.  The
         public is entitled to feel particularly concerned about the
         increasing blight of offences based upon fraudulent activities and
         dishonesty in the use of bank accounts and financial dealings,
         particularly when committed by a foreign national.  As Mr Bates
         submitted, other foreign nationals should be given the clear
         message that if they undertake these type of criminal activities,
         they face a concrete risk of deportation.

Public interest conclusions

     45. There are mitigating features to the appellant's offence as set out
         in the sentencing comments.  The sentencing judge regarded the type
         of fraud to be in the medium and not the serious category.
         However, I bear in mind that these are matters that are already
         reflected in the length of sentence imposed.  The sentence of 30
         months comfortably exceeds the minimum requirement for automatic
         deportation. The mandatory presumption is therefore that
         deportation is in the public interest.  As the sentence sits more
         than half way up the medium offender category, the public interest
         correspondingly increases - as s. 117C(2) clearly states: "The more
         serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the greater is
         the public interest in deportation of the criminal". There are
         justifiable public concerns about this type of offending,
         particularly when committed by a foreign national albeit one with
         settled status.  I also bear in mind wider policy considerations of
         deterrence and public concern.

     46. On the other hand, I am prepared to attach some weight to the
         appellant's behaviour and rehabilitation in this case.  Although
         the appellant has denied the offence I am clearly satisfied that he
         presents no more than a very low risk of reoffending.

     47. Having considered the various facets of the public interest in this
         case in the round, I do not consider the public interest can be
         said to be either generally very strong or generally very weak in
         this case (as submitted by the respective representatives).  I
         assess the public interest as remaining strong albeit lessened by
         reason of the offence being a 'one-off' and the very low risk of re-
         offending.

Wide-ranging exercise

Exception 1

     48. Although I have not thus far addressed the requirements of
         Exception 1, it is helpful to conduct the wide-ranging exercise by
         reference to the broad subject-matter relevant to each of the three
         limbs in s. 117(C)(4) at (a) to (c).  This is because Exception 1
         provides a useful benchmark for the type of private life cases
         deemed to be capable of breaching Article 8.  In addition, how
         close an applicant gets to meeting these requirements and matters
         linked to them, will be a relevant factor to consider for the
         purposes of the wide-ranging exercise required by s. 117C(6).

Residence and private life in the UK

     49. The appellant has conceded that the lawful residence requirement in
         s. 117(4)(a) cannot be met.  The appellant has spent a very lengthy
         period in the UK from April 1998 i.e. some 22 years.  This does not
         constitute a period that can be said to be for 'most of his life'
         because he spent some 28 years in Sri Lanka.  The appellant has
         spent most of his adult life in the UK but the entirety of his
         childhood in Sri Lanka.

     50. Although the appellant was not granted any form of leave until
         2014, the application which led to the grant of ILR had been
         outstanding since 2002.  The grant of ILR must be seen within this
         context.  The respondent has offered very little to explain this
         delay.  The appellant was a failed asylum seeker and overstayer
         after his appeal was dismissed in 1999 but he remained in the UK
         from 2002 pending an outstanding claim that was ultimately
         successful.  Although the relevant period of residence between 2002
         and 2014 was not lawful in the sense that he had some form of
         leave, it can be explained - the appellant sought to regularise his
         immigration status and was entitled to remain in the UK (and
         therefore could not be lawfully removed and was permitted to work)
         whilst his application was resolved - see Akinyemi v SSHD [2017]
         EWCA Civ 236; [2017] 1 WLR 3118 at [42].   However and for the
         avoidance of doubt, I do not treat the appellant as having been
         'lawfully resident' in the UK save for his initial period of
         residence after claiming asylum, until that was finally determined
         in December 1999 and the period from the grant of ILR in September
         2014.   For the reasons explained by Leggatt LJ in CI (Nigeria) at
         [48] and [51], the appellant's legal status did not change because
         his 2002 application was pending, and only changed when he was
         granted ILR.

     51. It follows that the majority of the appellant's residence in the UK
         has not been lawful and can more readily described as 'precarious'.
          However, I am satisfied that I should not apply the 'little
         weight' provisions in s. 117B of the 2002 Act in this case - see
         Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58; [2018] 1 WLR 5536.  Little weight
         should generally be given to a private life established when a
         person was present in the UK unlawfully or without a right of
         permanent residence, absent "particularly strong features".  I am
         satisfied that the flexible approach envisaged in Rhuppiah should
         apply to enable more than limited weight to be given to the
         appellant's private life on the particular facts of this case.  The
         flexible approach is appropriate in the light of the combination of
         all these factors: lengthy residence;  British identity and
         language; few meaningful ties to Sri Lanka; friendship / social
         ties; past employment and future employment opportunities; law-
         abiding behaviour over an extended period with the exception of the
         one offence of fraud (as discussed in more detail above); the
         appellant was granted ILR and became a 'settled' migrant.  As to
         the last factor, I bear in mind that the appellant offended shortly
         after he became 'settled' in the UK.  On the other hand, the
         decision to grant ILR was delayed for many years with no clear
         explanation from the respondent as to why.

Social and cultural integration in the UK

     52. The appellant spent the majority of his life (some 28 years) in Sri
         Lanka, where he was born and brought up.  The importance of
         upbringing and education in the formation of a person's social
         identity is well recognised.  It is important to note that the
         appellant spent no part of his childhood in the UK and only came
         here as an adult.

     53. Relevant social ties obviously include relationships with friends,
         as well as ties formed through employment or other paid or unpaid
         work or through participation in communal activities.  Mr Bates was
         correct to point out that although the appellant's employment
         history is impressive, his friendship and community ties are not
         and have never been extensive.  However, I accept the appellant's
         evidence that he is a shy and private person who spent much of his
         time and energy at work.  He worked in a position of trust as a
         customer manager and according to the OASYS at one stage held two
         jobs.  He worked for the same employer for nearly ten years in
         total.  His ties must be seen in that context.  The appellant has
         friendships he relies on for emotional support in the UK.  The
         appellant's friends including Mr Nathan come mainly from the Sri
         Lankan diaspora.  That does not lessen the support they provide.
         Mr Nathan is a long standing British citizen with firm social and
         employment ties to the UK.  The appellant has lived with others in
         a house share environment and has lived with a supportive friend
         since his release from imprisonment in early 2016.  That friend did
         not provide a statement or attend the hearing but I accept the
         evidence from the appellant and Mr Nathan that he is nonetheless a
         supportive friend.

     54. I note that the appellant has continued to volunteer by assisting
         the elderly during the pandemic and according to his second witness
         statement has been spending a lot of time at the temple and
         assisting in helping the community.  I also accept that the
         appellant has undertaken some voluntary activities as set out in a
         letter from the Hanuman Community Centre Trust, as accepted by the
         respondent.

     55. Prior to his conviction in 2015 the appellant had undertaken work-
         related courses in  management  and  health  and  safety, and had
         worked for many years in the UK.  Indeed, the sentencing judge
         described him as having prior to his conviction a "history of 17
         years hard work" and having a "good history, good character and no
         convictions" which culminated in the grant to him of ILR. The
         appellant's employment with McCall Martin Retail continued after
         his release from prison and he has demonstrated an employment
         relationship of nearly 10 years with the same employer. The
         appellant was also able to take on two jobs at the same time.

     56. A person's social identity is not defined solely by such particular
         relationships but is constituted at a deep level by familiarity
         with and participation in the shared customs, traditions,
         practices, beliefs, values, linguistic idioms and other local
         knowledge which situate a person in a society or social group and
         generate a sense of belonging.  I accept the appellant's evidence
         that he preferred to speak in English and gradually adjusted over a
         long period to living a British life which has generated the
         requisite sense of belonging.

     57. Criminal offending and time spent in prison can in principle
         indicate that the person concerned lacks (legitimate) social and
         cultural ties in the UK. Thus, a person who leads a criminal
         lifestyle, has no lawful employment and consorts with criminals or
         pro-criminal groups can be expected, by reason of those
         circumstances, to have fewer social relationships and areas of
         activity that are capable of attracting the protection of 'private
         life'.  Periods of imprisonment represent time spent excluded from
         society during which the prisoner has little opportunity to develop
         social and cultural ties and which may weaken or sever previously
         established ties and make it harder to re-establish them or develop
         new ties (for example, by finding employment) upon release.  In
         this case upon his release from prison, the appellant was able to
         resume employment and quickly make firm friends with law abiding
         citizens.  Those friends have supported the appellant with finances
         and accommodation since he has not been permitted to work.

     58. I am satisfied that although the appellant was brought up and
         educated in Sri Lanka, he spent a lengthy time working in the UK
         with friends and associates such that prior to his imprisonment he
         was socially and culturally integrated in the UK and any
         interruption caused by his imprisonment, has been resumed since his
         release.  Although he has not been in employment this is because he
         is no longer permitted to work because he faces deportation.  The
         appellant has however regained friendship ties and continues with
         his community activities.

Obstacles to re-integration to Sri Lanka

     59. In Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813, [2016] 4 WLR 152, Sales LJ
         provided guidance at [14] in the following terms:

             "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative
             judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be
             enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the
             society in that other country is carried on and a capacity to
             participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to
             be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis
             in that society and to build up within a reasonable time a
             variety of human relationships to give substance to the
             individual's private or family life."

     60. For the purposes of s. 117C(4)(c) the obstacles to re-integration
         must reach a very high threshold: the obstacles to re-integration
         must be 'very significant'.

     61. The appellant grew up in Sri Lanka and continues to have
         friendships with members of the diaspora, and will be familiar with
         its linguistic, cultural and social mores.  As Mr Bates submitted
         he can make use of his English and employment skills in Sri Lanka.
         Although his length of time outside of Sri Lanka means that he will
         face obstacles, if he was fit and well, all other matters being
         equal, he should be able to overcome these obstacles in order to re-
         adapt to life in Sri Lanka.  It is now necessary to turn to the
         appellant's mental health concerns in more detail.

     62. I accept the diagnosis of Dr Singh and note he specifically
         addressed the clinical plausibility of the symptoms described - see
         [16.1] to [16.3] of his report.   The appellant has "experienced a
         condition of persistent mental and emotional stress typically
         involving disturbance of sleep and recall of experiences" since his
         imprisonment and this has continued, such that "his current mental
         health is exerting a negative impact on his life in respect of his
         social and occupational functioning" - see [15.2] to [15.8] of Dr
         Singh's report.  He is suffering from a depressive episode of
         moderate severity.  He has been prescribed anti-depressants
         (Mirtazapine) since May 2017.  I also accept that the appellant had
         counselling and is reported to being less depressed upon its
         conclusion in January 2018, but awaits further counselling.  I
         therefore accept Mr Muquit's submission that the appellant has
         mental health vulnerabilities, which compromise his day to day
         functionality.  I particularly note that the appellant experienced
         suicidal ideation and self-harm whilst imprisoned, but these have
         not been repeated due in large part to the important role the
         appellant's support network (which includes his friends, the
         temple, his GP and counsellor) have played.

     63. It is important to assess whether the appellant's mental health
         will deteriorate, and if so to what extent upon removal to Sri
         Lanka.  Dr Singh was careful to highlight that prognosis depends on
         a range of variables and the precise likelihood and magnitude of
         improvement or deterioration is difficult to predict - see [17.3]
         of his report.  However, Dr Singh made it clear that deterioration
         was likely to follow as a consequence of the appellant's conditions
         being untreated or unaddressed, in which case he was said to be at
         risk of developing "severe and prolonged distress and depression",
         with an increase in the risk of self-harm and suicidal ideations -
         see [17.5] to [18.2] of his report.    At [18.5] Dr Singh concluded
         that it was "likely" that the appellant would experience "a
         significant deterioration in his mental health conditions".

     64. Dr Singh has quite properly not been prepared to quantify or give a
         clear time-line for such eventualities.   As Mr Bates submitted, it
         is for me to conduct that assessment in the light of all the
         evidence available including the availability of the treatment in
         Sri Lanka and the appellant's ability to access that treatment.  I
         am satisfied that the appellant will be adequately supported during
         the course of the removal process and is likely to be given a
         supply of his medication to last him a while.  Having considered
         all the evidence in the round, within a relatively short period of
         time in Sri Lanka, the appellant's mental health is likely to
         significantly worsen (well beyond moderate depression) for several
         reasons considered cumulatively.  It is important to make it clear
         that I accept that the appellant can potentially receive treatment
         in Sri Lanka.  Section 9 of the Report of a Home Office fact-
         finding mission to Sri Lanka published on 20 January 2020 ('the FFM
         report') and the CPIN set out a number of challenges within the
         healthcare system for the treatment of mental health conditions but
         it is sufficiently clear that the type of treatment identified by
         Dr Singh is potentially available in Sri Lanka.  The appellant is
         however likely to find this treatment very difficult to access.

     65. First, the appellant is likely to feel even more anxious, stressed
         and distressed within a short period of his arrival in Sri Lanka
         and this is likely to hamper his ability to seek treatment. The
         appellant has an entrenched subjective fear of the Sri Lankan
         authorities and the general discrimination shown toward Tamils -
         see [12.2] and [18.1] of Dr Singh's report.  As Mr Bates properly
         pointed out his subjective fears of serious harm are not well-
         founded - see J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 at [60].  He seems to
         approach the conditions in Sri Lanka as he left them some 22 years
         ago rather than in the light of the current country conditions.
         These are far from perfect as the applicable country guidance on
         Sri Lanka and the FFM report make clear, but it has been conceded
         that the appellant is not at current real risk of harm.

     66. Nonetheless, the appellant's fears remain genuinely extreme, and
         have caused and continue to cause him significant distress.  That
         level of distress is likely to increase upon return to Sri Lanka.
         As Dr Singh noted at [18.3] the appellant has felt safe in the UK
         and as his mental health deteriorates in Sri Lanka (at least in
         part due to a perception that he is unsafe), he has a corresponding
         reduced ability to ask for help.

     67. The appellant's more general fears are not entirely without
         objective foundation.  The return process to Sri Lanka and the
         likely approach of the authorities is described in GJ and more
         recently in a Report of a Home Office fact-finding mission to Sri
         Lanka published on 20 January 2020 ('the FFM report') at [4.1.1] to
         [4.1.3] and [8.1.3].  For the avoidance of doubt, I entirely accept
         that this appellant's background history is such that the
         authorities will not consider him to be of adverse interest.
         However, it is likely that he will be questioned at the airport as
         a failed asylum seeker.  Even though this is likely to lead to his
         release, the appellant's fears are such that he will continue to
         be very distressed about being targeted and followed.  Those fears
         are likely to be interlinked with genuine concern and feelings of
         anxiety as a result of the likely discrimination he will face.  I
         accept, as Mr Nathan highlighted in his evidence, that the
         appellant is likely to find life difficult and experience
         discrimination by reason of being from the 'Up-country' Tamil
         community, who do not speak Sinhalese - see the discrimination
         described in the FFM report at [2.1.1] and the CPIN at [3.1.1]. The
         latter reference makes it clear that 'Up-country' Tamils face
         direct and indirect discrimination including lack of access to
         health care.

     68. Second, the appellant has not a single friend or family member to
         turn to in Sri Lanka, a society where family support plays a
         particularly important role (FFM report at [9.1.7]).  As Mr Nathan
         confirmed, the appellant has grown accustomed to turning to his
         friends in the UK to accompany him to appointments.  The appellant
         has claimed that he has lost all touch with anyone he once knew in
         Sri Lanka and knows of no family or friends there to turn to for
         support.  I accept this evidence.  After all he has been away from
         Sri Lanka for a very lengthy period on any view and during that
         time there have been fundamental changes in Sri Lanka.  As a
         consequence of the civil war many have been displaced or died.  He
         has lost touch with his parents who are presumed to be dead.

     69. Third, the appellant will find it very difficult to make the
         contacts and ties to build up a support system to assist him to
         access the necessary treatment he requires.  Whereas in the UK the
         appellant relies upon the Temple and his friends, this will be much
         more challenging to do in Sri Lanka.  As the CPIN states at
         [8.1.2]:

             "Mental illness is not widely discussed in Sri Lankan society
             and carries stigma at the community level.  This, in turn,
             deters victims from revealing and seeking treatment for mental
             illness."

     70. Fourth, the appellant's confidence is at rock bottom since he has
         not been able to work.  He has described in very clear terms his
         feelings of inadequacy and hopelessness.  This will not assist him
         in seeking to access the mental health treatment he requires in the
         absence of a support system, particularly at a time when the
         pandemic has led to the closure of public health clinics (see
         section 10 of the CPIN).  I note that there are community mental
         health nurses and helplines but it is unlikely that the appellant
         will be in a position to access these, given his particular
         circumstances.

     71. The evidence demonstrates that the appellant would be unable to
         access the mental health facilities or community assistance he
         requires.  When assessing the extent of the obstacles likely to be
         faced by the appellant it is important to consider the matter
         holistically.   Mr Bates submitted that the appellant would be able
         to survive on remittances provided by friends from the UK and in
         any event he would be in a good position to obtain employment.  He
         has a good work record and has gained important skills including
         his use of English.  For the reasons I have set out the likely
         deterioration in the appellant's mental health together with the
         discrimination he is likely to encounter as an 'Up-country' Tamil
         are such that he is unlikely to be able to obtain employment in Sri
         Lanka.  Mr Nathan confirmed that any remittances would be very
         limited.  In any event this would not assist in accessing the
         requisite treatment for the reasons I have outlined.

     72. The appellant's vulnerability and mental health presentation in the
         UK takes on an entirely different character in Sri Lanka for the
         reasons I set out above.  I am satisfied that because of the
         peculiarities of the appellant's background, beliefs and current
         circumstances, within a reasonable period of time upon return to
         Sri Lanka, he would not be able to access the appropriate treatment
         and support he requires to obviate a likelihood of developing
         severe and prolonged distress and depression.  This in turn will
         lead to an exacerbation of his current symptoms and impact
         adversely upon his day to day functioning such that he will face
         very significant obstacles in being able to operate on a day-to-day
         basis in Sri Lankan society or to build up within a reasonable time
         a variety of human relationships.  I am therefore satisfied that
         the evidence relied upon by the appellant demonstrates obstacles to
         reintegration in Sri Lanka that are 'very significant'.

Balancing exercise

     73. For the reasons I have provided the public interest in favour of
         the appellant's deportation remains strong but tempered by his
         offence being a 'one-off' and his very low risk of re-offending.
         However, this is just one factor which has to be weighed in the
         balance, which must also include the other criteria which emerge
         from the Strasbourg authorities.  I must balance public interest
         against the nature and extent of the appellant's private life and
         the circumstances said to be very compelling in his case.

     74. The appellant's case would cause no rupture to family relationships
         and comes nowhere close to meeting Exception 2.  The appellant does
         not meet the first limb of Exception 1, albeit his residence has
         been very lengthy.  He meets the second and third limbs of
         Exception 1 and I am prepared to attach weight to his private life
         in the UK for the reasons I have provided.

     75. The appellant must meet the extremely demanding test in s. 117C(6).
          As Jackson LJ explained in NA (Pakistan) at [32], discussing the
         case of a 'medium offender':

             "... if all he could advance in support of his article 8 claim
             was a 'near miss' case in which he fell short of bringing
             himself within either Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not
             be possible to say that he had shown that there were 'very
             compelling circumstances, over and above those described in
             Exceptions 1 and 2'. He would need to have a far stronger case
             than that by reference to the interests protected by article 8
             to bring himself within that fall back protection. But again,
             in principle there may be cases in which such an offender can
             say that features of his case of a kind described in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 have such great force for article 8
             purposes that they do constitute such very compelling
             circumstances, whether taken by themselves or in conjunction
             with other factors relevant to article 8 but not falling
             within the factors described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The
             decision maker, be it the Secretary of State or a tribunal,
             must look at all the matters relied upon collectively, in
             order to determine whether they are sufficiently compelling to
             outweigh the high public interest in deportation."

     76. The appellant cannot meet the Exceptions in s. 117C and that is a
         'con' of considerable importance in the case of a 'medium
         offender'.  His private life cannot be described as very strong in
         recent times, albeit it can be described as strong in the light of
         the matters I have discussed above in relation to the first two
         limbs of Exception 1.  The appellant's private life has narrowed
         with the onset of mental health difficulties from the time of his
         imprisonment.  Prior to this I am satisfied, as he explained to me,
         that his private life was very strong and he has the potential to
         return to this position once his mental health condition is
         properly treated in the manner explained by Dr Singh.  On the other
         hand there are matters, supported by cogent evidence, which
         constitute 'very compelling circumstances', when viewed
         collectively:

               i) the appellant's lengthy residence in the UK, where he has
                  become socially and culturally integrated;

              ii) he has no friendship or family ties in Sri Lanka and his
                  mental health is likely to deteriorate because in the
                  absence of a support system and in the light of his
                  intense subjective fears he is unlikely to be able to
                  access the requisite treatment he requires;

             iii) this in turn means that he is likely to develop severe and
                  prolonged depression, with an intensification of the
                  symptoms he already finds very difficult to cope with such
                  as persistent and emotional stress, disturbance of sleep,
                  constant recall of experiences, with the consequence that
                  it is unlikely that he will be able to develop any type of
                  support system or secure employment in Sri Lanka;

              iv) the likely deterioration in his mental health is likely to
                  give rise to very significant obstacles to his re-
                  integration;

               v) and in addition cause him considerable mental suffering
                  and anguish (albeit not at the threshold required to meet
                  Article 3) particularly in the light of his suffering as a
                  consequence of losing every member of his family and his
                  genuinely held but not well-founded entrenched fear of the
                  Sri Lankan authorities;

              vi) he is likely to suffer discrimination as an 'Up-country
                  Tamil' without the respite that membership of a family or
                  community can bring in such circumstances;

             vii) by contrast the appellant's prognosis in the UK is
                  significantly better, where he has the support system to
                  be able to access the requisite treatment in order to
                  return to employment and financial independence.

     77. Having considered all the relevant factors on both sides of the
         scales, including in particular the strong public interest in
         deportation, I am satisfied that the appellant has been able to
         identify features of his case of a kind described in and linked to
         Exception 1, which have such great force for Article 8 purposes
         that they constitute 'very compelling circumstances' which are
         sufficiently compelling to outweigh the strong public interest in
         deportation, such that the high test required by s. 117C(6) is met.

Decision

     78. I allow the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8, ECHR).




Signed: UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

Dated: 1 December 2020
