
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07855/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated:                 |
|On 1 March 2019                               |On 11 March 2019             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                               Emad Najm Amin
                          (Anonymity NOT directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen  (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the  tribunal")  which  it  sent  to  the
parties on 14 September 2018; whereupon it dismissed his  appeal  against  a
decision of the Secretary of State made on 25 May 2018 to  refuse  to  grant
him international protection.

2.    Shorn of all but the essentials, the background circumstances and  the
asserted facts underpinning  the  claim  to  be  entitled  to  international
protection are as follows: The claimant, who was born on 11  December  1990,
is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity. He  hails  from  Kirkuk  but  he
says he had spent time living in the Kurdish  administered  region  of  Iraq
(the "IKR") because he had been employed  by  a  Member  of  Parliament  one
Ashwaq Jaff of the Kurdish Democratic Party ("KDP"). He says that whilst  in
that employment, he was approached by a group of armed men who asked him  to
supply information which he had access to in consequence of  his  employment
but that he refused. He was then threatened with harm or death. He  did  not
inform his employer but instead fled, leaving Iraq on  28  August  2017.  He
travelled through various  countries  before  entering  the  United  Kingdom
illegally on 3 December 2017 and claiming asylum. He says he  does  not  now
possess identity documentation including what is known as a  CSID  card  and
that the lack of such documentation would cause him insurmountable  problems
if he were to be returned to Iraq.  He  also  mentioned  a  claimed  growing
interest in Christianity. The Secretary of State, though,  disbelieved  most
of what he had to say and that is why  the  decision  of  25  May  2018  was
taken.

3.    The tribunal heard the appeal on 26 July 2018. The  claimant  attended
but was not represented. He gave oral evidence. The Secretary of  State  was
represented. The tribunal took appropriate measures to ensure  the  claimant
was not disadvantaged (see paragraph 7 of the tribunal's written reasons  of
5 August 2018). The tribunal found the claimant had not been the  victim  of
threats from any armed  group,  that  he  had  worked  for  Ashwaq  Jaff  as
claimed, that he was not at risk from armed groups in the IKR and that  even
if  he  had  been  threatened  by  such  armed  groups,  there  would  be  a
sufficiency of protection for him in the IKR.  It  accepted  that  he  could
not go to live in Kirkuk  because  that  remained  a  "contested  area"  but
concluded that, in light of the  above,  he  would  be  able  to  internally
relocate to the IKR. As to identity documentation, it found  he  would  have
had to furnish his former employer with details from his passport and  CSID,
that if he did not now have such details he could get them from  his  former
employer, and that the possession  of  such  details  would  enable  him  to
become re-documented either in the United Kingdom via the Iraqi  Embassy  or
via processes which could be carried out in Iraq such  that  he  could  then
have those documents sent to him. Possession of such documents would,  found
the tribunal, enable him to travel from Baghdad (the  point  of  return)  to
the IKR (the place of relocation).

4.       Permission to appeal was sought and obtained. The  grounds  run  to
some 6 pages but may be summarised as follows: Ground 1-the tribunal  failed
to make a clear finding as to whether the claimant  had  worked  for  Ashwaq
Jaff or not. Ground 2-the tribunal erred through speculating as  to  whether
Ashwaq Jaff would have kept a record of the claimant's identity details  or,
at least, should not have found she would  have  done  without  putting  the
point to him.  Ground  3-the  tribunal  failed  to  properly  apply  Country
Guidance with respect to the ability of the claimant  to  become  documented
whilst in the UK. Ground 4-the tribunal failed  to  make  a  finding  as  to
whether the claimant remains in contact with his family in Iraq.  Ground  5-
the tribunal failed to adequately  address  the  evidence  or  impermissibly
speculating concerning the ability to internally relocate within the IKR.

5.       Permission having been granted the case was listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could  be  decided  whether
the tribunal had erred in law. The claimant did not attend that hearing  and
was not represented.  It is clear that whilst he had  not  been  represented
before the tribunal he had subsequently been represented for a period  after
that, because his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal have been  drafted
by Counsel. But it is also clear from the casefile that  he  no  longer  has
that representation. It appeared that he had been notified as to  the  time,
date and place of hearing. There was no explanation for his  non-attendance.
Mrs Pettersen on behalf of the Secretary of State urged  me  to  proceed  in
the claimant's absence. I decided to do so because it appears  he  has  been
notified, no reason for not attending was apparent, there was no  reason  to
think  if  I  did  adjourn  the  situation  regarding  attendance  would  be
different at a reconvened hearing, the hearing was concerned with  error  of
law and that matter had already been dealt with in the  grounds  drafted  by
counsel and because I was satisfied I could justly proceed.

6.    Turning then to the  grounds,  it  is  clear  that  the  tribunal  did
conclude that, notwithstanding its disbelief as to threats from  armed  men,
that the claimant had been employed as claimed. It  did  not  say  in  terms
that it was so finding but it relied upon the fact  of  the  employment  for
other conclusions it had reached as to documentation  and  internal  flight.
It would not have done that if it was not accepting he had been employed  as
claimed. Looked at from  one  perspective  it  might  be  thought  that  the
tribunal was speculating to a degree as to what details the former  employer
might have taken from the claimant and retained. But on the other  hand,  it
seems  to  me  it  was  open  to  the  tribunal  even  absent  corroborative
background country material, to find that he would  have  been  required  to
provide such as copies of his passport and  CSID  to  a  politician  who  is
seemingly influential before entering into the employ of such a  person.  It
is but a small step from that to the finding  that  copies  and  appropriate
details would have been retained and could now  be  provided.  The  tribunal
does not seem to have put the matter to the claimant for comment but  in  my
judgment whilst it could have done that it was not obligated as a matter  of
law to do so. It was obligated to consider all the evidence  before  it  and
make appropriate findings as to key issues including documentation but  that
is what it did. The case of AAH Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) does  on  the  face
of it seem to suggest that the process  of  becoming  re-documented  in  the
United Kingdom will or may require the production of original documents  but
it does not preclude the possibility of such process being  accomplished  if
reliable information emanating from a Member of Parliament in Iraq could  be
provided. The tribunal was not here departing from Country Guidance as  such
but merely relying upon unusual circumstances in a specific case and it  was
entitled to do that.  Given the  finding  that  the  claimant  could  become
documented in the United Kingdom the tribunal did not have to make  findings
about family members in Iraq which is, I assume,  why  it  did  not  do  so.
Finally, as to relocation,  it  was  open  to  it  to  conclude  the  former
employer would be prepared to afford the claimant some  assistance.  It  was
also open to it to find he would be able to secure some employment given  he
had worked in the IKR  before  and  would  be  re-documented  prior  to  his
return.

7.    In light of the above I have concluded that the tribunal did  not  err
in law. Accordingly, its decision shall stand.

8.    Finally, the claimant was  not  granted  anonymity  by  the  tribunal.
There is nothing before me to suggest that I should grant  anonymity  and  I
do not do so.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed.


Signed:                Date: 7 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

