
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07920/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2017                         |On 19th January 2018          |
|(Resumed hearing of 21st August 2017)         |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     KG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes of Counsel, instructed by Morgan Dias
Immigration   Consultants Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Kelly made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 20th April 2017.

 2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan.   His  date  of  birth  is
    disputed. He claims  that  he  was  born  on  2nd  February  2001.  The
    Immigration Judge concluded that he was 19 years old having  been  born
    on 2nd May 1998 in reliance upon what he said was  a  Merton  compliant
    age assessment undertaken by Sheffield City Council.

 3. The underlying facts of this case are not in dispute.   The  respondent
    accepted that the appellant's father was  a  Taliban  commander,  well-
    known in his local area.   A  few  months  before  the  appellant  left
    Afghanistan his brother  took  part  in  a  suicide  mission  upon  the
    instruction of his father.  When  his  father  tried  to  persuade  the
    appellant to follow his brother's example his mother arranged  for  him
    to go to the home of his maternal uncle in the city of Jalalabad.   His
    uncle organised an agent who took him to the UK.

 4. The judge found that, contrary to the appellant's assertions,  that  he
    had been in touch with his uncle both shortly after his arrival in  the
    UK and again some seven or eight months later.

 5. He concluded that the appellant had not established that he would be in
    danger from the Afghan government as the  eldest  surviving  son  of  a
    prominent Taliban leader and that he could  safely  and  reasonably  be
    expected to live with his  maternal  uncle  in  Jalalabad  or  live  an
    independent life in Kabul.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to engage with the issues in sufficient detail.

 7. He had failed to explain why, if the appellant was  at  risk  from  the
    State in his home area, that risk would not equally apply elsewhere. By
    stating that he was unaware of any policy of the Afghan  government  to
    kill the sons of Taliban activists the judge had not adequately engaged
    with the issue as to whether there was any actual  risk  to  him.   The
    appellant could not be expected to disguise his identity and inevitably
    would come into contact with the authorities on return.

 8. Second, the judge had failed to engage with the question as to  whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the appellant to live in Kabul  or  in
    Jalalabad.  There was no assessment of relevant  factors  such  as  the
    appellant's employment prospects and what support he could be  expected
    to receive from relatives, and in particular no evidence as to  whether
    the uncle would be willing or able to offer assistance.

 9. Mrs Pettersen, on behalf of the  respondent,  said  that  she  was  not
    seeking to defend the determination.

10. The decision is set aside for the reasons set out in  the  grounds  and
    conceded by the respondent.

11. Mr Holmes submitted that, whilst the issue of the appellant's  age  was
    not raised in the grounds, it was a Robinson obvious point that the age
    assessment before the judge was not  in  fact  Merton  compliant.   The
    question of whether the appellant was in fact still a child was plainly
    relevant to the issue of relocation.  He asked for  an  opportunity  to
    provide further evidence.

12. This matter was adjourned to be relisted before  me  on  28th  November
    2017.  The appellant was directed to adduce whatever evidence he  seeks
    to rely on, including evidence in relation to his age, and serve it  on
    the Tribunal and the respondent  seven  days  before  the  hearing.   A
    further witness statement should deal with the position of his uncle in
    Jalalabad.



The resumed hearing

13. At the resumed hearing the  appellant  produced  a  further  bundle  of
    documents including witness statements  from  himself  and  his  foster
    mother together with further background evidence.  Mr  Holmes  told  me
    that he had not been able to obtain another age assessment  because  it
    had not been possible to obtain funding.

14. The first issue in this appeal to be decided is whether  the  appellant
    was born on 2nd February 2001 as he claims or whether he  was  in  fact
    born on 2nd February 1998 as alleged by  the  respondent.   The  second
    issue is whether he could reasonably relocate to Kabul or to Jalalabad,
    it having been accepted that he would be at risk in his home area.



The Evidence

15. The appellant said in his witness statement  that  he  had  no  way  of
    contacting his uncle who lived in Nangrahar  which  was  two  to  three
    hours away from his village.  The Taliban were after him and he did not
    want his number to be tracked by them.  In his oral  evidence  he  said
    that he had spoken to his uncle only once when he came to the UK  about
    a year and a half ago when he needed documents in relation to his  age.
    The documents were sent to a friend. Once his uncle  had  provided  him
    with the  information  that  he  needed  he  blocked  his  friend  from
    contacting him.  He did not know much about his uncle, other than  that
    he had always been in the army, because he did not see him a great deal
    when he was growing up.  He could not live with him in Afghanistan, and
    his uncle was frightened for his own safety.

16. The appellant was asked about his father.  He said that  he  came  home
    about once a month as he had a high position in the Taliban with  about
    50 to 60 people working for him.  It would be very easy for his  father
    to find out if he had returned  to  Jalalabad  because  of  the  strong
    networks.

17. The appellant was asked whether he was receiving any medical treatment.
     He said that he had a problem with hair loss for which he  was  taking
    medication.  This was because of a vitamin D deficiency and stress.

18. His foster mother also gave evidence.  KG  has  lived  with  her  since
    2015. She described him as a quiet, respectful, and anxious young  man.
    In her witness statement she said that  he  had  started  to  adapt  to
    living in the UK well in general terms, but found it difficult to adapt
    to new circumstances.  There was a period of time when  she  could  not
    get him to go to college everyday.  He  continues  to  sleep  with  the
    lights on in his room.  He has few friends.  She did not think that  he
    would adapt to living in Afghanistan on his own.  He is unable to  cook
    for himself very much and would be vulnerable.



Submissions

19. Mrs Pettersen relied on the  age  assessment  undertaken  by  Sheffield
    Children's and Young People's Services which  was  headed  "Merton  Age
    Assessment" although she accepted that it was not  a  Merton  Complaint
    document.  She asked me to conclude that he was 19 years old.

20. There was no clear reason why he could not live  in  Jalalabad  in  his
    uncle.  There was no suggestion that he had  been  personally  involved
    with the Taliban and therefore would not be  of  any  interest  to  the
    government.  It was not credible that his father would be aware of  his
    return to either Kabul or Jalalabad, and whilst she  accepted  that  he
    might have a subjective fear of him  finding  out,  it  was  not  well-
    founded.  He would  be  returning  to  Afghanistan  with  reintegration
    payments and there was no medical evidence,  aside  from  a  vitamin  D
    deficiency, to suggest that it would be unduly harsh to expect  him  to
    do so.

21. Mr Holmes asked me to place little weight on the document  relied  upon
    by the respondent from Sheffield City Council which was in summary form
    and which was entirely unreasoned.  It was incumbent on the  respondent
    to adduce evidence which established, on balance, that he was  the  age
    which they said he was.  On any rational view the document relied  upon
    could not satisfy a tribunal that the appellant  was  two  years  older
    than the age which he had  put  forward.   The  appellant  himself  had
    always maintained that his date of birth was 2nd  February  2001.   The
    evidence from the foster carer was that he still slept with  the  light
    on which was indicative of his being a child.

22. The appellant fears both the Taliban and the government on return.  His
    account of his brother having been coerced by his father  to  become  a
    suicide bomber has been accepted.  It was also accepted  that  he  left
    Afghanistan because his father wanted him to follow  in  his  brother's
    footsteps.  He would therefore be at risk from the  government  because
    of his association with the Taliban and he  would  be  perceived  as  a
    supporter of the government because of his refusal to  become  involved
    in his father's activities.  It was reasonably likely that  his  father
    would come to know of his return.

23. The background evidence established that  there  was  now  the  highest
    level of violence in Afghanistan since recording began, particularly in
    Kabul.  Whilst he was not arguing that the appellant would be  at  risk
    under Article 15(c) throughout the country, the humanitarian  situation
    was dire and represented real barriers to relocation for the appellant.



Findings and Conclusions

The appellant's age

24. In the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the  respondent  considered  the
    appellant to be credible and his account to be in the  main  internally
    and externally consistent.  It was  accepted  that  he  was  an  Afghan
    national who faced forced recruitment by the Taliban.   No  credibility
    issues were raised, aside from the question of  the  appellant's  birth
    date, and the claim was refused on the sole basis  that  the  appellant
    could reasonably relocate to another part of Afghanistan, namely Kabul.



25. In rejecting the appellant's claim  to  have  been  born  in  2002  the
    respondent  relies  upon  a  document  headed  "Merton  Age  Assessment
    Information Sharing Pro-forma".  The document names the social  workers
    who undertook the assessment and the dates on which it took place.   It
    was noted that the appellant's fingerprints matched up on  the  Eurodec
    database showing an asylum application in Belgium on 21st January 2015,
    with a different name and different date  of  birth  and  that  further
    information stated that the  Belgium  authorities  were  not  satisfied
    concerning  the  age  given.   However  he  absconded  before  an   age
    assessment could be conducted.

26. The document then concludes:-

         "Based on the  information  from  this  assessment  and  subsequent
         statutory visits to K it is the  opinion  of  both  Social  Workers
         completing this assessment that he is more of an age  of  17  years
         rather than 14.  This is based  on  K's  social  presentation,  his
         interaction and his demeanour throughout the interview."

27. I am not able, from this document, to assess  what  the  reasoning  was
    behind the social workers' conclusions that  the  appellant  was  three
    years older than he said he was, namely 17 years old  rather  than  14.
    There is only reference to his  social  presentation,  interaction  and
    demeanour.  Given that he is a person whose story has been found to  be
    both internally and externally consistent I conclude that this document
    is not a sufficient basis upon which to conclude that the appellant was
    lying about his age and therefore accept that he was born in  2001  and
    not 1998 as found by the respondent.



Risk on Return

28. It is the  respondent's  claim  that  the  appellant  could  return  to
    Jalalabad and live with his uncle.  Although no credibility issues were
    raised initially, it is now argued that  the  appellant  has  not  been
    truthful in relation to his lack of contact with his uncle.

29. In her witness statement the foster mother said that they did not  even
    know whether the uncle was alive or not.   No  issues  have  ever  been
    taken with her credibility.  I accept  that  they  are  not  in  touch.
    However, even if it were possible for the appellant to  regain  contact
    with his uncle I would find that he could not  safely  return  to  live
    with him there, because it is most unlikely that his father  would  not
    come to hear of his return, given  his  position  within  the  Taliban,
    which has been accepted by the respondent.

30. The question therefore remains whether he could  reasonably  return  to
    live in Kabul or in another area of Jalalabad.

31. Mr Holmes submitted that the appellant would be at risk of  retribution
    from the government because he would be seen, through his  relationship
    with his father,  as  supporting  anti-government  elements.   He  also
    submitted that he would be at risk from  the  Taliban  because  he  had
    refused to carry out the suicide bombing.

32. It seems to me to be very unlikely that the authorities would have  any
    interest in the appellant since he had fled the country because of  his
    refusal to act against them.  The greater danger is certainly that  his
    father would come to know of his  return,  if  he  went  to  Jalalabad,
    through his uncle.

33. The appellant relies on research conducted by Refugee  Support  Network
    in a document dated April 2016 entitled "After Return" which  documents
    the experiences of young people forcibly removed  to  Afghanistan.   In
    particular, the returnees prioritise personal security.   The  role  of
    social networks in helping young returnees to adapt  to  life  back  in
    Afghanistan is critical and those who have  been  able  to  reintegrate
    with their families had been able to access secure and reliable  source
    of accommodation.   Those  who  had  not  depended  on  fragile  social
    connections, such as other returnees they met on the plane.  The  young
    returnees monitored for the purposes of the  report  did  not  use  the
    temporary accommodation centre available to them for  the  initial  two
    weeks.

34. So far as Kabul is concerned, although  the  current  Country  Guidance
    makes it clear that Kabul in general terms is not unreasonable  per  se
    as a place of relocation, the appellant is a  child  and  is  therefore
    particularly vulnerable. Moreover he suffers from hair loss, caused  in
    part by vitamin D deficiency but also stress.

35.  Furthermore,  there  has  been  a  significant  deterioration  in  the
    humanitarian situation in Kabul since 2012 when  the  Country  Guidance
    case was decided.  The Amnesty International Report for  2016  to  2017
    states that the number of people internally displaced is now more  than
    double the number in 2013.  The most recent statistics  available  from
    the International Labour Organisation show that only 45.7% of the total
    working age population are employed in Afghanistan  and  73.8%  of  the
    urban population live in slum households.  Out of a total population of
    approximately 27 million people, 8.1 million people were reported to be
    in need of humanitarian assistance.  The appellant would be joining the
    1.4  million  internally  displaced  people   who   faced   significant
    challenges in accepting healthcare without adequate access  to  housing
    and education or employment opportunities.

36. In these circumstances, Kabul  would  not  be  a  reasonable  place  of
    relocation for this particular young individual. He could  not  live  a
    relatively normal life judged by the standards of  Afghanistan  because
    he would be unable to access the support networks he needs due  to  his
    fear of his father discovering his return.

Notice of Decision

The original judge erred in law.  His decision  has  been  set  aside.   The
appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   [pic]                      Date 15 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

