
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07346/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 21st November 2017                 |On 23rd November 2017                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                    [D W]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Popal, instructed by Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant was given permission to appeal the  decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Carroll on the grounds that it  was  arguable  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred by failing to follow  the  Country
      Guidance case, by reaching conclusions that were not available on  the
      evidence and  by  reaching  conclusions  that  were  contrary  to  the
      evidence.


   2. The appellant, a Sri Lankan citizen, arrived in the UK on 20  December
      2010 as a Tier 4 student. An in-time application for further leave  to
      remain as a student was refused on 9th August 2011. He did  not  leave
      the  UK.  On  3rd  September  2013,  he  was  served  with   reporting
      conditions. He failed to report as directed and on 8  April  2015  was
      listed as an absconder. On 4th January 2016, he  was  encountered  and
      detained. Removal directions were made for 13 January 2016  but  on  6
      January 2016 he claimed international protection on asylum  and  human
      rights grounds. His claim was refused on 1st July 2016 and it  is  his
      appeal against that decision that was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Carroll.


   3. Although permission to appeal was granted in short  form,  9  separate
      grounds of appeal were relied upon in seeking  permission.  These  can
      conveniently be summarised as follows:


   i) Grounds 1 to 5 take issue with the reliance placed  by  the  judge  on
      elements of the evidence before him  in  reaching  findings  that  the
      appellant's account as to the circumstances in which he was forced  to
      flee Sri Lanka was not credible.
  ii) Grounds 6 to 8 take issue with the judge's  approach  to  the  medical
      evidence before him; and
 iii) Ground 9 submits that the  judge  incorrectly  applied  the  dicta  of
      Tanveer Ahmed.


            Grounds 1 to 5


   4. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out in paragraph 18 of his  decision
      the  significant  factors  that  he  relied  upon  in   reaching   his
      conclusions on credibility  namely  the  delay  by  the  appellant  in
      claiming asylum; that he had produced no documentary evidence  of  the
      claimed deposit of money into his bank account; that  he  was  not  of
      Tamil ethnicity, not a supporter of the LTTE and there  were  no  LTTE
      connections in his family; there was an inconsistency in  his  account
      of when he was abducted; no explanation was forthcoming why his father
      had burnt court letters allegedly received by the appellant;  that  he
      left Colombo airport without any difficulty; the inconsistent evidence
      of his contact with the alleged LTTE supporter; there was no  evidence
      from his uncle and aunt who were resident in the UK and with  whom  he
      stayed on his arrival.


   5. The appellant submits that the finding that he left Sri Lanka  without
      difficulty as being indicative  of  lack  of  risk,  was  contrary  to
      country guidance; that whether or not he stayed  with  his  uncle  and
      aunt on arrival and that they did  not  give  evidence  was  not  only
      irrelevant to risk on return but also no reasons had been given why it
      was relevant and it  was  not  relied  upon  by  the  respondent;  the
      reference to the burning of documents was irrational and perverse  and
      that the non production of an arrest warrant  was  not  an  indication
      that one was not outstanding; that the  appellant  was  not  asked  if
      there was any reason why he was unable to produce a copy of  his  bank
      statement was a procedural error of law.


            Grounds 6 to 8


   6. The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the medical  evidence  before
      him in paragraph  19  of  the  decision.  He  records  the  appellants
      evidence of being burnt with a hot iron bar, beaten to  his  head  and
      body, having a petrol bag tied to his face, falling  and  hurting  his
      shoulder, pulling his toe nail  off.  The  judge  records  differences
      between the written and oral evidence as to whether it was one or  two
      toe nails that were pulled out,  that  the  Rule  35  report  made  no
      mention of the toenail and gave a different account of how he hurt his
      shoulder that an adjournment was  refused  to  obtain  further  medial
      evidence before of the delay  and  that  although  he  claimed  to  be
      suicidal and taking medication there was no evidence.


   7. The appellant submits  that  the  Rule  35  conclusion  was  that  the
      injuries described were plausibly obtained in the manner described  by
      the appellant and the judge failed to engage  with  that  observation;
      that the appellant was not asked why  there  was  late  disclosure  of
      medical documents; that the refusal of  the  adjournment  request  was
      unfair given that delay in seeking to  obtain  a  report  was  not  in
      itself sufficient reason for refusal.


            Ground 9


   8. In paragraph 20 the judge set out his  comments  on  documents  relied
      upon by the appellant and notes that  the  documents  do  not  provide
      details of detention or torture, or do not refer to outstanding arrest
      warrants, or no explanation for the late submission of a  letter  from
      his mother. The judge concludes:


                  "21. In the light of all the  evidence,  for  the  reasons
                  given above and for the reasons given by the respondent, I
                  find that the appellant is not in any way credible  as  to
                  the circumstances in which he claims to have come  to  the
                  attention of the authorities in Sri Lanka and to have been
                  detained or tortured or that he  is  credible  as  to  his
                  claim that the authorities continue to have an interest in
                  him. In the light  of  such  findings,  and  applying  the
                  principles set out in Tanveer Ahmed, I attach no weight to
                  the  documents  belatedly  submitted  in  support  of  the
                  appeal.
                  22. I have considered the appellant's case in the light of
                  the current guidance set out in GJ and I am satisfied that
                  he is of no interest to the authorities...."


   9. The appellant submits that the judge erred in  finding  the  appellant
      not credible and then placing no weight upon the documents rather than
      considering the documents as part of the evidence in the round.


            Further submissions


  10. It was also submitted by Ms Popal that the Rule 35 report, at the very
      least, indicated that the  appellant  may  have  been  the  victim  of
      serious harm and trauma and that inconsistencies in his evidence  were
      not only minor, but could and  should  have  been  considered  in  the
      context of his potential vulnerability.


  11. The respondent submitted that the judge had considered the appellant's
      vulnerability in reaching his decision. Mr  Nath  submitted  that,  in
      general, it had been open to the judge to reach the  findings  he  had
      reached based upon the evidence before him. Although  the  wording  of
      paragraph 21 was slightly odd,  he  submitted  that  in  the  previous
      paragraph, the judge had considered the documents and the findings  on
      the appellant's account were findings on the evidence as a whole.


            Conclusion


  12. The difficulty with the First-tier Tribunal decision is that  although
      the judge has set out what  evidence  he  has  considered  it  is  not
      possible to see the relevance of that evidence from his reasoning  (or
      lack of reasoning). It is not explained why  the  lack  of  a  witness
      statement from his aunt/uncle was relevant and although the judge  was
      entitled to comment that the appellant  had  left  Sri  Lanka  without
      difficulty and apparently on his own passport and without payment of a
      bribe and that he was not a Tamil, it is difficult  not  to  view  the
      various comments made as comments made in isolation from  the  medical
      evidence and the documentary evidence. The judge  failed  to  consider
      the possible inconsistencies in the light of the medical evidence even
      if he was satisfied that the appellant had not  been  abducted  as  he
      claimed. The Rule 35 report indicates the appellant had sustained some
      serious injuries and, however caused, they could  have  impacted  upon
      his evidence. The appellant's submissions in  relation  to  the  judge
      relying  upon  the  lack  of  evidence  of  bank  statements  are  not
      sustainable - the appellant knew the case against him, based his claim
      significantly  upon  claimed  transfers  of  money  leading   to   his
      identification as a potential LTTE supporter and had  had  many  years
      within which to obtain corroborative  evidence  that  would  not  have
      endangered him. He had  after  all  presumably  had  to  produce  bank
      statements for his student visa application.


  13. Of some concern is the manner in which the judge stated he applied the
      principles of Tanveer Ahmed.  Although  in  the  written  grounds  the
      appellant submitted that proof  of  forgery  lay  initially  with  the
      respondent and this had not been done, it is not clear that the  judge
      was saying the documents were forgeries, merely  that  they  were  not
      reliable  as  supportive  evidence  of  the  appellant's  claim.   But
      paragraph 20 states  both  that  the  documentary  evidence  had  been
      considered and that it has been, effectively,  discounted  because  of
      the credibility findings made earlier.


  14. Although of course a decision must start  with  the  writing  down  of
      evidence and findings in some sort of order,  it  should  be  apparent
      from a reading of the decision that the elements of the evidence  have
      not been considered sequentially with findings made  as  the  decision
      progresses, but that the evidence is considered as a  whole.  That  is
      not apparent here.


  15. Furthermore, there is no indication the judge considered the  evidence
      in the context of possible vulnerability.


  16. For these reasons, I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal decision and
      conclusion dismissing the appellant's appeal against the international
      protection claim is infected with material errors of  law  and  cannot
      stand. I set aside  that  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
      decision, to be remade.


  17. In  so  far  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's  findings  on  the
      appellant's Article 8 human rights claim is concerned, the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge made findings which have not been  the  subject  of  an
      application for permission to appeal and they stand. For the avoidance
      of doubt, paragraphs 24 to 28 inclusive and paragraph 31 of the First-
      tier Tribunal decision stand.


        18. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does
            not assign the function of primary fact finding  to  the  Upper
            Tribunal.


        19. When I have set aside a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
            s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case  to  the
            First tier with directions or remake it for  myself.  Here  the
            facts are significantly disputed and oral evidence is  required
            in  addition  to  consideration  of  documentary  evidence.   I
            conclude that the decision should be remitted to the First-tier
            Tribunal to determine the appeal.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision as referred to in paragraphs 16 and 17 above.







                                    Date 22nd November 2017
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
