
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07616/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2018                            |17 January 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     nnl
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Talacchi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 6 June 2018 refusing his claim for international protection.




Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 2 August 1984.  He has  a
    wife and two young children who are in Vietnam.  On his own account  he
    left Vietnam on 7 July 2017, travelling to Russia  by  plane  where  he
    remained for about a month.  He then  left  Russia  travelling  through
    various unknown countries until he arrived in France when he boarded  a
    lorry and arrived in the UK on 18 November 2017.  He claimed asylum  on
    5 December 2017.  He based his claim on a  fear  of  persecution  as  a
    result of his political involvement in the Viet Tan Party.  He  claimed
    that he had become a member in 2012 and had come to  the  attention  of
    the authorities in Vietnam in 2012, 2013 and 2014.  On each occasion he
    was detained but subsequently released.  In 2014 he  was  summoned  and
    arrested  because  he  had  attended  a  demonstration  against   China
    illegally taking the Hai Duong oil rig.  He was released with no charge
    but fined for causing public disorder.  He was also required to sign  a
    document promising not to be involved in  political  demonstrations  in
    the future.

3.   In June 2017 he and five  others  organised  a  demonstration  to  take
    place on 29 June 2017 against the Formosa Company and the pollution  it
    was causing.  The appellant did not attend  the  demonstration  in  the
    light of the document he had previously signed but he had called people
    from  home  encouraging  them  to  go,  made  banners  and  distributed
    leaflets.  The police attended the demonstration and made arrests.  One
    of the appellant's five colleagues called him and  told  him  that  his
    identity had been revealed to the authorities as  someone  involved  in
    organising  the  demonstration.   Following  this  the  appellant  left
    Vietnam.

4.   Since being in the UK he has attended demonstrations  taking  place  in
    London outside the  Vietnamese  Embassy  organised  by  the  Vietnamese
    community in this country.  He claimed that he  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return because of his involvement in demonstrations both
    in Vietnam and in the UK.

5.   The respondent accepted that the appellant's nationality  and  identity
    were as claimed but did not accept that he had been  a  member  of  the
    Viet Tan Party who had had  subsequent  problems  with  the  Vietnamese
    authorities, that he had been involved in organising the  demonstration
    in June 2017 or that he had had any involvement with the Viet Tan Party
    in the UK.  His claim was dismissed on all grounds.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The judge, having considered the  evidence  and  submissions,  rejected
    the appellant's claim about  what  happened  to  him  in  Vietnam.   He
    accepted that he had demonstrated some knowledge of the Viet Tan  Party
    but found that it did not go beyond what was in the public domain.  His
    account of how he was initiated to the party could not  be  tested  and
    was lacking in detail.  He was able to describe the Viet Tan Party flag
    in detail, but the judge commented that it would be strange if  someone
    claiming to be a member of that party could not describe its flag.

7.   The judge reminded himself that the appellant  must  satisfy  him  that
    there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that the claimed events had
    taken place in Vietnam but he found that the level  of  detail  he  had
    been able to provide, essentially in his interview, was so slim that he
    did not accept even to the lower standard that he had been detained and
    released as he claimed or that the authorities had been  told  that  he
    had organised the demonstration of 29 June  2017.   The  appellant  had
    been unable to state when he became interested in human rights and  his
    evidence did not satisfy the judge that he had ever become a member  of
    the Viet Tan Party.

8.   The judge went on to consider the  appellant's  sur  place  claim.   He
    accepted  that  he  had  demonstrated  outside  the  Embassy  on   four
    occasions: 10 December 2017, 8 April 2018, 29 April 2018  and  10  June
    2018.  He claimed that he had found out about the  first  demonstration
    through the Vietnamese community and, as a  result  of  attending  that
    demonstration, he met five members of the Viet Tan Party in the UK  and
    that thereafter he and  they  organised  further  demonstrations.   The
    judge did not accept this evidence.  He said there was no  evidence  to
    corroborate the appellant's claim that he had been in any way active in
    the UK Viet Tan Party, none of his five supposed  Viet  Tan  colleagues
    had attended the hearing of his appeal to support him and  he  did  not
    accept the appellant's explanation that  they  feared  coming  to  give
    evidence at Taylor House because the Vietnamese authorities would  find
    out that they were members of the party.  The  appellant  had  produced
    photographs showing him at the demonstrations  but  none  of  his  five
    supposed  Viet  Tan  colleagues  appeared  in  the  photographs.    The
    appellant said that they had attended all four demonstrations, but they
    had all stood apart at different corners of the demonstration so as  to
    be able to police it efficiently.  The judge rejected that evidence.

9.   The judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  demonstrated  outside  the
    Embassy solely to found a sur place claim.  He referred to the judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in Danian v Secretary of State [1999]  EWCA  Civ
    3000 that such behaviour did not bar a  successful  asylum  application
    and that, despite such cynical conduct, the issue remained  whether  he
    would be at real risk of persecution on return to  Vietnam  because  of
    his political activities.  When assessing that risk the judge  reminded
    himself  of  the  guidance  given  by  the   Upper   Tribunal   in   BA
    (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36  and
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  YB  (Eritrea)  v  Secretary  of
    State [2008] EWCA Civ 360.

10.  The judge  accepted  that  thirteen  of  the  photographs  produced  in
    evidence carried a recognisable image of the appellant, whereas in  the
    other photographs  his  image  was  unrecognisable.   Five  photographs
    showed the appellant carrying a loud hailer but he  was  not  the  only
    person who did so.  He had also been photographed holding a small South
    Vietnamese flag, posters and placards and  numerous  other  individuals
    were doing the same.  The judge was satisfied that some if not  all  of
    the photographs would have appeared on Twitter, Instagram  and  YouTube
    and on  such  sites  in  Vietnam.   He  accepted  that  the  Vietnamese
    authorities would find the brandishing of the South Vietnamese and  the
    Viet Tan Party flags offensive.

11.  The judge found that  some  if  not  all  of  the  photographs  of  the
    appellant demonstrating outside the Embassy would have become available
    to be seen by the Vietnamese authorities and he was satisfied that they
    carried out such surveillance on the  internet.   However,  he  had  no
    evidence that any photographs had in fact been seen by  the  Vietnamese
    authorities.   He  had  rejected  the  appellant's   claim   that   the
    authorities had been pestering his mother  because  of  his  activities
    here and allegedly wanted to know his whereabouts  and  commented  that
    this part of his account in any event would not  lie  easily  with  the
    Vietnamese authorities supposedly  knowing  where  he  was:  in  London
    demonstrating against the Vietnamese government.

12.  The judge  said  he  had  no  evidence  to  show  that  the  Vietnamese
    authorities carried  out  surveillance  of  anti-Vietnamese  government
    demonstrations in this country let alone  what  recognition  procedures
    they may have available to them.  He came to the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's sur place activities attending  these  four  demonstrations
    would not put him at real risk of persecution or ill-treatment contrary
    to article 3  on  return.   He  considered  it  probable  that  if  the
    photographs had come to the attention of the authorities, any enquiries
    they made would in all probability have resulted  in  their  concluding
    that the appellant was no more than an opportunist seeking to establish
    an asylum claim rather  than  a  committed  oppositionist.   For  these
    reasons, the appeal was dismissed.

Grounds and Submissions

13.  In ground 1, the appellant seeks to challenge  the  judge's  assessment
    of the risk on return as a result of his sur place activities,  arguing
    that it is  materially  flawed  or  not  supported  by  the  background
    evidence.   It  is  argued  that  the  judge's  finding  on   risk   is
    inconsistent with the evidence that where a person is perceived to have
    taken part in opposition political activities, they will  come  to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities in Vietnam and face a real risk of
    persecution.

14.  Ground 2  argues  that  the  appellant's  evidence  of  his  sur  place
    activities was supported by the photographs produced.   The  judge  had
    made a number of positive findings in favour of the appellant:  he  had
    demonstrated four times outside the Vietnamese Embassy and  there  were
    photographs which carried a recognisable image of the  appellant.   The
    judge was satisfied that some of the photographs,  if  not  all,  would
    have appeared  on  the  internet  and  on  sites  in  Vietnam  and  the
    authorities would find the brandishing of the South Vietnamese and Viet
    Tan flags offensive. The  photographs  would  have  been  seen  by  the
    Vietnamese authorities because the authorities carry  out  surveillance
    of the internet.  In such circumstances, the authorities would perceive
    the appellant as having taken part in opposition  political  activities
    and so he would be at risk of adverse attention.  The photographs spoke
    for themselves, so the grounds argue,  the  Vietnamese  authorities  on
    seeing the images would see the appellant carrying a loud  speaker  and
    holding a South Vietnamese flag and they would not infer  that  he  was
    simply a hanger on.

15.  Ground 3 argues that the  finding  of  the  appellant's  attendance  at
    demonstrations was opportunistic and that he was seeking to bolster his
    asylum claim was irrelevant to the issue  of  whether  such  attendance
    would put him at risk.  The evidence about the  Vietnamese  authorities
    was such that there would be adverse attention even when the sur  place
    activities were conducted in bad faith.  In ground 4 it is argued  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  address  the  issue  of  how  the
    appellant would be treated on return when interrogated as  to  his  sur
    place activities.  The judge had accepted that the photographs had come
    to the attention of the authorities. They would make enquiries and that
    on return the  appellant  could  not  be  expected  to  lie  about  his
    activities.  In any event, even were the authorities not to know of the
    images in the photographs,  when  the  appellant  was  interrogated  on
    return, his answers to the questions asked would lead to  a  real  risk
    that he would be perceived as an activist.  There  was  an  added  risk
    that during the questioning the  appellant  would  state  that  he  had
    attended demonstrations whilst in the UK and would thereby be  at  risk
    of persecution.

16.  In his submissions, Mr Talacchi argued that the judge materially  erred
    in law when assessing the risk arising from the appellant's  sur  place
    activities and when assessing the risk on return. He submitted that the
    judge had made a  number  of  positive  findings  which  in  themselves
    demonstrated that there was a real  risk  on  return.   The  judge  had
    erred, so he argued, at [52] in his finding that  no  government  would
    want to identify and interrogate every one of its citizens who chose to
    participate in an anti-government demonstration in  foreign  lands  and
    that, not only would it be illogical to  do  so,  it  would  be  wholly
    impractical.  The judge had said that those acting on behalf of a given
    government would take  soundings  from  all  available  sources  as  to
    whether an individual was a  committed  oppositionist,  including  from
    Embassies in the countries where the demonstrations had taken place.

17.  Mr Talacchi submitted that these comments were not in  accordance  with
    the  background  evidence  about  the  behaviour  of   the   Vietnamese
    authorities.  At [53] the judge had said that, if the  photographs  had
    come to the attention of the authorities, any enquiries  would  in  all
    probability have resulted in their concluding that the appellant was no
    more than an opportunist rather than  a  committed  oppositionist.   He
    submitted that this was contrary to the  background  evidence  at  [34]
    that a person perceived to have  taken  part  in  opposition  political
    activities and as a result coming  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities would face a real risk of persecution.  He  submitted  that
    the judge's conclusions were not open to him on the objective  evidence
    and that his findings were flawed by his speculation that no government
    would want to identify and interrogate every one of  its  citizens  who
    had participated in anti-government demonstrations abroad.

18.  Mr Whitwell argued that the judge had properly  identified  the  issues
    he had to address.  He had  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    involved in anti-government political  activities  inside  Vietnam  and
    that he was not a member of the Viet Tan Party.  When assessing whether
    he would be at risk, assuming that the  photographs  had  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities, the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account the fact that he had not been taken to any background  material
    showing that the Vietnamese authorities  carried  out  surveillance  of
    anti-government demonstrations in countries outside Vietnam [46] and to
    note at [50] that there was no  evidence  what  recognition  procedures
    they might have available to them.  The appellant had left Vietnam  for
    Russia by plane and there was nothing to suggest that his departure was
    in any way unlawful.  He submitted the judge had  carefully  considered
    the evidence and reached a decision properly open to him.

Assessment of Whether the Judge Erred in Law

19.  I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  properly  directed  himself  on  the
    approach to an assessment of whether sur place activities could lead to
    an appellant being at real risk of persecution on return.  He  reminded
    himself of the approach set out by Sedley LJ in YB (Eritrea)  that  the
    real question in most cases would be what followed  for  an  individual
    claimant if any information reaching the Embassy was likely to be  that
    the claimant identified in the photograph was identified as a hanger on
    with no real commitment to the oppositionist cause.

20.  This was a question of fact for the judge to  assess  on  the  evidence
    before  him.    He   accepted   that   the   appellant   had   attended
    demonstrations, albeit that this was solely to found a sur place  claim
    rather than as a result of  any  genuine  political  commitment.   That
    conclusion was one the judge was entitled to reach in the light of  his
    finding that the appellant had not taken part in activities in  Vietnam
    nor had he been a member of the Viet Tan Party.  Nonetheless, the judge
    accepted  that  he  had  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  in  his
    particular circumstances would, as a result of his activities coming to
    the attention of  the  Vietnamese  authorities,  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution.

21.  He accepted that  the  appellant  did  appear  and  was  recognised  in
    thirteen photographs.  In five he was carrying a loud hailer and he was
    also photographed holding a South Vietnamese flag and  various  posters
    and placards.  He also accepted that some of the photographs would have
    appeared on the internet and on sites in Vietnam.  He accepted that the
    Vietnamese authorities did carry out surveillance  in  Vietnam  and  at
    [47] that  they  would  therefore  be  available  to  be  seen  by  the
    Vietnamese authorities.  Contrary to the assertions in the  grounds  he
    did not make a finding that  the  photographs  had  been  seen  by  the
    authorities. He had no evidence that any photographs had in  fact  been
    seen by the  Vietnamese  authorities  and,  in  this  context,  he  was
    entitled to note that this did not  sit  easily  with  the  appellant's
    evidence that the authorities had been pestering his mother wanting  to
    know his whereabouts if indeed  they  had  knowledge  that  he  was  in
    London.

22.  Nonetheless, the judge went on to consider whether, on  the  assumption
    that some photographs had come to the  attention  of  the  authorities,
    they would have put the appellant at risk.  On the judge's findings the
    appellant would not be someone who had previously come to  the  adverse
    attention of the Vietnamese authorities. It was for him  to  assess  on
    the  evidence  before  him  how  the  Vietnamese  authorities  in  such
    circumstances would view the appellant.  His finding was  that  if  the
    photographs had come to the attention of the authorities, any enquiries
    they would have made would have resulted in their concluding  that  the
    appellant was nothing more than an opportunist seeking to establish  an
    asylum claim.  It was argued that  the  judge's  comments  on  how  the
    Vietnamese authorities might behave  or  be  expected  to  behave  were
    speculative, but I am not satisfied that they undermine  his  findings.
    Indeed, they indicate that he was applying  his  mind  to  the  correct
    question.

23.  Taking into  account  the  fact  that  there  would  be  no  record  of
    activities in Vietnam, the judge was entitled to find that, even if  on
    arrival the appellant was recognised as someone who had been seen in  a
    photograph on the internet, the authorities would  in  all  probability
    conclude that he was nothing more than an opportunist.   No  point  was
    made in submissions about the use of the phrase "in all probability" in
    [53] which must be read in context and there  is  nothing  to  indicate
    that the judge was not applying the  correct  standard  of  proof,  not
    least as he properly directed himself on the correct standard  at  [10]
    and again referred to the lower  standard  at  [55]  and  [56].   I  am
    therefore not satisfied  that  ground  1  is  made  out.   The  judge's
    assessment of risk on return to Vietnam on the basis of the appellant's
    sur place activities is not materially flawed  or  unsupported  by  the
    background evidence.   The  judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    authorities would have an adverse interest in an  actual  or  perceived
    oppositionist.  It was a question of fact for him to assess whether the
    appellant fell into either category. He found that he did not  for  the
    reasons he has given.

24.  So far as ground 2 is concerned the fact that the judge made  a  number
    of positive findings does not undermine the fact that his conclusion on
    whether there was a risk on return was properly open to him.  Ground  2
    essentially reargues ground 1 as do  grounds  3  and  4.  There  is  no
    substance in ground 3 as the judge accepted that even if his attendance
    at  the  demonstrations  was   opportunistic,   the   appellant   could
    potentially be at real  risk  on  return,  subject  to  his  particular
    circumstances.  There is no substance in ground 4.  This is not a  case
    where there is an assumption that the appellant would have to lie about
    his activities if questioned about them on return in the light  of  the
    judge's findings that the appellant would not be of adverse interest to
    the authorities on return

25.  In summary,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  reached  findings  and
    conclusions properly open to him for the reasons he gave on  the  issue
    of whether the appellant would be at risk as a result of his sur  place
    activities.

Decision

26.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its decision stands.

27.  The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal  remains  in  force
    until further order.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 4 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

