
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/07713/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                    |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 27 February 2018                    |        On 5 March 2018             |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     MKS
                         (anonymity ORDER CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Naz, Fountains Solicitors, Walsall
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull  that
    was promulgated on 23 October 2017.  Judge Phull decided the  appellant
    was not a refugee from Iraq  or  otherwise  in  need  of  international
    protection.

 2. Ms Naz informed me that the appellant had recently instructed Fountains
    Solicitors in place of Freedom  Solicitors.   I  confirmed  the  record
    would be updated.

 3. Ms Naz relied on the grounds of appeal submitted on  3  November  2017.
    In summary, the appellant arguments are as follows.

      i) The appellant has a real risk of serious harm as he comes from  one
         of the contested areas in Iraq (Kirkuk) and therefore benefits from
         the country guidelines in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
         544.

     ii) The appellant has no  family  living  in  the  IKR  and  cannot  be
         expected to relocate to that part of Iraq, for reasons given in the
         same country guidance.

    iii) The appellant cannot be expected to travel to the IKR from  Baghdad
         and  therefore  there  is  no  realistic   prospect   of   internal
         relocation, for reasons given in AA (Iraq) and supplemented  by  BA
         (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18.

 4. In response, Ms Aboni relied on the rule 24  reply  dated  15  December
    2017.  The respondent conceded Judge Phull had erred in concluding that
    the appellant had family living  in  the  IKR.   It  was  accepted  the
    appellant had never stated he had family there.   The  error,  however,
    was not material because it was evident  from  the  envelope  in  which
    documents were sent to the appellant that  his  brother  had  travelled
    without difficulty from Kirkuk to Erbil to post the documents.

 5. The Home Office retains the original envelop.  Ms Naz had not  seen  it
    and a full copy was not on the appeal file.  Judge Phull records seeing
    the original at  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Ms  Naz
    examined it, as did I.  It shows  the  documents  were  posted  by  the
    appellant's brother on 7 January 2017, who cited a  return  address  in
    Erbil.  I do not record the full address here because of the  anonymity
    order I have made.

 6. The respondent also argues that there have been material changes to the
    situation in Iraq since the country guideline cases.  ISIS  has  fallen
    and what had been contested areas are no longer  such.   The  appellant
    had not provided evidence to show that  he  would  still  benefit  from
    article 15(c) in Kirkuk.

 7. Having considered the competing submissions, I decided that there is no
    legal error in Judge Phull's decision and reasons statement.  I  accept
    the concession that she erred in finding that the appellant had  family
    living in the IKR but do not find that error  to  be  material  to  the
    outcome for the following reasons.

 8. The appellant has identity documents, which were sent  to  him  by  his
    brother who travelled from Kirkuk to Erbil to post them.  The fact  the
    appellant has identity documents means he has not shown there would  be
    significant obstacles to his travel from Baghdad  either  to  his  home
    area in Kirkuk or to the IKR.  The fact his brother had  been  able  to
    enter the IKR without difficulty was  evidence  that  such  travel  was
    feasible.

 9. The appellant had not shown that Kirkuk remains a contested area.  With
    the fall of ISIS, which was well reported in national and international
    press, and the retaking of Kirkuk by the Iraqi authorities  earlier  in
    October 2017, it was incumbent on the appellant to show that  he  still
    required  humanitarian  protection   under   article   15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC).  The appellant merely suggests he
    should benefit from the country guideline cases;  but  they  cannot  be
    regarded as being up to date.

10. In reaching these conclusions I have kept in  mind  that  there  is  no
    challenge to Judge Phull's finding that the appellant is not a refugee.
     The appellant has not pursued that part of his claim and  only  relies
    in this onward appeal on whether the judge properly  considered  issues
    of internal relocation in Iraq (including to the IKR) and  humanitarian
    protection.  I am satisfied she did.

11. Even were I to be wrong, and there is legal error, it would be  for  me
    to remake the decision in relation to the issues relating  to  internal
    relocation and humanitarian protection as of today's date.  Because  of
    the preserved findings, this would not be a case suitable for remitting
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  The findings I have  made  would  be  even
    more applicable in such circumstances, again leading to the  conclusion
    that the outcome would be unchanged.  This reinforces my view that  any
    error is not material.

12. But I do not believe I am wrong. I find there is  no  legal  error  and
    Judge Phull's decision is upheld.

Notice of Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons statement of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Phull and her decision stands.


Signed                              Date         1 March 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"MKS".


Signed                              Date         1 March 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

