

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/07528/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 April 2018                           |On 13 April 2018                  |
|                                           |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                THUONG THI LE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bradley, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but are referred to in the rest of this  decision
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD refused the appellant's asylum and human rights  claims  by  a
    decision dated 1 August 2017.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton allowed the  appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons explained in her decision promulgated on 24 October 2017.

 4. The SSHD's grounds of appeal are as stated at part C of her application
    for permission to appeal dated 1 November 2017.

 5. Paragraph 1 of the grounds says that the judge allowed  the  appeal  on
    asylum and human rights grounds, but  stated  no  clear  conclusion  on
    article 8.  That is correct; but Mr Matthews acknowledged that it is of
    no moment, if there is no  error  in  allowing  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, which is the main point of the decision.

 6. Paragraph 2 says there is no clear finding on risk  from  loan  sharks.
    Similarly, that is of no importance, unless the finding of  a  risk  on
    persecution on grounds of religion were to be set aside.

 7. Paragraph 3 asserts an inconsistency between paragraphs 31  and  32  of
    the decision, but there is none.

 8. Paragraph 3 says that the judge took no account of  section  8  of  the
    2004 Act, but she plainly did, at paragraph 21.

 9. Paragraph 3 also says the  judge  took  no  account  of  "Dorodian"  on
    "evidence from Churches", and points out that no witness appeared  from
    the Church.

10. The grounds do not give the citation or quote from "Dorodian".  Parties
    concurred that the case was not cited to the FtT, and that there is  no
    rule that a case of persecution for being a Christian cannot be  proved
    without attendance of a witness from a Church in the UK.  The judge  at
    paragraph 32 noted that no witnesses attended, but found  her  evidence
    consistent and took into account letters from three Churches.   I  note
    that these included a  recent  letter  from  the  administrator  of  St
    Andrew's Metropolitan Cathedral, Glasgow, stating  that  the  appellant
    attends mass there each Sunday.  No error is disclosed in  this  aspect
    of the case.

11. That leaves of the grounds only a complaint that the judge  engaged  in
    speculation at paragraph 31 over why the  appellant  attended  mass  in
    Vietnam on Saturday night not Sunday morning.  The judge  thought  that
    might have been less suspicious to her parents.  That was  speculative,
    when no such explanation was advanced by the appellant; but in context,
    it is a trivial not a material error.

12. The SSHD has not shown that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of any error on a point of law, such that it  ought
    to be set aside.  The decision shall stand.

13. The FtT made an anonymity direction but no request was made for such  a
    direction in the UT, and there is no reason to retain it.

            [pic]
            10 April 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
