
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07487/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 April 2019                              |On 30 April 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                             MR LONG VAN NGUYEN
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 10 October  2000.  He  is
    now 18 years of age. He appeals against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Davidson sitting at Hatton Cross on 10 January 2019
    in which the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a  decision
    of the Respondent dated 1 June 2018. That decision was  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's application for  international  protection.  The  Appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 30 March  2015  when  he
    was then aged 14. He claimed asylum on 1 December 2017 at  the  age  of
    17. Between arriving in the  United  Kingdom  and  claiming  asylum  he
    stayed with various individuals and groups.

The Appellant's Case

 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was due to his political opinion. He
    was  detained   on   two   occasions   in   Vietnam   after   attending
    demonstrations, the first was in support of two Roman Catholic  priests
    who had been arrested. The Appellant was held for one  month  and  then
    released. His father was detained at the same time as the Appellant but
    has not yet been released. The second demonstration was on 19 May  2014
    in relation to the disruption of local fishing by  the  presence  of  a
    Chinese oil and gas platform. The Appellant was detained for two months
    on that occasion. The Appellant was ill-treated on both occasions being
    tortured  into  signing  confessions  and  being  placed  on  reporting
    requirements. His mother was summoned by  the  police  and  feared  she
    would be arrested so both the Appellant and  his  mother  fled  Vietnam
    with the assistance of an agent. The Appellant states he  is  now  lost
    touch with his mother.

 3. After arriving in the United Kingdom, he was placed in foster  care  by
    social services but ran away the next day because he was worried  about
    being  returned  to  Vietnam.  He  stayed   with   several   Vietnamese
    individuals over the following years until a Vietnamese friend took him
    to a solicitor so that the Appellant could claim asylum. Since  he  has
    been in the United Kingdom he has attended three demonstrations outside
    the Vietnamese embassy in  London  protesting  against  the  Vietnamese
    government. The Appellant produced photographs  of  himself  which  had
    been taken by a friend. He also relied on  a  medicolegal  report  from
    Professor Graham  which  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  scars  were
    consistent  with  the  ill-treatment  complained  of.  There  was  also
    background evidence of the adverse attention paid by the authorities to
    those who openly criticised the Vietnamese state.

The Decision at First Instance

 4. At [25] to [31] the Judge  set  out  her  findings  and  decision.  She
    accepted the Appellant's explanation for the delay in  claiming  asylum
    bearing in mind the Appellant's age and his fear  of  return.  However,
    she found  the  Appellant's  accounts  of  the  two  demonstrations  in
    Vietnam, in which he claimed to have been detained, lacked credibility.
    In relation to the demonstration in September 2013 in  support  of  the
    detained catholic priests the Appellant appeared to have conflated  two
    quite separate demonstrations. The first was on 3  September  2013  and
    was a large and peaceful demonstration, the second was on  4  September
    which had turned violent. By contrast the Appellant had stated that  he
    attended a large and peaceful demonstration which turned violent.  Even
    allowing for the Appellant's age  the  discrepancy  was  sufficient  to
    damage the Appellant's credibility.

 5. The Appellant also appeared to have changed  the  basis  of  his  case.
    Having initially claimed that the main ground for his  fear  of  return
    was his religion, at the hearing counsel clarified that it was not  the
    Appellant's  religion  which  put  him  at  risk  but  his   opposition
    activities.  The  Appellant's  low-level  involvement   might   attract
    attention, but this would not  amount  to  persecution.  There  was  no
    evidence that he had come  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  in
    relation to any involvement in protests while in the United Kingdom. He
    had  no  significant  profile  and  there  was  no  evidence  that  his
    activities in the United Kingdom had been recorded by anyone other than
    his friends. That in turn was only to assist  the  Appellant  with  his
    appeal. There was no evidence that the Appellant's  attendance  at  the
    United Kingdom demonstrations were in the public domain.

 6. Roman Catholicism was recognised in Vietnam and there was no  objective
    evidence that any difficulties encountered  by  Roman  Catholics  would
    amount to persecution. The medical  evidence  had  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's scarring could be as a result of  ill-treatment,  but  this
    was insufficient for the Appellant to show that he was subject to  ill-
    treatment even on the lower standard  of  proof  bearing  in  mind  the
    credibility findings.

The Onward Appeal

 7. The Appellant appealed against this  decision  in  grounds  settled  by
    counsel who had appeared at first instance.  The  grounds  argued  that
    even if the conflation  of  the  demonstrations  was  an  inconsistency
    giving one reason for disbelieving the entirety of  an  appeal  was  an
    inadequate assessment of the evidence from the outset. The rest of  the
    Judge's findings were premised on this sole discrepancy. The  Appellant
    had explained the alleged discrepancy in the protests namely  that  the
    Vietnamese government would not want such details  being  made  public.
    Failure to consider this explanation  was  a  material  error  of  law.
    Substantial details had been  provided  by  the  Appellant  as  to  his
    attendance at the demonstrations, but the Judge had  not  engaged  with
    any of this evidence. The Judge had not considered at all  the  protest
    that the Appellant had attended on 19 May 2014.

 8. The Appellant's sur place activities further enhanced his  credibility.
    It was not the Appellant's case that those activities would  have  come
    to the attention of the Vietnamese authorities. The Judge's finding  at
    [29] that the Appellant's low-level involvement might attract attention
    but this would not amount to persecution was confused. It was not clear
    what that finding related to.

 9. The second ground of onward appeal argued that the Judge had failed  to
    make material findings in relation  to  the  Appellant's  evidence  and
    otherwise given inadequate reasons for her conclusions. The  Judge  had
    not considered whether it was accepted that the Vietnamese  authorities
    had sent a summons to the Appellant's mother and had failed to consider
    whether or not the Appellant attended the anti-state  demonstration  in
    May 2014.

10. Ground 3 submitted that the report of Professor Graham  had  found  the
    Appellant had a prognosis of long-term post-traumatic stress  disorder,
    but the rejection of the  report  was  based  on  the  one  credibility
    finding. Citing the case of SA (Somalia)  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1302,  the
    grounds argued that medical evidence corroborative  of  an  account  of
    torture should be considered as part of the whole package  of  evidence
    going to the question of credibility and not simply treated as an  add-
    on or separate exercise for subsequent assessment only after a decision
    on credibility had been reached.

11. There then appeared a lengthy passage in the grounds  relating  to  the
    jurisprudence on self-infliction by proxy which the grounds  added,  at
    paragraph 32, had not been explicitly raised by the Respondent  in  any
    event. It was not entirely clear why the grounds had raised the  issue.
    The grounds concluded that  there  was  insufficient  analysis  of  the
    medicolegal report and no weight given to the Appellant's diagnosis  of
    long-term  PTSD  anxiety  and  depression.  The  Judge  had  failed  to
    recognise that serious mental health concerns could have an  effect  on
    the evidence given by an Appellant.

12. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  McCarthy  on  27  February
    2019. In granting permission to appeal he found it  arguable  that  the
    Judge had not given adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    account of his own and his father's detentions in Vietnam. There was no
    assessment of  the  evidence  and  no  clear  findings.  Instead  Judge
    Davidson appeared to reject the account merely because  she  found  the
    background  country  information  showed  Roman  Catholics   were   not
    persecuted in Vietnam. The Appellant's case was always that he  was  at
    risk because of an additional political factor in that  the  detentions
    were the core of the Appellant's claim. Permission was granted  on  all
    the grounds, the Designated Judge adding  "because  although  they  are
    long winded they all relate to this core matter and are arguable".

13. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by  letter  dated  29
    March 2019. It was submitted that the Judge  had  identified  the  core
    claim being the  Appellant's  opposition  to  the  government  and  its
    policies and had considered the Appellant's claim to have been detained
    twice and ill-treated. The Judge  had  found  against  the  Appellant's
    credibility when considering the  claim  against  the  known  objective
    evidence. It was clear from the Appellant's own evidence  that  he  and
    his father had attended a demonstration on  3  September.  1000  people
    attended, and it dispersed peacefully whilst the violent  demonstration
    took place a day later.

14. The Respondent accepted that the Judge's decision was relatively short,
    but all the core elements been considered  and  rejected  and  as  such
    adequate reasons had  been  given.  There  was  little  information  to
    consider as there were no documents from  Vietnam  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's claim. There was no evidence in relation  to  the  father's
    detention or any efforts made to confirm that he was still in detention
    five years after the claimed arrest. There was no medical evidence from
    the hospital where the Appellant claimed to have been treated  for  his
    broken limb. There were no arrest warrants or  any  evidence  that  the
    Vietnamese authorities were looking for the  Appellant.  Attendance  at
    demonstrations in the United Kingdom did not show the Appellant joining
    any anti-Vietnamese government organisations  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    There were no supporting statements from  other  demonstrators  in  the
    United Kingdom or any statement from the youth  organisation  that  the
    Appellant claimed to belong to in Vietnam. The findings  of  the  Judge
    were sustainable. The Respondent opposed the appeal.

The Hearing Before Me

15. In consequence of the grant of permission to  appeal  the  matter  came
    before me to determine in the first place whether there was a  material
    error of law in the Judge's determination such that it fell to  be  set
    aside and directions given for the rehearing of the  appeal.  If  there
    was not, then the decision at first instance would stand.

16. For the Appellant counsel, who had not represented the Appellant below,
    argued that the Judge should have looked at the case in the context  of
    the Appellant's explanation for the discrepancy over the two dates  for
    the September 2013 demonstration. The Judge was  required  to  consider
    the 2nd demonstration and give reasons why it was not credible.

17. For the Respondent, reliance was placed on the rule  24  response.  The
    Respondent  had  taken  issue  in  the  refusal  letter  with  a  major
    discrepancy in the Appellant's claim relating  to  the  September  2013
    demonstration. There was no other evidence to support the claim  beyond
    the  Appellant's  own  evidence.  There  was  no  evidence   that   the
    Appellant's sur place activities were in the public domain. He  claimed
    to have been heavily involved with the Roman Catholic Church but  there
    had been no evidence from the church  in  support  of  the  Appellant's
    claim. The scarring on the  Appellant  was  5  years  old  and  it  was
    difficult for the expert to  say  that  it  related  to  the  causation
    claimed by the Appellant. It was not important that  the  determination
    be set out in any particular order as long as the Judge had  looked  at
    all the evidence in the round.

18. In conclusion it was argued that the Judge had  not  rejected  the  May
    2014 incident because of a lack of  evidence  but  only  based  on  the
    finding in relation to the September 2013  demonstration.  It  affected
    the way that the Judge had looked at all of the evidence, having  first
    made a finding and then rejected the rest of the claim.  The  Appellant
    had been quite clear about the disappearance of his father and that  he
    had no knowledge of his father after his arrest. He had tried to  speak
    to the Red Cross to trace his parents and to expect  the  Appellant  to
    provide more was unreasonable. The determination was  not  cohesive  or
    coherent it was not reasoned or in an acceptable form.

Findings

19. This is essentially a reasons-based challenge  to  adverse  credibility
    findings. The Judge did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness
    and rejected his account of taking part in opposition activities or  of
    being ill-treated by the authorities. Further the Judge found that  the
    Appellant's sur place activities in the United  Kingdom  were  for  the
    purposes of bolstering the claim but in  any  event  were  not  in  the
    public domain. The  onward  grounds  of  appeal  themselves  accept  at
    paragraph 17 that the Appellant's activities would not have come to the
    attention of the Vietnamese authorities. It was thus a matter  for  the
    Judge to decide what the Appellant's motivation was in engaging in  any
    such activities.

20. Even if the activities had been conducted in bad  faith  the  Appellant
    could still rely upon them if they could come to the attention  of  the
    authorities with adverse consequences.  In  this  case  it  was  common
    ground that they had not come to the attention of the  authorities  and
    the Appellant's bad faith in producing such evidence was a factor which
    the Judge was entitled to consider in arriving at an overall conclusion
    on the issue of credibility.

21.  As  the  Respondent  acknowledges  in  the  rule   24   response   the
    determination is a short one but it is not necessary for the  Judge  to
    set out each and every piece of evidence presented at the hearing.  The
    core of the  claim  was  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  attended  a
    demonstration in September 2013 which turned violent and as a result of
    which he was arrested, detained and ill-treated. The  problem  for  the
    Appellant was that he had muddled  his  account  conflating  two  quite
    separate incidents into one. This was a major discrepancy since it  was
    the foundation of the Appellant's claim.

22. The problem for the  grounds  in  arguing  at  paragraph  14  that  the
    Appellant had given "substantial detail ... as to the attendance of the
    demonstrations" is  that  if  the  Appellant  was  able  to  give  this
    substantial detail the muddle he  got  into  in  conflating  two  quite
    separate incidents was inexplicable. In those circumstances it was open
    to the Judge to conclude that the Appellant had embroidered his account
    by claiming to have taken part in a large demonstration that had turned
    violent resulting in arrests. If the Appellant had attended  the  large
    peaceful demonstration on 3 September  2013  he  would  not  have  been
    arrested because there were no arrests and the demonstration itself was
    peaceful as the Judge found. On the other hand, if  the  Appellant  had
    attended the demonstration on 4th September which  had  turned  violent
    the Appellant would have known it was not  a  large  demonstration  and
    would have been able to say so particularly if it was being argued  the
    Appellant had a detailed knowledge of the events in question.

23. It was also significant that the Appellant appeared to have changed the
    focus of his claim as time had gone by from initially stating  that  he
    was claiming asylum because of his Roman Catholic religion to saying it
    was due to his political  activities.  On  this  issue  I  respectfully
    disagree with the learned Designated Judge who  granted  permission  to
    appeal who stated that it had always been the Appellant's case that  he
    was at risk because of political activities. The interview record shows
    that the Appellant had put forward another ground  in  interview  which
    was then  abandoned  at  the  hearing,  as  the  Judge  noted.  In  the
    Appellant's interview at question 33  when  asked  whether  there  were
    other reasons why he feared the Vietnamese government  in  addition  to
    his  family  attending  a  demonstration  (not  2  demonstrations)  the
    Appellant stated that the other reason was that he did not have freedom
    of religion, adding: "Whenever we have a  religious  Festival  then  we
    fear that  the  government  will  repress".  This  claim  of  religious
    persecution  contradicted  the  background  information  as  the  Judge
    pointed out in her determination and it  is  not  surprising  therefore
    that it was abandoned by the Appellant through counsel at  the  hearing
    at first instance. Nevertheless, the Judge was entitled to take such  a
    change in the evidence into account when arriving at an  evaluation  of
    the Appellant's credibility.

24. The third ground focuses  on  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  medical
    evidence arguing that the Judge having arrived at  a  conclusion  about
    the Appellant's lack of credibility because of the  inconsistency  over
    the September 2013 demonstration dealt with  the  medical  evidence  as
    something of an afterthought. The Respondent submits  that  it  is  not
    particularly important in what order the Judge sets out her conclusions
    as long as all relevant matters were covered.

25.  The  medical  evidence  stated  that  the  Appellant's  injuries  were
    consistent with his account. That meant that they could  be  consistent
    with other explanations. It was not  for  the  Judge  to  speculate  on
    whether the injuries, which would have been 5 or 6  years  old  by  the
    time of the hearing, could at some point have  been  self-inflicted  by
    proxy. It was for the Appellant to show that the injuries  were  caused
    in the way he claimed. That involved an assessment of  the  Appellant's
    credibility which the Judge was in a better position to assess than the
    doctor because the Judge had had the benefit of  seeing  the  Appellant
    give evidence in cross examination. While it is correct that the events
    the Appellant was relating occurred were said to have occurred when  he
    was a young teenager, by the time he came to give his evidence  he  was
    an adult.

26. Given the fact that the Appellant had travelled  from  Vietnam  to  the
    United Kingdom arriving here on his own at a young age and  then  lived
    "under the radar", it is perhaps unsurprising  that  the  doctor  might
    conclude that the Appellant had mild chronic anxiety  and  stress  with
    borderline  abnormal  elevated  levels  of  anxiety   and   depression.
    Professor Graham's diagnosis was noted by the Judge at [6b] and she had
    it in mind in arriving at her conclusions, but the  issue  was  whether
    the Appellant's explanation of what had happened to him  was  credible.
    If it was not there could be other reasons why the Appellant was  under
    stress, such as the fact that he was living in a  foreign  country.  It
    was not for the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to speculate  on  such
    matters. It was for the Appellant to be  able  to  show  to  the  lower
    standard that his symptoms were caused by the treatment he had received
    in the past. Since the Appellant was not a credible witness,  he  could
    not show that.

27. All that the Appellant could show was what the  Judge  referred  to  at
    [29] as "a low level of involvement which might attract  attention  but
    would not amount to persecution". The  objective  background  material,
    noted by the Judge in that paragraph, did not show that Roman Catholics
    were persecuted per se. Such adverse attention as the  Appellant  might
    receive upon return would not amount  to  persecution.  The  Respondent
    pointed to the lack of supporting evidence produced by  the  Appellant.
    There is no requirement that such evidence should be produced  but  the
    lack of it meant  more  attention  was  paid  to  the  Appellant's  own
    testimony. That testimony was deficient because the Appellant had  been
    inconsistent about the core  incident  in  his  claim.  Ultimately  the
    assessment of the evidence was a matter for the Judge and  the  grounds
    of onward appeal and submissions made to me amount to no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the  Judge's  decision.  They  do  not  disclose  any
    material error of law on the Judge's part and I dismiss the Appellant's
    onward appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 25 April 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 25 April 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

