
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/07647/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 20 November 2017                    |         On 04 December 2017        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     MK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adewoye, of Prime Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. Mr MK (Appellant) appealed against a decision of Judge of the First-
        tier  Tribunal  Anstis  (FtJ),  promulgated  on  30  January  2017,
        dismissing his protection  and  human  rights  appeal  against  the
        Respondent's decision of 7 July 2016 refusing  his  protection  and
        human rights claims. In an 'error of law'  decision  dated  6  July
        2017 I concluded that the  FtJ  materially  erred  in  law  in  his
        assessment of the availability of the  internal  relocation  option
        available to the  Appellant,  his  partner  and  their  child.  The
        hearing was adjourned to enable further evidence to be provided  in
        respect of the issue of internal relocation. The principle  factual
        findings of the FtJ were not challenged and have been retained. The
        Tribunal has received further documentary  evidence,  primarily  in
        the form of an expert report from Gil Daryn, dated 28 August  2017,
        further statements from the Appellant and his partner, articles  on
        the position of illegitimate  children  in  Pakistan  and  marriage
        between Sunni and Shia Muslims, and a NADRA (National Database  and
        Registration Authority) publication on  child  registration.  At  a
        resumed hearing on 20 November 2017 I heard further  evidence  from
        the Appellant and received copies of emails sent by  the  Appellant
        to the Home Office and the Pakistani High Commission in London.


   Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan,  date  of  birth  12  July
        1978. He entered the UK as a student on 5  November  2011  and  was
        granted further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until
        30 September 2014. He made an  application  for  further  leave  to
        remain outside of the immigration rules on  the  22  October  2014.
        This application was refused on 4 August 2015 on the basis that the
        Appellant fraudulently obtained his TOEIC certificate using a proxy
        test taker. He was detained on 21 October 2015 and  claimed  asylum
        on 26 October 2015. The Appellant's partner, RMA, also  a  national
        of Pakistan, arrived in the UK  on  18  December  2015  with  entry
        clearance as a student. At the date of the appeal before the First-
        tier Tribunal the Appellant's partner had made an asylum claim that
        was yet to be determined. The Appellant was invited  to  an  asylum
        interview on 9 January 2016 but failed to attend without  providing
        a reasonable explanation and his asylum claim was  withdrawn  on  6
        April 2016. The Appellant then lodged  further  submissions  on  30
        June 2016 leading to the refusal of his protection claim on 7  July
        2016.


     3. The Appellant claimed that he would be at risk of serious harm from
        his partner's family in Pakistan as a result  of  his  relationship
        with her. He is a Shia Muslim and she is a Sunni Muslim. They  also
        belong to different castes; his being  Khan  (Pathan),  hers  being
        Siddiqui (Sidiki). They are in an unmarried relationship and have a
        young child born out of wedlock in September  2016.  The  Appellant
        maintained that there was  historical  animosity  between  the  two
        religions and castes and that, as  their  child  was  born  out  of
        wedlock, he will be regarded as a bastard and would not be accepted
        by either family. The Appellant feared that he would be  killed  on
        the basis that he had dishonoured both his family and his partner's
        family. Both he and his partner (whilst in  the  UK)  had  received
        death threats from his partner's family in Pakistan. He  maintained
        that he and his partner would be  unable  to  rent  a  property  in
        Pakistan as any landlord would ask them if they were married.  They
        claimed that they could not get married in Pakistan and that  their
        child would be unable to obtain an ID or register for school.


     4. The Respondent was not satisfied with the evidence provided by  the
        Appellant  and  found  his  account  incredible.   The   Respondent
        considered the country  information  and  guidance  document  (CIG)
        'Pakistan: Interfaith Marriage', dated January 2016,  and  the  CIG
        document entitled 'Women Fearing Gender-Based Harm  and  Violence',
        dated February 2016. Whilst noting that sex outside of marriage was
        forbidden there was no evidence  before  the  Respondent  that  any
        complaints had been laid before a court against  the  Appellant  or
        his partner and there was no evidence that they were  not  free  to
        marry. The Respondent concluded that the Appellant and his  partner
        would receive sufficient protection from the  Pakistan  authorities
        and that the internal relocation alternative was available to them.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     5. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant and  from
        his partner. She maintained that her father and brothers would  try
        to find out if she and the Appellant returned to Pakistan. Although
        she said her father was "not powerful or influential as such" there
        were ways of paying people money or using links and her father "...
        would definitely try finding out from  friends  or  use  any  means
        possible." She claimed they could not  move  to  a  different  city
        because they would need to find somewhere to rent  and  would  need
        documents and that "... the people in the area would soon find  out
        we belong to different sects so it is not  going  to  be  possible.
        People will not tolerate this."


     6. The FtJ did not find the  Appellant's  evidence  to  be  altogether
        satisfactory. He noted that the Appellant's asylum claim  was  only
        made after he had been detained, and that the basis of his  initial
        asylum claim (before his partner arrived in the UK)  was  not  even
        arguable. The FtJ took a dim view of  the  Appellant's  failure  to
        attend his asylum interview and did not  consider  the  Appellant's
        explanation (that he had changed address and forgot to  inform  the
        Respondent) to be a good one. The FtJ noted the  Respondent's  view
        that the Appellant had used a proxy tester to  obtain  his  English
        language qualification but did not make any formal findings on this
        matter.


     7. Despite initially lodging a protection claim that was "a  bad  one"
        the FtJ considered that the claim  could  become  good  because  of
        events arising since it was lodged. He noted  the  absence  of  any
        dispute that the Appellant and his partner were in  a  genuine  and
        subsisting relationship, that they had a child  together,  that  he
        was a Shia Muslim and she was a Sunni Muslim, and  that  they  came
        from different castes. Although the FtJ did not accept that several
        translated emails containing  threats  and  screenshots  of  mobile
        phones showing telephone calls from Pakistan by themselves added to
        the Appellant's credibility, he did attach weight to  the  evidence
        given  by  the  Appellant's  partner.  The  FtJ  found   that   her
        credibility as a witness was not directly affected by the  problems
        that had been identified with the Appellant's credibility. The  FtJ
        therefore accepted that the Appellant's partner had been subject to
        threats from her brother and her father. The FtJ concluded that the
        Appellant, his partner and their child would be at risk in her home
        area given the existence of the threats from her family.


     8. He then turned to the questions of  sufficient  of  protection  and
        internal relocation. The FtJ noted that Pakistan was a  very  large
        and populous  country  and,  as  the  Appellant's  partner  herself
        accepted,  her  family  had  no  special  influence  or  privileged
        position  in  Pakistan.  The  FtJ  noted,  with  reference  to  the
        Respondent's  background  information  documents,   that   internal
        relocation was, in general, possible and effective and  that  there
        was, in general, a sufficiency of  protection  available  from  the
        authorities.  He  referred  to  the  reported   decisions   in   AW
        (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC),  NA  and
        VA (protection: Article 7(2) Qualification Directive) India  [2015]
        UKUT 00432 (IAC) and KA (domestic violence-risk on return) Pakistan
        CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC), and noted, with reference to KA, that  in
        general a risk to a woman facing an honour killing was likely to be
        confined to tribal areas such as the North-West Frontier  province.
        The Appellant's partner did not come from this  province.  The  FtJ
        did not accept that the partner's family would be able to track her
        and the Appellant as a result  of  police  corruption  because  her
        family having no special influence.


     9. At [56] the judge stated,

         I accept that the police in Pakistan are liable to corruption,  but
         the Appellant's case on this point is tantamount to saying that any
         family could track down a returning member within Pakistan,  and  I
         do not accept that, since if that were to be the case  there  would
         be nothing in the general principle (outlined above) that  internal
         relocation  and  sufficiency  of  protection  would  generally   be
         available.

    10. At [57] the judge stated,

         I accept that the position is not entirely clear, and that  another
         judge on another occasion may form a different view, but on what  I
         have heard I consider that the Appellant,  his  partner  and  their
         child could move to an area of Pakistan were either they could  not
         be found by her family or they would be sufficiently  protected  by
         the authorities. It follows that the Appellant's asylum appeal must
         be dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the 'error of law' decision

    11. The grounds took issue with the FtJ's approach to the  question  of
        internal relocation. It was submitted that the FtJ's  reasoning  at
        [57] was inadequate and  that  he  made  a  sweeping  remark  about
        internal  relocation  which  was  at  variance  with  the  evidence
        provided at the hearing. The grounds noted that  KA  related  to  a
        female victim of honour crimes and that there was  no  guidance  on
        the position of male victims of honour  crimes.  The  grounds  made
        several references to background information concerning attacks  in
        various parts of Pakistan on victims of honour crimes.


    12. At the outset of the 'error of law  'hearing  I  indicated  to  the
        Presenting Officer my concern that the FtJ appeared to conflate the
        test in respect of the availability of a sufficiency of  protection
        with the test  for  the  availability  of  an  internal  relocation
        alternative, and that he failed to take into account  the  specific
        factors identified by the Appellant said  to  render  the  internal
        relocation alternative unavailable,  i.e.  his  mixed  relationship
        with his partner and the fact  that  his  child  was  born  out  of
        wedlock.  The  Presenting  Officer  accepted  that  these   factors
        appeared  to  play  no  part  in  the  FtJ's  assessment   of   the
        availability of internal relocation. I indicated that I would allow
        the appeal on the basis that the FtJ failed  to  adequately  assess
        the availability of the internal relocation  alternative  and  that
        the matter would be adjourned to  enable  further  evidence  to  be
        provided  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the   internal
        relocation alternative.

    13. The FtJ found that the Appellant, his partner and their child would
        be at risk in their home area. Such a finding normally  entails  an
        absence of sufficient protection by the  authorities  in  the  home
        area. The FtJ proceeded to then consider internal relocation within
        the framework of,  and  by  reference  to,  the  threats  from  the
        partner's family i.e. that the Appellant,  his  partner  and  child
        would continue to be at risk of being  the  subject  of  an  honour
        killing wherever they went  in  Pakistan.  The  FtJ  had,  however,
        already found that the family of the Appellant's partner  were  not
        powerful or influential. There was therefore no real risk that  the
        agents of persecution would be able to locate the Appellant and his
        family if they relocated. The FtJ should therefore have  considered
        whether  it  was  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to  expect   the
        Appellant, his partner  and  child  to  move  to  another  part  of
        Pakistan given that they are unmarried, that he is a  Shia  Muslim,
        she is a Sunni Muslim, and in light of the fact that they are  from
        different castes and that they have a child born out of wedlock.

Resumed Hearing

    14. The hearing was scheduled to be resumed on 1 September 2017 but  on
        that date the Appellant's representative provided a 76-page bundle,
        including the new expert report. This was in breach of directions I
        issued relating to further evidence and the Presenting Officer  was
        unable to properly consider the further evidence on the day of  the
        hearing. The hearing was therefore adjourned to 20  November  2017.
        The Respondent  had  already  provided,  within  the  terms  of  my
        directions, the CIG report 'Pakistan: interfaith  marriage',  dated
        January 2016.


    15. At  the  resumed  hearing,  the  Appellant  provided  some  further
        documentary evidence in the form  of  emails  to  the  Home  Office
        requesting documents to enable him to get married,  and  emails  to
        the Pakistani embassy on 23 October 2017 requesting information  on
        the procedure and documents required to register his child born out
        of wedlock. There had been no reply from the Embassy. The Appellant
        additionally provided a NADRA 'Frequently Asked Questions'  webpage
        which indicated that the marital status of  at  least  one  of  the
        parent's ID card had to be updated to "married" in order to process
        a child's application for  a  NICOP  (National  Identity  Card  for
        Overseas Pakistanis) registration document.


    16. In his oral evidence,  the  Appellant  claimed  he  was  unable  to
        register his child in Pakistan or the UK without being married.  He
        claimed that if he sought to register his child he  would  have  to
        admit to adultery. When I asked the  Appellant  why  he  could  not
        undertake a religious marriage in the UK he said he  did  'make  an
        effort' but that his partner's papers were with the Home Office. He
        additionally claimed that an Imam told him verbally that  he  could
        not marry in the UK, although there was no documentary evidence  in
        support of this assertion. The Home Office had, apparently, replied
        his email requesting a scanned copy  of  his  passport,  indicating
        that it would take 4 to 6 weeks "to work on  it",  and  that  there
        was, as yet, no answer. The Appellant said he tried once to have an
        Islamic marriage in the UK in May 2016. He did not try again as  he
        and his partner belonged to different faiths and because they could
        not get married without the consent of her parents.  The  Appellant
        accepted that an Islamic marriage in the UK would  be  accepted  by
        the Pakistan authorities. The Appellant  stated  that  he  required
        witnesses in a court in Pakistan to get married but  his  relatives
        disowned him. He claimed that if a priest  knows  he  has  a  child
        outside marriage he won't perform the marriage.


    17. Having heard the oral evidence, and following the oral  submissions
        from both representatives, I reserved my decision.


Findings and reasons


    18. The FtJ found that the Appellant and his partner and child would be
        at risk of serious ill-treatment in  their  home  area.  This  risk
        emanated from the Appellant's partner's family  and  was  based  on
        perceived dishonour to the family. The FtJ found as a fact that the
        wife's family were not powerful or influential. While I accept that
        honour killings can occur throughout Pakistan, that men can also be
        subject to honour killings, that the Pakistan  police  are  corrupt
        and that they may even aid  and  abet  honour  killings,  and  that
        corrupt NADRA officials may be  manipulated with relative ease  and
        for nominal  amounts  of  money,  given  the  unchallenged  factual
        findings made by the FtJ, and  in  the  absence  of  any  described
        mechanism by which the partner's family would become aware that she
        and the Appellant had  returned  to  Pakistan,  there  is  no  real
        likelihood that the  partner's  family  would  have  any  reach  or
        influence outside their home area. There is therefore no real  risk
        that her family would be able  to  locate  the  Appellant  and  his
        partner and child if they relocated to another part of the country.




    19. The issue I must now determine is whether it would be  unreasonable
        or unduly harsh to expect the Appellant and his partner  and  child
        to  relocate  in   light   of   their   particular   circumstances,
        specifically,  the  fact  that  they  are  in  a  mixed  Shia/Sunni
        relationship, that they are from different castes, and  that  they,
        at the moment, have a child born out of wedlock.


    20. The Appellant's produced an expert report authored by Gil Daryn. No
        issue was raised by Mr Duffy in respect of the  expert's  standing.
        The expert noted that there were no  laws  or  government  policies
        that discriminate against Shi'ites in Pakistan, and there  were  no
        legal restrictions on freedom of religion for  Shi'ites,  who  were
        estimated to comprise  10  to  15%  of  the  Muslim  population  of
        Pakistan.  The  expert  however  maintained  that  the  culture  of
        religious intolerance was pervasive, and  that  discrimination  and
        violence against Shi'ites was widespread. It is claimed that  these
        attacks targeted ordinary Shi'ite individuals and that anti-Shi'ite
        hate speech permeated all sectors of Pakistani society. He referred
        to military  groups  that,  despite  being  banned,  operated  with
        virtual   impunity   throughout   Pakistan,   and   that    Shi'ite
        professionals   and   officials   including    doctors,    lawyers,
        politicians, prominent business people and local traders were  also
        targeted and killed.


    21. While I don't doubt  that  there  is  discrimination  and  violence
        against Shi'ites in Pakistan, the expert  does  not  assess,  other
        than to assert  in  a  general  and  unparticularised  manner  that
        discrimination and violence is widespread, the number of attacks on
        Shi'ites  in  respect  of  the  size  of  the  population  or   the
        probability of such attacks  occurring.  While  any  attack  on  an
        individual or group based solely on their religion or ethnicity  is
        to be abhorred, the evidence contained in the  expert  report  does
        not indicate that the level and prevalence of violence directed  to
        Shi'ites is such as to render an individual who is  Shi'ite,  or  a
        Sunni Muslim in a relationship with a Shi'ite, open to a real  risk
        of persecution.


    22. The expert stated that Sunni and Shi'ite  marriages  are  perfectly
        legal in Pakistan but that, although quite common until the  1980s,
        they are currently very rare. The  expert  stated  that,  "...  The
        objective  evidence  demonstrates  that  despite  being  legal  and
        permitted, Sunni-Shi'ite marriages  are  still  quite  problematic,
        rather un-accepted socially, and might pose a grave risk", and that
        this was particularly so when the respective families  are  not  in
        favour of the match.  The  expert  however  does  not  provide  any
        reference  or  support  for  his  conclusion   that   Sunni-Shi'ite
        marriages "might" pose a grave risk. In the absence of any specific
        supporting evidence, I am  not  persuaded,  having  considered  the
        evidence on the lower standard of proof, that the Appellant or  his
        partner or their child would face a real risk of persecution  based
        on the mixed marriage. I note  the  absence  of  any  reference  to
        serious discrimination faced by those in  Sunni-Shia  marriages  in
        the CIG report on Interfaith Marriage,  January  2016.  Although  I
        only need to be persuaded that it would be unreasonable  or  unduly
        harsh for the Appellant and his partner and child to relocate (they
        do not have to persuade me that they would face persecution in  the
        place of relocation), I'm nevertheless satisfied, for  the  reasons
        given above, that it would not be unreasonable for them to live  in
        another part of Pakistan even though this means they may face  some
        degree of discrimination.


    23. Despite being specifically asked to comment on the effects  of  the
        Appellant and his partner being from different castes,  the  expert
        does not engage with this at  all.  There  is  simply  no  reliable
        background  evidence  indicating  that  the  Appellant  being  Khan
        (Pathan), and his partner being  Siddiqui  (Sidiki),  would  expose
        them to any  significant  discrimination,  let  alone  persecution.
        While the January 2016  CIG  report  does  indicate  that  marriage
        outside of one's own ethnic community is generally  disapproved  of
        by most  Pakistani  families,  the  report  does  not  support  the
        Appellant's claim that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for
        him and his partner to relocate to another part of Pakistan.


    24. The Appellant additionally contends that he and his  partner  would
        be unable to relocate elsewhere in  Pakistan  because  their  child
        would be regarded as being illegitimate and that this would  either
        expose the Appellant and his partner to accusations of adultery, or
        would prevent their child from being registered with NADRA.


    25. Although  the  expert  states  that,  according  to  Islamic  laws,
        adultery is a punishable crime and those who committed  fornication
        could be sentenced to death, he does not refer  to  the  manner  in
        which the  Islamic  laws  are  actually  implemented  in  Pakistan.
        Moreover, there is  simply  no  evidence  that  any  allegation  of
        adultery has been lodged with the  police  or  courts  against  the
        Appellant or his partner.


    26. I accept that in August 2017, the Appellant emailed the Home Office
        indicating that his partner was recently granted 30 months  LTR  (a
        point not brought to my attention or further commented upon at  the
        hearing) and that Weybridge Registration Centre indicated that  the
        Appellant should contact the Home Office to obtain a  scanned  copy
        of his passport to enable them to get married. Despite an automatic
        email response indicating that the Home Office aimed to  provide  a
        response within 20 working days, no response was  provided  in  the
        Appellant's bundle. At the hearing, the Appellant claimed that  the
        Home Office did reply explaining that it would take 4 to 6 weeks to
        "work on it", and that there was, as yet, no answer. This reply was
        not contained in the bundle. In any  event,  it  appears  that  the
        Appellant and his partner could get legally married in the UK  once
        a scanned copy of the Appellant's passport has  been  provided.  It
        was not suggested at the hearing that there was any reason why  the
        Home Office would not provide the scanned copy.  I  therefore  find
        that the Appellant is likely to be able to enter a  civil  marriage
        with his partner in the UK.


    27. But even if this was not the case and there was some impediment  to
        the Appellant being able undertake a civil marriage, there  was  no
        satisfactory  evidence  that  the  Appellant  would  be  unable  to
        undertake an Islamic marriage in the UK that would be recognised by
        the Pakistani authorities, and no evidence that a Nikah obtained in
        the UK would not be accepted in Pakistan.  The  Appellant  did  not
        produce any evidence that he had been refused an  Islamic  marriage
        in  the  UK.  I  appreciate  that  there  is  no  requirement   for
        corroborating evidence in this jurisdiction, but I am  entitled  to
        draw an appropriate inference from the absence of evidence that one
        would reasonable expect to  be  available.  If  the  Appellant  had
        approached an Imam in order to undertake an Islamic marriage in the
        UK, and the Imam refused to perform  the  marriage,  I  would  have
        reasonably expected to see evidence of this, including reasons  for
        the refusal. In rejecting the Appellant's claim to  have  attempted
        to obtain an Islamic marriage in the UK I take into account that he
        is someone the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  to  be  an  incredible
        witness.


    28. There is no  evidence  before  me  indicating  that,  in  order  to
        undertake a marriage that  will  be  recognised  by  the  Pakistani
        authorities, a Pakistani national must disclose whether or not they
        have children. The Appellant claimed he would  have  to  lie  about
        having a child to get married. There is however no independent  and
        reliable evidence that the Appellant or his partner will  be  asked
        whether they have children in  order  to  get  married,  either  in
        Pakistan or in respect of an Islamic marriage conducted in the  UK.
        In his statement and  oral  evidence,  the  Appellant  additionally
        claimed that he could only get married  with  the  consent  of  his
        wife's parents, that he would need witnesses  who  were  relatives,
        and that the authorities would become 'suspicions' and start asking
        questions if there were  no  witnesses  which  might  disclose  the
        existence of  his  child.  There  is  however  no  independent  and
        reliable evidence that the consent  of  his  partner's  parents  is
        needed or that  witnesses  must  be  relatives  and  his  assertion
        relating  to  the  absence  of  witnesses  is  unsupported  by  any
        background evidence and is unduly speculative. In  the  absence  of
        such evidence I am not satisfied the Appellant  is  unable  to  get
        married either in the UK or in Pakistan.


    29. I accept that, in order for a Pakistani child  to  obtain  a  NICOP
        registration document, one of the parent's ID cards must be updated
        to "married." The NICOP  document  however  appears  to  relate  to
        Pakistanis living outside Pakistan. There is no evidence indicating
        that this document is necessary to  enable  a  child  born  to  two
        Pakistani nationals outside Pakistan to re-enter Pakistan. Even  if
        this was the case, if the Appellant and his partner were  to  marry
        in the UK, which I have found they can do,  the  Appellant  or  his
        partner would be able to update their  own  ID  cards  which  would
        allow for their child to obtain the NICOP document. No details were
        provided in either the expert report or in the other  documents  in
        the Appellant's bundle as to the requirements needed  to  obtain  a
        Child Registration Certificate (CFC). The expert specifically noted
        that, according to NADRA's website, a marriage certificate  is  not
        listed amongst the documents that parents need to submit as part of
        the application process for a Juvenile Card (ID for under  18)  for
        their children. In any event, I have already concluded  that  there
        is insufficient  evidence  that  the  Appellant  cannot  marry  his
        partner in the UK and that this marriage would not be recognised by
        the Pakistani authorities either through their embassy in the UK or
        in Pakistan.


    30. The Appellant relies on an Internet  forum  discussion,  downloaded
        from  'www.therevival.com'  relating  to  Islam  and   illegitimate
        children, where an individual, based in Leicester,  UK,  considered
        that a child born before a man marries the  mother  will  still  be
        considered a legitimate even after the marriage. No further details
        were  provided  to  indicate  the  authoritative  nature  of   this
        pronouncement. In any event, the pronouncement says  nothing  about
        how the law in Pakistan operates, or whether  the  child  would  be
        entitled to an identity card. I therefore  find  this  evidence  of
        little probative value when determining the likelihood  of  whether
        the child will be able to legalise his  status  through  NADRA  and
        whether the child would still be considered legitimate.


    31. I have considered the likely impact on the Appellant and his family
        having cumulative and holistic regard to the factors identified  by
        him that he claims renders  unreasonable  the  internal  relocation
        option. I have found that there is no real risk that the  Appellant
        and his partner will be unable  to  marry,  either  in  the  UK  or
        Pakistan, and that once married, there is no  real  risk  that  the
        Appellant's child would be unable to obtain the  required  identity
        document that will enable her to access all services  in  Pakistan.
        In circumstances where the Appellant and his  partner  are  validly
        married, and their daughter has a valid registration/identity card,
        there  is  no  real  risk  that  the  child  will  be  regarded  as
        illegitimate or that it would  become  public  knowledge  that  the
        child was born before the marriage,  and  no  real  risk  that  the
        Appellant or his partner would be exposed to any prosecution on the
        basis that they committed adultery.

Notice of Decision

I re-make the decision of the First-tier Tribunal by dismissing the appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 1 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
