
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07508/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 June 2019                     |On 8 July 2019                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL



                                   Between

                                     KA

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, Solicitor, JKR Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore ("the judge"), promulgated on 14 February 2019, in
    which he dismissed the appeal on all grounds. That  appeal  arose  from
    the Respondent's decision of 6 June 2018, refusing protection and human
    rights claims made  by  the  Appellant  on  the  basis  of  his  sexual
    orientation.

The Judge's Decision

 2. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and three witnesses and set
    out their evidence and submissions  at  [9]  to  [17].  The  judge  was
    plainly not impressed by the  Appellant's  evidence  and  that  of  the
    witnesses called on his behalf attesting to his  sexuality.  The  judge
    noted inconsistencies  and  implausibility's  in  the  Appellant's  and
    witnesses' evidence which he found was vague  and  lacking  in  detail.
    Accordingly, the Appellant failed to establish his claim to be gay  and
    the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. The grounds assert that the judge erred in  adopting  an  unsustainable
    approach to the evidence of the witnesses'; that his assessment of  the
    documentary evidence was erroneous and that he erred in concluding that
    the Appellant's delay in disclosing his sexual identity undermined  his
    credibility.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed application to the  Upper
    Tribunal on 29 April 2019.

 5. The Respondent in a Rule 24 reply opposed the appeal.

Decision on error of law

 6. I have considered the submissions made by both  representatives.  While
    Mr Kandola said all he could to defend the judge's decision and, whilst
    I do not accept all of what was said by Mr Reza;  several  grounds  are
    without merit, I  am  just  persuaded  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    consideration of the witness evidence. I say, just, because  the  judge
    clearly identified a number of troubling features to the  evidence  and
    unsurprisingly Mr Kandola sought  to  sustain  the  decision  on  these
    grounds, but the judge's adverse view was  clearly  influenced  by  the
    evidence of the witnesses and I cannot be satisfied that  the  decision
    read as a whole is safe in the circumstances.

 7. The judge heard evidence from three witnesses. All three gave  material
    evidence relevant to the issue of the Appellant's sexuality.

 8. The judge considered their evidence at [28] and [29]. While  the  judge
    noted  that  witness  SA  and  RH  were  friends  with  the  Appellant,
    socialised  together,  frequented  gay  bars,  were  members   of   gay
    organisations and further that the Appellant and RA had twice  had  sex
    together, the judge rejected their evidence on the following basis:

         "However, both [SA] and [RH] state that they have never been to the
         Appellant's home, or the Appellant to either of  their  homes,  and
         that they know little about the  Appellant's  family  or  his  past
         life. Moreover, there is no evidence of a single message  (such  as
         by text, WhatsApp or Messenger) passing between them. When this was
         put to [RH] he said that he and the Appellant mainly spoke  on  the
         phone and although they occasionally sent messages, these were  not
         intimate. However, the messages would not have to  be  intimate  in
         nature to  support  the  Appellant's  case,  and  could  have,  for
         example, have established, the Appellant making social arrangements
         with [RH] and [SA], or enquiring  after  each  other's  well  being
         and/or social life."

    As regards [MA's] evidence, I have noted above the discrepancy  between
    his account of his reaction to discovering the Appellant is a  gay  man
    and the account the Appellant gave in his asylum interview. I also note
    that, despite the Appellant living with him, he could not name  any  of
    the LGBT organisations that the Appellant says he is member of [~]  nor
    did he know the days of the week on which the  Appellant  attended  the
    meetings of those organisations. I also find it surprising that  [MA's]
    wife has never enquired why the  Appellant's  parents  have  apparently
    ceased all contact with Appellant, when until May 2017 they were trying
    to force the Appellant to return to Bangladesh and get married.  ...  "
    (sic)

9.    The concern that I have  with  this  analysis  is  that  some  of  the
    judge's reasoning does not adequately reflect or is contrary to what is
    stated by the witnesses in their written testimony.

10.   First, it is apparent that the judge partly formed  his  adverse  view
    on the basis that neither the Appellant, SA  or  RH  had  visited  each
    other homes. There was an explanation however  before  the  judge  from
    witness MA, with whom the Appellant resides, as to why SA  and  RH  had
    not been to their home. In his witness statement MA said that he  never
    met any of the Appellant's boyfriends and that he was  not  allowed  to
    bring any of them to his home.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge
    adequately addressed this evidence which does not comfortably sit  with
    the judge's adverse view taken on account that SA and RH had  not  been
    to the Appellant's home. Moreover, it does not appear as  submitted  by
    Mr Reza that an explanation was sought from RH or SA for that matter as
    to why they had not been to the Appellant's home ([13] and  [14]),  and
    this appears to be a concern raised by the judge  which  the  witnesses
    did not have an opportunity to address at  the  hearing  leading  to  a
    degree of unfairness.

11.   Second, I accept that it can be inferred from  the  witness  statement
    of MA that whilst he permitted the Appellant to live in  his  home,  he
    did not necessarily approve of him being gay and his evidence  (written
    and oral) did not indicate that he took any interest in the Appellant's
    life as a gay man. In the  context  of  the  evidence  therefore  there
    appears to be no evidential basis for concluding that the names of  the
    clubs frequented by the Appellant or the  meetings  he  attended  would
    necessarily be known by MA. It can be inferred from what the judge said
    at [29] that he was of the view that these matters would or should have
    been known to MA, but in my judgement there was no evidential basis for
    that view.

12.   In summary, I am satisfied that the judge erred  in  relation  to  his
    approach to the witnesses'  evidence.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    judge's treatment of the evidence of the  witnesses  was  adequate  and
    that  he  took  proper  account  of  their  evidence  in  reaching  his
    conclusions.

13.   I have considered whether the error of approach is  material  in  this
    case. It is quite true that the judge made several findings against the
    Appellant, but having said that, if the witnesses'  evidence  had  been
    accepted, it clearly provided support for the Appellant's claim  to  be
    gay and was capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal. I thus find
    the judge's error is material in this regard.

14.   The above I consider is sufficient to render the decision  unsafe.  It
    is not therefore necessary to traverse the other grounds raised in  the
    grounds of appeal.  In light of the  above  I  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.

Disposal

15.   Both representatives were agreed that if I were  to  find  a  material
    error of law this appeal would have to be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a complete re-hearing.  Having regard to the nature of the
    error I deem it appropriate to take this course of action.

16.     The appeal is therefore remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing on  all  issues
by a judge other than Judge Moore.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed      Date: 20 June 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

