
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07827/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated  |
|On 20th February 2018                         |On 23rd February 2018            |
|                                              |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The claimant is a dual citizen of Turkey and the Turkish Republic  of
       Northern Cyprus born in 1988. He arrived in the UK on 27th March 1994
       as a five-year old child with  his  asylum-seeking  parents.  He  was
       granted discretionary leave on  12th  November  2003  and  indefinite
       leave to remain on 19th October 2004.

    2. On 21st April 2015 the claimant was notified by the  respondent  that
       she intended to make a deportation order against  him  as  a  foreign
       criminal. The detailed reasons for the Secretary of State's  decision
       are set out in her letter of 15th June 2015, and a deportation  order
       was signed on the same date. The claimant had committed  the  offence
       of  conspiracy  to  commit  burglary:  he  was  involved  with  three
       burglaries  of  non-dwelling  houses   with   others   which   caused
       significant economic loss. He was  given  a  prison  sentence  of  18
       months. His appeal against the decision to refuse a protection  claim
       and a human rights' claim and to make a deportation order was allowed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge R. G. Walters on Article  8  ECHR  human
       rights in a determination promulgated on the 20th September 2017.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Grant-Hutchinson on 12th October  2017  on  the  basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in  law  in  failing  to
       give adequate reasons for the decision under  paragraph  399  of  the
       Immigration Rules. I found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in
       law for the reasons set out in my decision which is appended as Annex
       A, and set aside the decision allowing the appeal  on  28th  November
       2017.

    4. The matter now comes back before me  to  remake  the  appeal  on  the
       following terms. I preserved all findings relating to  the  dismissal
       of the asylum appeal; the dismissal of the  private  life  Article  8
       ECHR appeal with reference  to  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration
       Rules; and also the positive finding that it would be harsh  for  the
       claimant's children and his partner to remain in the UK without  him.
       I therefore need to remake two elements  of  the  decision:  firstly,
       whether there would be any harshness in the claimant and  his  family
       going to live in Turkey together, and secondly the balancing exercise
       to decide if the deportation of the claimant would  be  unduly  harsh
       both to the claimant's children and his partner - which in  turn  may
       answer the ultimate question as to whether the claimant's deportation
       is Article 8  ECHR  compliant  or  not  through  the  application  of
       paragraph 399(a) and (b) of the Immigration Rules / s.117C(5) of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    5. The evidence of the  claimant  relevant  to  the  issues  I  have  to
       determine, in short summary, is that he has no memory of having lived
       in Turkey and has no relatives there that he  knows  or  friends  who
       could assist him: such a move would be disastrous for his family. His
       paternal uncle who lives there has a small overcrowded  home  and  is
       financially overstretched, and could not  help.  There  would  be  no
       accommodation that they could access. The claimant  also  understands
       that he would also be immediately conscripted into the  Turkish  army
       for a period of months, where he believes would suffer abuse  due  to
       his Alevi tattoo, and thus he would not be able to assist his partner
       and four children which he needs to do in  financial,  practical  and
       emotional ways. He also doubts he  would  be  able  to  support  them
       financially thereafter given his lack  of  experience  of  living  in
       Turkey, poor Turkish and his criminal conviction which  would  hamper
       his ability to obtain work.

    6. Returning to Turkey would also expose his partner to abuse  from  her
       father who lives in Turkey and from whom she had historically to hide
       in a women's refuge in the UK. He also fears that the authorities  in
       Turkey would not stop future abuse of his partner by her father. This
       is a fear shared by his partner who would thus not be willing to join
       him in Turkey, and thus his deportation to Turkey would be the end of
       their relationship and his ability to provide for  his  children.  He
       also believes it would be disruptive for his  eldest  (step)child  to
       have to move to Turkey as she has found the recent move to  different
       accommodation in the UK difficult. It  would  also  be  hard  as  his
       partner and oldest child only speak broken Turkish. The family  speak
       English at home and their culture is English even though the extended
       family, for instance  the  cousins  via  his  uncle  in  the  UK,  is
       ethnically Turkish Kurdish they now all commune in  English  and  are
       culturally English. His parents could not help him with relocation as
       they are old and earn too little, and in fact he has been  supporting
       them financially since he was about 20 years old.

    7. The evidence of the claimant's partner  is  that  she  is  a  British
       citizen who was born and brought up in the UK, and has only ever  had
       two one week  trips  to  Turkey  which  were  primarily  for  medical
       treatment for her eldest daughter at a time  when  she  was  on  good
       terms with her parents when her daughter was about one  and  half  or
       two years old. She has had an abusive relationship  with  her  father
       who was very controlling. He  had  worked  for  Turkish  intelligence
       (MIT) before the family came to live in the UK, and  kept  a  gun  at
       home which he used to intimidate her. In 2014 she spent more than six
       months in a women's refugee due to threats and domestic violence from
       her parents as they did not agree  with  her  relationship  with  the
       claimant as he is of Kurdish origins and they  are  Turkish.  She  is
       concerned that her father is still "after" her older daughter as  her
       parents took this daughter from her in 2013  when  she  was  pregnant
       with the first child she and the  claimant  have  had  together.  She
       fears if she were to go and live in Turkey her father, who  lives  in
       that country, would once again obtain control over her and her oldest
       child. Further her children do  not  speak  Turkish  and  her  oldest
       child, who is 7 years old, has friends and cousins in the UK whom she
       would miss if she left this country. She does not want  her  children
       to be educated in Turkish as she wants  them  to  learn  English  and
       Kurdish language and culture. She feels going to Turkey  would  wreck
       her life and the lives of her children, and thus she is  not  willing
       to take that step.

    8. The evidence of the claimant's  parents  is  that  they  are  British
       citizens of Turkish Kurdish origin. His father sells goods in a local
       market and earns about �100 a week. His parents live  on  this  money
       and benefits paid to his mother due to her inability to work  because
       of mental health difficulties. His father has  hepatitis  B  and  his
       mother arthritis, anxiety, depression, migraines and stomach  ulcers.
       They help out a bit with the claimant's four children but they cannot
       return to live in Turkey  with  him  or  look  after  the  claimant's
       partner and children. They cannot provide him with funds  either  and
       do not have a property in Turkey he could use. The claimant's  mother
       has no relatives in Turkey. The claimant's father has a  brother  who
       has not met the claimant and who could not help him either as  he  is
       struggling to provide for  his  own  family.  His  brother  has  four
       children, two of whom are disabled.

    9. In addition, the claimant has  provided  an  expert  report  from  Dr
       Rebwar Fatah of Middle East Consultancy Services. I  accept  that  Dr
       Fatah has the relevant expertise on Turkey to provide the report  and
       has confirmed his duty to  the  Court,  and  was  provided  with  the
       relevant documents relating to the claimant. Dr Fatah  explains  that
       the claimant's tattoo would identify him as an Alevi or  Shia  Muslim
       but not necessarily a Kurd. However, if he did  identify  himself  in
       that way whilst conscripted then he would possibly  face  a  risk  of
       being sent to conflict zones to fight against other Kurds  and  would
       possibly be at risk of suspicious death which in turn  might  not  be
       properly investigated. It is therefore  possible  that  he  might  be
       mistreated for reason of his religious/ethnic origin. He  would  also
       possibly face general discrimination  as  an  Alevi  but  not  as  an
       agnostic. Dr Fatah could not obtain any  objective  information  that
       individual or ex-members of MIT were able to use their influence.  If
       the claimant's partner's father  is  such  a  person  it  is  however
       possible that he might be able to use his  influence  to  target  the
       claimant for harm if he wished to do so.

   10. Ms Ahmad relied upon the reasons for refusal letter. I asked  if  she
       had any submissions on how it would not be harsh for  the  claimant's
       partner to live in Turkey as the sole carer of her four children  for
       the period of 15 months whilst the claimant did his military  service
       (as there was a preserved finding of the First-tier Tribunal  it  was
       harsh for her to care for her children alone in the UK). Ms Ahmad did
       not have any submissions on this issue. She accepted  that  it  would
       appear that the claimant was liable to do  his  military  service  on
       return to Turkey, and that the reasons for refusal  letter  contained
       information which indicated that this would be for 15 months.

   11. Ms Ahmad did however submit that, whilst it might be harsh, it  would
       not be unduly harsh to the claimant's partner and  children  for  the
       claimant to be deported. This was because the criminal  behaviour  of
       the claimant must be balanced against the impact on the children  and
       partner. Further the partner and children had  all  been  exposed  to
       Turkish Kurdish culture and had some understanding of  the  language.
       The children were all under the age of seven years and so their lives
       were focused just on their relationships with their parents, and they
       did not have extensive private life ties with the  UK  despite  their
       British citizenship and could adapt to life in Turkey.  Turkey  would
       provide the children with education and health care.  Ms  Ahmad  also
       submitted that the claimant had committed a serious criminal  offence
       aimed at the public, and that he had not fully accepted his guilt  as
       at page 7 of 15 of the OASys assessment it was said that he  did  not
       accept he was part of team involved with stealing.

   12. Ms Brown relied upon her skeleton argument. In summary  she  contends
       that it would be harsh for the claimant's wife and children  to  have
       to go and live in Turkey. This is because there is a risk of domestic
       violence or honour killing towards his partner from  her  family  who
       have threaten/ committed such acts in the past; because the  claimant
       would be conscripted into the Turkish army and might  be  ill-treated
       there due to his Alevi faith/Kurdish origins and would not be able to
       support his family during  this  period;  because  the  family  might
       suffer discrimination as Kurdish Alevis or because they are of  mixed
       ethnicities or suffer because of boycotts in  Turkish  schools  which
       has led to thousands  of children being  deprived  of  education  and
       others having their education disrupted; because there  would  be  no
       family support from the claimant's family; because  they  would  lose
       their contact with and some support from UK based relatives;  because
       they do not speak  good  Turkish  and  have  no  experience  of  that
       country; and because the claimant's job prospects are  poor  in  that
       country. She also submitted that the  claimant's  oldest  (step)child
       and his partner have  had  a  lot  of  instability  in  their  lives,
       spending time in two women's refuges, and then  moving  accommodation
       again relatively recently - which entailed this child moving  school.
       His eldest (step) child  has  found  that  challenging  and  has  now
       settled after this period of disruption. It would be harsh to require
       her to uproot herself once again against this background.

   13. In terms of whether the deportation of the claimant would  be  unduly
       harsh Ms Brown accepts that whilst the best interests of the children
       must be considered as a primary consideration and the above harshness
       given proper weight that it is also  legally  correct  and  therefore
       necessary to balance the claimant's immigration and criminal  history
       to determine whether any harshness is "undue".

   14.  In terms of the claimant's immigration history it is accepted by the
       respondent there is nothing adverse as he came to the UK as  a  child
       and his residence has always been lawful, and he had indefinite leave
       to remain at the time of committing his criminal offence.

   15. In relation to the claimant's criminal history it  is  accepted  that
       conspiracy to commit burglary is a serious offence but the  following
       should also be noted which reduce the weight of  this  factor.  There
       was a recommendation that the claimant receive a  suspended  sentence
       and he in fact received an eighteen-month sentence which  is  at  the
       low end of the one year to four year category to which this exception
       applies. Contrary to what is  submitted  by  Ms  Ahmad  the  claimant
       admitted his guilt at a very early stage and is remorseful. He has no
       relevant previous convictions and has been assessed as a low risk  of
       reoffending. There were  specific  circumstances  which  led  to  the
       offence being committed, which do  not  excuse  this  behaviour,  but
       which will mean it is not likely to reoccur:  the  claimant  and  his
       partner were hiding from  his  partner's  family  and  had  financial
       problems as a result. The claimant was also not the organiser of  the
       crime. Ms Brown submits in  these  circumstances  that  the  claimant
       succeeds  under  paragraphs  399(a)(ii)(a)  and  399(b)(ii)  of   the
       Immigration Rules, and that there is therefore no public interest  in
       his deportation, and  to  remove  him  would  be  a  disproportionate
       interference with his right to  respect  for  family  life,  and  the
       appeal should therefore be allowed.

Conclusions - Remaking

   16. The claimant is a foreign criminal whose deportation is in the public
       interest in accordance with s.117C(1) of the Nationality, Immigration
       and  Asylum  Act  2002  (henceforth  the  2002  Act).   However   his
       deportation will not be required in the public  interest  if  he  can
       fulfil one of two exceptions to deportation at s. 117C(4) and (5)  of
       the 2002 Act. I have preserved the finding of the First-tier Tribunal
       that this claimant cannot fulfil the exception at  s.117C(4)  because
       he would not have very significant obstacles  to  integration  if  he
       returned alone to Turkey. This was found to be the  case  as  he  had
       lived in a Turkish family in the  UK  and  been  exposed  to  Turkish
       culture and attitudes, can speak Turkish and would probably have some
       family contacts or distant relatives who could help  him.  He  cannot
       therefore show that  his  deportation  would  be  a  disproportionate
       interference with his private life ties with the UK.

   17. I must now consider whether the claimant can succeed in  this  appeal
       by showing that he meets the requirements of s.117C(5)  of  the  2002
       Act: that he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
       qualifying partner and children, and his deportation would be  unduly
       harsh. The claimant has  been  in  a  stable  relationship  with  his
       British citizen partner for almost six years. There are four  British
       citizen children of the family: the oldest  is  the  claimant's  step
       child, who has had no contact with her biological  father  and  views
       the claimant as her father, and who is now 7  years  old;  the  other
       three are the children of the claimant and his partner and are aged 3
       years, 20 months and 5 weeks.

   18. I have preserved the finding that it would be harsh for the  claimant
       to be deported and his partner and three (now four)  children  remain
       in the UK without him from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       which of course includes preserving a finding that the  relationships
       between the claimant, his partner and all four children  are  genuine
       and subsisting and that they are all qualifying persons. As I set out
       in my error of law decision: "At paragraph 38 of the decision  it  is
       found that the claimant's pregnant wife cannot care for  their  three
       children aged 7, 3 and 1 years without his considerable assistance as
       she suffers from severe carpal tunnel syndrome which means she cannot
       open jars, hold things up and carry her baby, and shortly there  will
       be a period of a year after an operation when she will not be able to
       carry anything. The  claimant's  wife  is  therefore  shortly  to  be
       "entirely dependent on the claimant to care for their  children".  It
       is also clear that she cannot turn to her parents or family for  help
       if her partner were deported as there is evidence  she  had  to  flee
       "honour based violence" from them and live in a women's aid  refugee,
       see paragraph 34 of the decision." This preserved First-tier Tribunal
       finding also clearly relies on the accepted  evidence  of  Ms  Ingrid
       Dudley, social worker employed by the London Borough of Barnet  which
       is set out at paragraph 39 of  the  decision  which  finds  that  the
       claimant is a  "caring  and  considerate  father"  who  is  "actively
       involved" and "integral"  in  his  children's  day  to  day  life,  a
       "proactive and hands-on parent".

   19. I find that the evidence before me from  all  four  witnesses  to  be
       reliable. Ms Ahmad made no submission that this was not the case.  It
       was consistent with the written statements, and there was consistency
       between all four witnesses. The evidence was also given in a straight
       forward and heart-felt way without exaggeration.

   20. I remind myself that the test for harshness is one which requires the
       outcome to be bleak or severe not  just  inconvenience,  undesirable,
       difficult or challenging. I find on the evidence put to me today that
       it would also be harsh for the claimant's  partner  and  children  to
       accompany him to Turkey.

   21. This is primarily because the claimant would be immediately  required
       to perform his military service for 15 months, and thus be unable  to
       provide for his family in Turkey in the sense of being with  them  to
       assist his partner with the practical care of  their  four  children.
       The law relating to military service is set out in the  Secretary  of
       State's reasons for refusal letter at paragraph 44 and is for all men
       between  the  age  of  20  and  41  years  with  no   provision   for
       conscientious objection.  I find that the  claimant's  partner  would
       thus be alone for this period of time attempting  to  care  for  four
       children under the age of 7 years in  an  unknown  country,  with  no
       practical assistance in the form of help from any relatives and  with
       the disabilities outlined above.  I  accept  the  evidence  from  the
       claimant and his parents to me that the claimant's  uncle  in  Turkey
       will not be able to provide accommodation or any financial  or  other
       help. In addition, the claimant's partner would be at  possible  risk
       of renewed domestic abuse from her own family who live in Turkey, and
       who have previously taken her oldest daughter from her and  subjected
       her to controlling and abusive behaviour.

   22. Whilst the family have some  familiarity  with  Turkish  culture  and
       language, I find it would be harsh for them to have to  move  country
       at this stage with the result that the claimant's  partner  would  be
       responsible for four very young children in a country  she  does  not
       know, and against a background of her and her eldest daughter  having
       suffered a number  of  stressful  moves,  including  two  periods  in
       women's refuges, within the UK due  to  the  domestic  abuse  of  her
       parents over the past four years. I find that the  claimant's  oldest
       (step) daughter does now have her own private life ties  as  a  seven
       year old in the UK with friends and cousins, and  that  it  would  be
       harsh for a child with her particular background to have to give this
       up, having reached a position of stability in her schooling and  with
       respect to her accommodation. The letter  from  Pooles  Park  Primary
       School regarding the two older children indicates  that  they  joined
       the school in April 2017. The school states that  they  have  a  good
       circle of friends, attend after school clubs and have good attendance
       and punctuality. I find strongly that a move to Turkey would  not  be
       in the best interests of the children given it would compromise their
       mother's ability to care for them as she would be alone and concerned
       about the  prospect  of  domestic  violence  from  her  parents  (one
       question from me about this issue notably reduced the claimant's wife
       to tears during the  hearing  before  me  whereas  the  rest  of  her
       evidence had been calm and measured), and place them in an alien  and
       more deprived situation  than  in  the  UK  with  respect  to  funds,
       accommodation, family and social support and schooling,  as  well  as
       negatively impacting on the now stable and developing private life of
       the eldest child.

   23. The final question is  whether  the  harshness  that  the  claimant's
       deportation would bring about for his partner and children  would  be
       unduly harsh. I remind myself that the claimant committed the offence
       of  conspiracy  to  commit  burglary.  He  was  involved  with  three
       burglaries  of  non-dwelling  houses   with   others   which   caused
       significant economic loss. He was  given  a  prison  sentence  of  18
       months. As Ms Brown has accepted this was a serious criminal offence.
       The sentencing remarks  do  make  clear  however  that  the  claimant
       admitted his guilt at  an  early  stage;  that  he  has  no  relevant
       previous convictions; and was not the organiser  of  the  crime.  The
       National Probation Service Pre-Sentence Report dated 23rd March  2015
       assesses the likelihood of reconviction as low. This is supported  by
       the report of  an  accredited  psychotherapist,  Mr  Baffour  Ababio,
       written after three consultations with the claimant  which  concludes
       that the claimant accepts his guilt and indeed blames himself  for  a
       "very stupid mistake, and accepts that the sentence he  received  was
       deserved. Mr Ababio's professional opinion is that the  claimant  has
       now transitioned to responsible adulthood.  It  is  also  correct  to
       observe that the circumstances of the family are now  very  different
       from those when the offence, which was said to have been  financially
       motivated, took place as  there  is  no  longer  a  threat  from  the
       claimant's family causing them to try to hide away from London  where
       the claimant has historically been able to find work.

   24. I remind myself however that the public interest is not  confined  to
       concern as to whether  the  claimant  will  commit  another  criminal
       offence, which on consideration of all of the above factors I find is
       highly unlikely, but also includes deterring other foreign  criminals
       and an expression  of  public  revulsion  against  such  criminality.
       These two factors must be given substantial weight in  the  balancing
       exercise although that weight is clearly not as great as it might  be
       if the crime had been one of violence or relating to drugs or if  the
       claimant had received a longer custodial sentence within the 1  to  4
       year bracket to which this exception applies.

   25. Evaluating all the circumstances of this case as set out above I find
       that the claimant is entitled to the  benefit  of  the  exception  to
       deportation at s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act. I find that  the  extremity
       of the harshness to this vulnerable family with four  young  children
       and a disabled mother who has been a victim of domestic violence from
       her own parents, who would have to live without the claimant  whether
       they remained in the UK or returned to Turkey, and who  do  not  have
       other family members who can take on the  claimant's  very  dedicated
       father role either in the UK or Turkey, can properly be  said  to  be
       unduly harsh when balanced against his particular offending, which is
       not of the most abhorrent type to which this exception is potentially
       available, as set out above.  As such I find that the public interest
       does not require the claimant's deportation, and that it would  be  a
       disproportionate interference with his right  to  respect  to  family
       life to deport him from the UK.

    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision allowing the appeal.

      3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on human rights
         grounds.

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a
    likelihood of serious harm arising to the claimant's wife and children.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 20th February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a dual citizen of Turkey and the Turkish Republic  of
       Northern Cyprus born in 1988. He arrived in the UK on 27th March 1994
       as a five-year old child with  his  asylum-seeking  parents.  He  was
       granted discretionary leave on  12th  November  2003  and  indefinite
       leave to remain on 19th October 2004.

    2. On 21st April 2015 the claimant was notified by the  respondent  that
       she intended to make a deportation order against  him  as  a  foreign
       criminal. The detailed reasons for the Secretary of State's  decision
       are set out in her letter of 15th June 2015, and a deportation  order
       was signed on the same date. The claimant had committed  the  offence
       of conspiracy  to  commit  burglary,  and  was  involved  with  three
       burglaries  of  non-dwelling  houses   with   others   which   caused
       significant economic loss. He was  given  a  prison  sentence  of  18
       months. His appeal against the decision to refuse a protection  claim
       and a human rights' claim and to make a deportation order was allowed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge R. G. Walters on Article  8  ECHR  human
       rights in a determination promulgated on the 20th September 2017.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Grant-Hutchinson on 12th October  2017  on  the  basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in  law  in  failing  to
       give adequate reasons for the decision under  paragraph  399  of  the
       Immigration Rules.

    4. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

   Submissions - Error of Law

    5. The Secretary of State argues that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
       give sufficient  reasons  why  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
       claimant's children to remain in the UK without him or to live in the
       country to which he was to be deported under  paragraph  399(a);  and
       why it would be unduly harsh for the claimant's  spouse  to  live  in
       Turkey because of compelling circumstances or unduly harsh to live in
       the UK without the claimant under paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration
       Rules.

    6. It is said that the reasons give for  the  decision  under  paragraph
       399(b) are weak because  they  focus  simply  on  the  issue  of  the
       claimant's family's reliance in the UK on state benefits.

    7. It is said that the reasons given for the  decision  under  paragraph
       399(a) are insufficient because all that is said is that the claimant
       is a caring and considerate father and that the best interests are of
       his children not to be separated from  him,  and  that  this  is  not
       sufficient to show that the decision is unduly harsh  in  a  criminal
       context.

    8. In relation to all scenarios under paragraph 399 of  the  Immigration
       Rules Mr Duffy, for the Secretary of State, observes that the  First-
       tier Tribunal failed to complete a  balancing  exercise  putting  any
       elements of harshness to the claimant's family against the gravity of
       the crime he committed.

    9.  Ms  Brown  argued  that  the  appeal  was,  in  reality,  simply   a
       disagreement with the outcome of the appeal. When viewed as  a  whole
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did make it  clear  that  all
       evidence had been  considered,  see  paragraph  6  of  the  decision.
       Further if that evidence is examined in can be seen that  the  social
       work report and medical evidence identifies  vulnerabilities  in  the
       claimant's partner and children; and that in the  statements  of  the
       claimant and his partner there are reasons given why the couple could
       not live in Turkey as well as reasons why it would be extremely harsh
       if  the  claimant  were  removed  given  his  genuine  and  extensive
       relationship with the three children of the  family.  The  conclusion
       that the deportation would be unduly harsh was therefore one open  to
       the First-tier Tribunal, which  does  set  out  the  details  of  the
       claimant's crime, and is sufficiently reasoned.

   10. At the end of the hearing I told the parties that I found that  there
       was an error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  and
       that I would set out my full reasons in writing. I explained  that  I
       was therefore going to set the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       aside and would remake two elements of the decision: firstly, whether
       there would be any harshness in the claimant and his family going  to
       live in Turkey, and secondly the balancing exercise to decide if  the
       deportation of the  claimant  would  be  unduly  harsh  both  to  the
       claimant's  children  and  his  partner.  I  preserved  all  findings
       relating to the dismissal of the asylum appeal; the dismissal of  the
       private life Article 8 ECHR appeal with reference to  paragraph  399A
       of the Immigration Rules; and also the finding that it would be harsh
       for the claimant and his wife to remain in the UK without him.

   11. Neither representative had the full file or had had  sufficient  time
       to prepare for remaking; witness evidence needed to be  updated;  and
       there was also no Turkish interpreter for the claimant's  parents  to
       give evidence. It was therefore  agreed  that  the  remaking  hearing
       should be adjourned for the first available date before me after  one
       month (by  which  time  the  claimant's  solicitor's  file  would  be
       returned from storage).

    Conclusions - Error of Law

   12. In relation to paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) and paragraph  399(b)(iii)  of
       the Immigration Rules I find that adequate reasoning is  provided  by
       the First-tier Tribunal explaining why it  would  be  harsh  for  the
       claimant's partner and children to remain in the UK without  him.  At
       paragraph 38 of the decision it is found that the claimant's pregnant
       wife cannot care for their three children  aged  7,  3  and  1  years
       without his considerable assistance as she suffers from severe carpal
       tunnel syndrome which means she cannot open jars, hold things up  and
       carry her baby, and shortly there will be a period of a year after an
       operation when she will not be able to carry anything. The claimant's
       wife is therefore shortly to be "entirely dependent on  the  claimant
       to care for their children". It is also clear that she cannot turn to
       her parents or family for help if her partner were deported as  there
       is evidence she had to flee "honour based  violence"  from  them  and
       live in a women's aid refugee, see paragraph 34 of the decision.

   13. However, I find that in  relation  to  paragraphs  399(a)(ii)(a)  and
       399(b)(ii) that there is insufficient reasoning as to why the  family
       could not live in Turkey without this being  harsh,  which  has  been
       found  to  mean  severe  or  bleak  and   not   just   inconvenience,
       undesirable, difficult or challenging, see  MAB  (para  399;  "unduly
       harsh") [2015] UKUT 435. It is  not  clear  why  the  fact  that  the
       claimant's wife would lose her council property and UK benefits would
       be harsh, in this sense, as there are no findings  as  to  what  life
       would be like for the family in Turkey. Further there are findings at
       paragraphs 61 to 62 of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  that
       the claimant can speak Turkish and that  the  claimant's  family  has
       some distant relatives in  Turkey  who  could  assist  him  integrate
       there, which tend to indicate that things would not be harsh.

   14. I also find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  conduct
       a balancing exercise putting his criminal offences into the  balance,
       as is required by MM (Uganda) & Anor v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450.
       Consideration ought to have been given to all  aspects  of  the  case
       including the claimant's criminal behaviour before  deciding  whether
       the  deportation  of  the  claimant  with  or  without   his   family
       accompanying him would, even if it were harsh, be "unduly"  harsh  to
       his partner and children.

    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision allowing the appeal.

      3. The remaking decision is adjourned.

    Directions:

      1. Any further evidence should be filed with the  Upper  Tribunal  and
         served on the other party 10 days prior to the remaking hearing.

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the claimant's wife and children.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 28th November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

