
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07888/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 22 May 2017                      |On 5 June 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before:
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |MM                                                |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Respondent   |

                                  Anonymity


I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to  identify  the  appellant.  This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Elliott-Kelly, of Counsel, instructed by Elder
Rahimi Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                           DECISION AND Directions



Introduction and background facts:


 1. The appellant is a national of Iran, born on [  ]  1993.  He  has  been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Devittie  who,  following  a  hearing  on  24  February  2017,
    dismissed his appeal against a decision of the respondent  of  14  July
    2016 on asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  human
    rights grounds.

 2. The appellant most recently arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  August
    2010 with entry clearance as a Tier 4 student valid from 11 August 2010
    until 31 October 2012. His leave was  subsequently  extended  until  17
    October 2016. On 13 October 2015, a decision was made  to  curtail  his
    leave so as to expire on 18  January  2016.  On  14  January  2016,  he
    claimed asylum. This was refused by the respondent in the  decision  of
    14 July 2016 which was the subject of  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT").

 3. The issue before me is whether the judge's decision involved  an  error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.

 4. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim may be briefly summarised  as
    follows:

 5. Whilst in the United Kingdom,  the  appellant  wrote  blogs  that  were
    critical of the Iranian  government.  His  parents  have  travelled  on
    several  occasions  between  Iran  and  the  United   Kingdom   without
    difficulties. However, when his parents travelled back to  Iran  on  13
    October 2015, his father was detained on arrival at the  airport  as  a
    direct consequence of the authorities linking his father to  his  blog.
    His father was detained for about a week. His father told him  that  he
    was told by the authorities that the appellant had been active  against
    the regime by writing blogs.  His father advised him  to  be  cautious.
    However, he decided to continue with his blogs. On 26 January 2016,  he
    started a viber chat account with friends in the United  Kingdom.  They
    published satirical stories which he found provocative. He participated
    in this viber chat group for a few weeks before it ceased to function.

 6. It was not in dispute before the judge that the appellant ran a blog on
    which he had posted material that was critical of the  Iranian  regime.
    The judge stated, at [9], that it was not seriously contested that  the
    appellant may have run a viber chat group. The issue before  the  judge
    was whether the appellant's activities had come to the attention of the
    authorities in Iran and, if they have, whether the appellant  would  be
    at real risk of persecution upon his return to return.

 7. The judge's findings, to the extent relevant to  my  decision,  may  be
    summarised as follows:

    i)      The appellant did not begin running the blog and the chat group
        because of any genuinely held  political  opinions  concerning  the
        situation in Iran ([10(i)]  although he accepted that this does not
        detract from the question whether his conduct would give rise to  a
        well-founded fear of persecution ([10(ii)]).

    ii)     The appellant's evidence that his father had been arrested as a
        direct consequence of the authorities linking  his  father  to  his
        blog was not credible, given  the  appellant's  evidence  that  the
        reason why he continued to run his blog after his  father's  arrest
        was because of his view that the authorities were interested in his
        father and not him which the judge found was inconsistent with  his
        evidence that his father was arrested because of his activities  on
        the internet.

    iii)    The appellant accepted that the blog did not show  his  surname
        and that his name is not an uncommon name ([10(ii)]).

    iv)     The background evidence shows  that  there  were  well  over  a
        million bloggers in Iran, a significant number  of  whom  expressed
        political opinions and are monitored by the authorities. The  judge
        said  that  it  was  difficult  to  understand  how   the   Iranian
        authorities would have made a link between the  appellant  and  his
        father and  undertaken  investigations  such  as  to  lead  to  the
        father's arrest at the airport or why the  appellant's  blog  would
        have attracted any interest at all having regard to its content and
        the apparent lack of interest in significant numbers of persons.

    v)      The judge therefore found that the appellant's evidence of  his
        father's arrest had been entirely fabricated and that  it  was  not
        reasonably likely that the appellant's online activities have  come
        to the adverse attention of the authorities.

    vi)     The judge found that, if returned as a failed asylum seeker and
        questioned at the airport, it would cause him no difficulty at  all
        not to mention his online activities and, if he did,  he  would  in
        truth have to disclose that the blog and other such activities were
        not the result of any genuine conviction on his part.

The grounds

 8. There are four grounds which may be summarised as follows:

    i)      (Ground 1) The judge erred in law by failing to mention  and/or
        take into account the oral and written evidence of the  appellant's
        mother. This was material because  the  appellant's  mother  was  a
        direct material witness to the fact and circumstances of the arrest
        of  the  appellant's  father.  The  appellant's  mother  also  gave
        evidence about  the  appellant's  blog  and  his  viber  posts  and
        concerning her unsuccessful attempts to persuade the  appellant  to
        cease blogging after his father's arrest.

    ii)     (Ground 2) The judge erred in law in failing  to  give  reasons
        for not admitting a witness statement from the appellant's  father.
        In  the   statement,   the   appellant's   father   explained   the
        circumstances of his arrest and the questions he was asked  by  the
        Iranian Intelligence Service during his  detention.  The  statement
        was received on the morning of the hearing and translated and faxed
        to the Tribunal at some point during the course of the hearing.  An
        adjournment application was not made in order to avoid  losing  the
        opportunity of the appellant's mother  giving  oral  evidence.  The
        judge refused a request by the appellant's representative  for  the
        fax to be retrieved and the statement admitted as evidence.

    iii)    (Ground 3) In  any  event,  the  judge  made  several  mistakes
        concerning the appellant's evidence. These are explained  at  paras
        13-16 of the grounds.

    iv)     (Ground 4) The Judge failed to  take  into  account  fully  and
        properly AB and others (internet  activity  -  state  of  evidence)
        [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC).

Assessment

 9. In relation to  ground  1,  Mr  Staunton  submitted  that  it  was  not
    necessary for the judge to engage with all the evidence that was before
    him. In his submission,  the  appellant's  mother  did  not  give  much
    evidence about the appellant's blogging or viber activity. Although the
    evidence of the appellant's mother was  potentially  corroborative,  Mr
    Staunton submitted that it was not material  that  the  judge  did  not
    refer to her  evidence  because  he  gave  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's evidence.

10. In my judgement, this last point made by Mr Staunton  was  misconceived
    as it effectively side-steps the complaint that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider and take into account the potentially  corroborative  evidence
    of the appellant's mother before deciding  to  reject  the  appellant's
    evidence that his father was detained as a direct  consequence  of  his
    blogging activity.

11. Whilst it is correct to say that Tribunal judges  are  not  obliged  to
    deal explicitly with every aspect of the evidence that is before  them,
    this does not mean that the failure to engage  with  evidence  that  is
    potentially corroborative of a material  aspect  of  the  account  upon
    which an individual relies in his or her asylum claim will  not  amount
    to an error of law or a material error of law. In this particular case,
    it is evident that the evidence of the  appellant's  mother,  that  the
    appellant's father had been arrested on return to Iran, was potentially
    corroborative of his claim that his blogging was  the  reason  for  his
    father's arrest. This was material to the appellant's case, that he was
    at real risk due to his  blogging  activity.  The  judge's  failure  to
    engage with the evidence of the  appellant's  mother  demonstrates,  at
    worst, that he overlooked her evidence, or at best, that he  failed  to
    explain why he rejected it.

12. Mr Staunton also submitted that the issue before the judge was  whether
    there was enough content in the appellant's blog and viber activity for
    the appellant to be at real risk of persecution on return to Iran.  The
    judge considered the content of the appellant's blog and found that the
    blog could not be linked to the appellant.

13. In my judgment, this submission ignores the  fact  that  the  appellant
    relied upon his father's arrest as evidence that his blogging had  come
    to the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities.

14. I am satisfied that ground 1 is established and that the judge did  err
    in law, in that, he either overlooked the potentially corroborative and
    material written and oral evidence of the appellant's mother, or, if he
    rejected the evidence, gave no reasons for doing so.

15. In relation to ground 2, I agree with Mr Staunton  that  the  appellant
    had not complied with directions requiring him to submit evidence  that
    he wished to rely upon five  working  days  prior  to  the  substantive
    hearing. As far as I can see, no explanation was given to the judge  or
    to me  for  the  failure  to  comply  with  this  direction.  The  case
    management review hearing took place on 10 February 2017, i.e. 14  days
    before the hearing took place before Judge Devittie.  Parties  must  co
    -operate with the Tribunal and assist it to discharge its duty to  hear
    and determine all appeals justly without unnecessary  adjournments  and
    without the necessity for the judge to re-open part of the case.

16. It is evident from para 9 of the grounds that the  translation  of  the
    statement of the appellant's father was  faxed  to  the  Tribunal  only
    after the oral evidence of the appellant and his mother had  concluded.
    If the judge had admitted the statement at that stage,  he  would  have
    been obliged to allow the respondent's representative an opportunity to
    consider the statement and, if necessary, allow both the appellant  and
    his mother to be questioned further.

17. Although I note that it is said at para  9  of  the  grounds  that  the
    judge's list completed at about 14:45 hours and that the judge did  not
    take a float, it is not for the appellant  or  his  representatives  to
    make submissions on whether the judge's list  could  have  accommodated
    the statement being admitted at a late stage without an adjournment.

18. Having said all of this, I have noted that the appellant's father gives
    evidence of his detention in Iran and the questions he was asked  about
    the appellant and his blogging  activities.  It  is  evidence  that  is
    potentially material to the  issue  whether  the  appellant's  blogging
    activities  have  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of   the   Iranian
    authorities. In my judgement, and notwithstanding  my  observations  at
    [15]-[17] above, the judge ought to have arranged for  the  fax  to  be
    retrieved and, if there was insufficient time for oral evidence  to  be
    re-opened and for the case to conclude on the same day, adjourned part-
    heard  for  oral  submissions  or  agreed  a  timetable   for   written
    submissions.  By  failing  to  do  so,  the  judge  excluded  from  his
    consideration evidence that was potentially corroborative of a material
    aspect of the appellant's case.

19. I am satisfied that, in relation to ground 2, the judge erred in law in
    excluding from his  consideration  the  potentially  corroborative  and
    material evidence of the appellant's father.

20. I am further satisfied that both of these errors of law  are  material.
    This is because the evidence of the appellant's mother and  his  father
    potentially  supports  the  appellant's  evidence  that  his   blogging
    activities  have  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of   the   Iranian
    authorities.

21. I therefore set aside the decision of Judge Devittie in its entirety.

22. It is not necessary for me to consider grounds 3 and 4.

23. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

24. In my judgement, this case  falls  within  para  7.2(b).  In  addition,
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) &  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that a remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-hearing on the merits on  all  issues  is  the  right
    course of action. Ms Elliott-Kelly and Mr Staunton agreed  that,  if  I
    found that the judge had  materially  erred  in  law,  the  appropriate
    course of action would be to remit this case for a  re-hearing  on  the
    merits by another judge.

Decision

The decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Devittie  involved  the
making of errors on points of law such that the decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside in its entirety.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  re-
make the decision on the appellant's appeal on the merits on all  issues  by
a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devittie.



[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 2 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill



