
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/07876/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 October 2020                 |On 22 October 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     HB

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For  the  appellant:      Mr  J  Rene  of  counsel,  instructed  by  TolTops
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
indicated that I found an error of law and  intended  to  set  the  decision
aside, but reserved my full reasons to be provided in writing, which  I  now
give. The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a Gambian national with date of  birth  given  as
    15.3.85, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 25.2.20, dismissing  on
    all grounds her appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State,
    dated 8.8.19, to refuse her claim for international protection made  on
    17.7.18.

 2. The claim was made on the basis that on return to Gambia she would have
    a well-founded fear of persecution and/or being killed, or be at a real
    risk of serious harm to herself and her child,  at  the  hands  of  her
    father, for having children with her boyfriend whilst in an involuntary
    arranged marriage to AK, whom she left after he raped her. In  essence,
    the claim is that the appellant is a  member  of  a  Particular  Social
    Group (PSG) as a person who has committed adultery.

 3. The respondent accepted that women committing adultery in Gambia form a
    PSG. However, the claim of being forced into marriage with Abdoulie Kha
    (AK) and to have committed adultery with Demba Khan (DK)  was  rejected
    by the respondent on credibility grounds.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the appellant's  factual  claim  to
    lack credibility and dismissed the appeal.

 5. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the submissions made to me and the grounds of  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  as  amplified  by  Mr
    Rene's oral submissions.

 6. In summary, the grounds argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed
    to give adequate reasons for finding the appellant  not  credible,  and
    that the findings were marred by material errors.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Resident Judge Zucker  on  15.5.20,
    considering that, as the grounds contend, the judge made findings which
    were insufficiently supported by the evidence.

 8. The grounds as drafted are at least in  some  respects  a  disagreement
    with the decision. For example, by reliance on the refusal decision  at
    [12] of the decision, the judge identified an internal  discrepancy  in
    the appellant's account as to how she came to encounter AK and be raped
    by him. In one account she said she had been asked  by  her  father  to
    take dinner to her sister but in another that the person  to  whom  she
    was asked to take dinner was a woman she  did  not  know.  The  grounds
    attempt to reargue the appeal on this point, asserting that it  was  an
    inconsistency that ought not to be weighed as  a  major  inconsistency,
    "for her sister is indeed a woman and if she did not know the woman  or
    the sister at the time of taking the food,  she  could  not  have  been
    inconsistent as claimed." This argument is  obvious  nonsense.  At  the
    hearing before me, Mr Rene attempted to argue that 'sister' was a  term
    that might be used in Gambia for any  woman  but  he  could  adduce  no
    evidence to support this speculative  interpretation  of  the  apparent
    discrepancy. In any event, it is well-established law that  the  weight
    to be given to any particular factor in an appeal is a matter  for  the
    judge and will rarely give rise to an error of law, see Green  (Article
    8 -new rules) [2013] UKUT 254. In Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ  412,
    the Court of Appeal said that it is  necessary  to  guard  against  the
    temptation to characterise as errors of law what are in truth  no  more
    than disagreements about the weight to be given to  different  factors,
    particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the  advantage  of
    hearing oral evidence. No error of law is disclosed by this ground.

 9. Complaint is next made that at [24] of the decision the judge found the
    fact that her alleged boyfriend's name DK appears in  her  passport  as
    her husband undermined her claim to have been  married  to  AK.  It  is
    submitted that there is no mention of DK in her passport. Having looked
    at the copy passport in the appellant's bundle I accept that the  judge
    made a factual error as there is no  reference  to  a  husband  in  the
    passport. However, at [37] of the refusal decision, it is  pointed  out
    that the appellant had named DK as her husband in her visa  application
    and that her response to challenge to this in interview at Q118-119 was
    that she used to state that DK was her husband on  all  her  documents,
    including her passport and visa application. "I used to say Demba is my
    husband." It follows that it was the  appellant's  claim  that  DK  was
    named as her husband in her passport. This is a point  that  the  judge
    could have relied on, but did not do so. It follows that at  least  one
    of  the  matters  upon  which  the  judge  relied  as  undermining  the
    appellant's credibility is factually incorrect.

10. Complaint is also made of the judge's assertion at [22] of the decision
    that as "the appellant did not inform the respondent of  any  of  these
    complaints at the time of her interview" little weight was accorded  to
    the documents adduced which had been sent to the appellant via DHL. The
    sense of the sentence in question is  a  little  difficult  to  follow.
    However, the judge indicated that little weight was  given  to  various
    documents the appellant alleged had  been  sent  to  her  by  a  friend
    through DHL, including  complaints  that  she  allegedly  made  to  the
    police, as (1) she failed to mention any of these complaints during her
    substantive asylum interview and (2) because she had not  provided  any
    credible evidence as to how these documents were  obtained.  The  judge
    went on within the same paragraph to find that although  the  appellant
    had produced documents regarding the birth  of  her  daughter  and  her
    school attendance, it was implausible and not credible that  she  could
    not at the same time have  obtained  official  document  verifying  the
    alleged marriage.

11. It is clear that at Q141 of  the  interview  the  appellant  was  asked
    whether she had approached the Gambian authorities  about  the  threats
    allegedly made against her. In response, she said "the first time", and
    went on to say that the police spoke to her father but nothing came  of
    it as they told her it was a family matter. Whilst it is  correct  that
    the appellant claimed in  interview  to  have  made  complaint  to  the
    police, her answer indicated that this  was  done  only  on  the  first
    occasion. No other complaint to the police was mentioned in  interview.
    I accept that the judge's statement as made  is  factually  inaccurate.
    However, as Mr Tan pointed out, the police document at page 26  of  the
    appellant's bundle refers to several complaints having been  lodged  by
    the appellant, which is inconsistent  with  the  appellant's  interview
    account that only once did she make complaint to the police. It follows
    that the judge would have been entitled for this reason to give  little
    weight to the police document. However, this was not relied on  by  the
    judge and once again an adverse credibility  finding  was  based  on  a
    factual error.

12.    Complaint  is  made  that  at  [20]  of  the  decision,  the   judge
    inaccurately  recorded  the  submission  of   the   appellant's   legal
    representative  to  the  effect  that  the  documents   supported   the
    appellant's claim and in particular that the birth  certificate  showed
    that the daughter's father is DK.  It  is  submitted  at  [13]  of  the
    grounds that counsel did not make  such  a  submission,  "because  that
    evidence clearly stated that the appellant at the time was  married  to
    Mr Kha and father of (the daughter). It is  thus  submitted  that  such
    errors had vitiated the Judge's credibility assessment of the appellant
    in this case."

13.  If  [20]  is  derived  from  the  submissions   of   the   appellant's
    representative, which is not entirely clear given the way in which  the
    decision is drafted, this ground is largely a disagreement as  to  what
    was submitted. Although Mr Rene attempted to refer me to his  notes  of
    the hearing, I pointed out that I could not  take  evidence  from  him.
    Nevertheless, I accept that the notification of birth at page 27 of the
    appellant's  bundle  gives  the  husband's  name  as  Abdoulie  Kah,  a
    different spelling of the surname to that relied on by  the  appellant,
    and not DK. However, the child is not named. I accept  that  the  judge
    inaccurately stated that DK was recorded as the father  of  the  child.
    Yet again, the judge relied on a factually inaccurate  statement  in  a
    credibility finding against the appellant.

14. [14] of the grounds is an attempt to reargue the appeal, asserting that
    the appellant was credible in her account as to the provenance  of  the
    supporting documents received via DHL. The paragraph stated that it was
    "unfortunate" that  the  evidence  was  omitted  from  the  appellant's
    evidence presented before the court owing to the  administrative  error
    of her solicitors and an attempt  is  made  to  adduce  this  evidence,
    attached to the grounds. The issue for me is not  what  evidence  might
    have been adduced, only what was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It
    follows that this ground discloses an error of law on the part  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

15. Complaint is also made of the judge's rejection at [23] of the decision
    of the claim to have been married to AK,  because  she  was  found  not
    credible during interview. The judge went on to find her "not  credible
    regarding how she met her husband at the compound and whether  she  was
    misled into meeting him in the first place and that  this  led  to  her
    being raped. I do not believe that the appellant was raped  by  Mr  Kha
    and that she was kept captive for two days." The grounds complain  that
    these conclusions were not  assessed  against  the  country  background
    rather than "premising such conclusions on the  inherent  probabilities
    of such happenings in the United Kingdom."

16. However, the judge did not state that he rejected the  account  because
    it was implausible or improbable but in  fact  found  the  account  not
    credible. This ground is primarily a disagreement with the decision and
    the reference to country  background  is  an  attempt  to  reargue  the
    appeal. Mr Tan pointed out that non country background information  was
    adduced by the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing.

17. Nevertheless, I accept it is  not  clear  from  [23]  itself  what  the
    judge's reasons were for finding the  account  not  credible.  Mr  Rene
    deduced that the judge was referring her to the findings of the refusal
    decision as summarised at [12] of the decision, but it is not clear.  A
    reading of the decision as a whole reveals some reasoning as to why the
    appellant was found not credible. For example, at [21] of the  decision
    the judge rejected the explanation for internal inconsistencies in  the
    appellant's interview as being that  she  misunderstood  the  questions
    because her child was crying. This explanation was rejected because she
    did not raise this as a concern at the time of the interview.  However,
    [23] as drafted is unsatisfactory as the judge does not appear to  have
    done more than accept the respondent's assertions of inconsistencies in
    interview and gave no adequate reasoning for accepting them.

18. Finally, the grounds assert that the judge materially erred in  failing
    to accord any weight in the credibility assessment of the appellant  to
    the supporting witness statement of DK, which it is  said  corroborates
    most of her account. However,  this  person  was  not  called  to  give
    evidence and, therefore, the claims  in  his  statement  could  not  be
    tested. In the premises, little weight could be given to such evidence.
    In any event, the judge made clear at [21] of the decision that all  of
    the evidence adduced and the  submissions  made  had  been  taken  into
    account before making findings of fact.  At [12] of  the  decision  the
    judge stated that all of the contents of the refusal decision had  been
    taken into account. No error of law is disclosed by this ground.

19.  Considering  the  decision  as  a  whole,  one  is   left   distinctly
    uncomfortable by the absence of adequate or cogent reasoning.  One  has
    to infer certain findings and reasons. The decision  is  marred  by  at
    least three factual inaccuracies on issues  in  respect  of  which  the
    judge made adverse credibility findings against  the  appellant.  There
    are errors of law here which are material to the outcome of the  appeal
    and which demand that the decision is set aside to be remade.

20. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.

21. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Decision

    The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The remaking of the decision is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  at
    Taylor House, with no facts preserved.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    14 October 2020




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date: 14 October 2020

