
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/07100/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 December 2018                      |On 14 January 2019                  |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                    MR AG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Dar, Archbold Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 24  May  2018  to
    refuse the appellant's asylum claim made on 28  November  2017.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 19 July 2018, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Broe dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 2. The appellant was born on 20 November 1987 and arrived in the UK  on  5
    June 2012 with entry clearance as a student until 2014.  On 28 May 2013
    his college informed the respondent that he had  concluded  his  course
    and his leave was curtailed so as to end on 11 November  2013.   On  19
    October 2013 he applied for leave to remain  as  a  student  which  was
    granted until 29 November 2014.  On 24 December 2014 he applied  for  a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national.   The  respondent  was
    satisfied the marriage was one of convenience.  His appeal against  the
    respondent's refusal  was  dismissed  by  Judge  Maka,  in  a  decision
    promulgated  on  15  March  2016,  following  an  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision on 22 June 2015.  The  appellant's  asylum  claim
    was made on the basis that the appellant now claims  he  is  homosexual
    and that he therefore would be at risk on return to Pakistan.

Grounds of Appeal

 3. The appellant appeals with permission from the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the following grounds:

    Ground 1:      failure to  make  clear  findings  on  material  matters
             having regard to relevant considerations and specifically  the
             evidence of Mr SS and Mr SRB;

    Ground 2:     failure to give weight to relevant factors;

    Ground 3:     failure to show anxious scrutiny or  apply  the  relevant
    standard of proof.

Error of Law Discussion

 4. There was no Rule  24  lodged  with  the  Tribunal  although  Mr  Avery
    indicated that one had been produced.   He  summarised  the  issues  to
    confirm  that  the  grounds  were  disputed   and   that   there   were
    discrepancies in the appellant's evidence identified by the judge.

 5. Mr Dar confirmed that his strongest point was that the evidence of  the
    asylum claim was not properly considered.  He submitted that  the  fact
    the previous appeal  was  dismissed  was  used  against  the  appellant
    whereas the appellant has come out as  a  completely  different  person
    since then.  He submitted  that  the  judge  referred  to  a  different
    witness.  At pages 29 to 31 of  the  appellant's  bundle  there  was  a
    statement from SS whereas the previous judge considered that there  was
    information from a friend called SA (paragraph [34] of the decision and
    reasons of Judge Maka).  Mr Dar further submitted  that  there  was  no
    adequate consideration of the evidence from Mr B.

 6. Although the judge stated that this evidence was inconsistent with that
    of the appellant with regard to the appellant's realisation that he was
    gay in the chronology of his asylum claim it was submitted that he  had
    failed to identify how that was inconsistent.  Mr B stated that he  met
    the appellant at a gay club in January 2017 and that he told him  after
    about two months that he was gay.  He further submitted that nowhere is
    mention made in  the  decision  of  the  numerous  pieces  of  evidence
    including entries on the Grindr app, e-mails  from  LGBT  organisations
    and pictures of LGBT events amongst the other evidence included.

 7. Mr Avery submitted that although the judge rejected the evidence of  Mr
    SS and found that he  misled  the  previous  judge  the  judge  made  a
    reasonable assumption on the evidence, given  that  the  appellant  was
    living with someone called 'SS' at the time of  both  different  appeal
    hearings.   Mr  Avery  submitted  that  although  the  judge  did   not
    specifically address the Grindr extracts and accompanying evidence they
    would not have made any  difference  in  the  context  of  the  overall
    evidence and the judge's findings.

 8. On the facts, the judge was entitled to find that the appellant lied to
    the previous judge.  It was his evidence to Judge Broe that at the time
    of the previous hearing his marriage had broken down and that his  wife
    J had left him at the time of  the  appeal  hearing  but  came  to  the
    hearing because she cared about him.  The appellant now claims that  at
    the time of the hearing he was living openly as a gay man, his  wife  J
    having caught him having sex in their bed with his friend A.

 9. The judge took into account that the last appeal hearing took place  on
    22 February 2016 and Judge Maka did not  accept  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant or J and found that they would both "go to any length to  try
    to make their account seem credible even if it meant lying  before  me"
    and the judge noted the absence of the  supporting  witnesses  although
    there were statements from their friends including "SS and A".  It  was
    in this context that Judge Broe found it likely that this  referred  to
    Mr SS and A.

10. Judge Broe noted that the appellant in his account in 2016  (the  judge
    being provided with a copy of that witness statement)  stated  that  he
    and J had moved in together  in  August  2014  which  contradicted  his
    account to Judge Broe that  they  began  living  together  after  their
    marriage on 22 December 2014.  Judge Broe took into account that at the
    2016 hearing the appellant was asked about his plans with J and he said
    that they wanted to have their own home and she was hoping to establish
    a business and they wanted to travel to Pakistan  and  Poland  to  meet
    their respective families and J said they had planned to  buy  a  house
    and start a family.  Judge Broe was entitled to find that this was  not
    consistent with the appellant's explanation (to  Judge  Broe)  for  not
    mentioning the relationship was over, which was that he was not  asked.



11. Judge Broe also took into account that the appellant's evidence at  the
    hearing before Judge Maka was that he was in contact with his family in
    Pakistan by video chat and phone, spoke  to  them  twice  a  week  most
    recently on the morning of the hearing on 26 February 2016 and that his
    wife had spoken to his older sister.  Judge Broe was entitled  to  find
    that this directly contradicted the appellant's current  claim  not  to
    have spoken to his family since February 2015.

12. The judge went on to consider that there was  documentary  evidence  of
    payments to M and A.  J stated that the appellant needed money for  his
    car and borrowed from her.  J initially said  that  she  had  moved  to
    London but they were still friends.   She then said that she was  lying
    about that and A lived with her and the  appellant  but  his  visa  was
    expiring so that was why she had not named him as  a  flatmate.   Judge
    Broe was entitled to find, as he did at [33], that it was not  possible
    to reconcile the different accounts offered by the appellant  and  that
    he  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  current  explanation  for   J's
    involvement including at the last hearing, to be remotely credible.

13. It was not the case therefore, as contended in the grounds, that  Judge
    Broe was relying solely on the previous decision  but  was  taking  the
    correct Devaseelan  approach  of  considering  whether  there  was  any
    evidence to warrant a departure from those credibility  findings.   The
    judge was entitled to find as he did at [33], that the appellant:

         "Must have lied to the judge in the last hearing or to me or  quite
         possibly to us both.  On the  account  he  gave  me  he  was  quite
         comfortable about explaining why he had lied at  the  last  hearing
         and it was clear that he will say whatever he feels is necessary to
         further his interests.  He was not troubled about lying to the Imam
         at his nikkah."

14. The judge also took into consideration that in addition to the issue in
    relation to the  appellant's  former  wife  J,  the  appellant  further
    accepted that he had also entered into an Islamic marriage with another
    individual on 30 September 2016 (and  there  was  a  witness  statement
    before the First-tier Tribunal from this individual  with  a  purported
    explanation  for  the  marriage).   It  was  the  appellant's   claimed
    explanation  that  his  legal  representatives  had  written   to   the
    respondent on 21 December 2016 by way  of  a  Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds.  They said that the appellant's marriage had broken  down  and
    he was in the process of seeking a divorce and that he had been  living
    with Ms I since September 2016 and planned  to  register  the  marriage
    when he was divorced.

15. Judge Broe was entitled to find that he did not accept the  appellant's
    explanation  which  was  that  this  letter  was  written  without  the
    appellant's instructions.  This was not least because  the  appellant's
    representatives enclosed a form of authority  from  the  appellant  and
    that if all the solicitors had was the marriage certificate  the  judge
    questioned why they would have said that the appellant  and  Ms  I  had
    been living together since September 2016.  Again this  was  a  further
    significant   adverse   credibility   issue   the   judge   took   into
    consideration, over and  above  the  starting  point  of  the  previous
    decision.

16. On the evidence before him the  judge  was  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusion he did, that on the balance of  probabilities  the  two  S's
    were the same person when considered in the context of all the evidence
    including that the appellant was someone found not to  be  credible  at
    all by the previous judge and on the basis of the  significant  further
    credibility  points  identified  by  Judge  Broe.   Even  if  it   were
    established that the judge erred in fact in this  conclusion,  that  is
    not material given the weight of the evidence against the appellant.

17. The fact that the judge did not specifically list each and every  piece
    of evidence before him, including the Grindr app  and  other  material,
    does not mean that it  was  not  considered.   The  judge  specifically
    noted,  for  example,  Mr  B's  evidence,  but  found   that   it   was
    inconsistent.  Again although Mr  Dar  submitted  that  there  were  no
    reasons given as to what the inconsistency was it  is  the  appellant's
    account that he was living openly as gay  prior  to  the  last  hearing
    after his wife left.  He was clear that she had left by the time of the
    appeal hearing and that he claimed in his witness statement that "after
    this I started living my life openly" including going to gay clubs  and
    events.  He further stated that he does not lie  about  his  sexuality.
    The judge was entitled to come to the conclusion he  did  that  it  was
    inconsistent in this context that Mr B met  the  appellant  in  January
    2017 and that the appellant did not tell him he was gay until about two
    months after they met. The  judge  did  not  make  an  adverse  finding
    against Mr B but found that he had been misled by the appellant.

18. Judge Broe reached clear findings, having considered  the  evidence  in
    the round, that the appellant is not being truthful about his claims to
    be gay and is prepared to lie (and on the basis of both Judge Maka  and
    Judge Broe's findings he would appear to have  lied  and  fabricated  a
    case on multiple occasions) if he thinks it is in his interests  to  do
    so [36].

19. I take into account that the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  need
    only be adequate (see MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1958) and that
    adequacy means no more nor less than that.  It  is  not  a  counsel  of
    perfection. Still less should it provide an opportunity to undertake  a
    qualitative assessment of the reasons  to  see  if  they  are  wanting,
    perhaps even surprising, on their merits. The purpose of  the  duty  to
    give reasons, is in part, to enable the losing party to know why he has
    lost.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.

Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
