
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/07210/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 July 2017                           |On 7 July 2017                      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     ASY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance by the legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant
herein is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall  directly
or indirectly identify the  appellant  or  any  member  of  the  appellant's
family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant's nationality was originally disputed by the Secretary of
    State,  the  decision  letter  identifying  him  as  being  Iraqi.  The
    appellant has always asserted that he is a national of Iran.

 2. The appellant, born in November 1987, arrived in the United Kingdom  on
    4 December 2015 and claimed asylum on the same date.  That  application
    was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of  29  June  2016,
    against which the appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett  on  30  January
    2017 and dismissed on all  grounds  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  9
    February 2017.

 3. It is prudent at this  stage  to  identify  the  following  significant
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal:

      i) the appellant is a national of Iran who has had refugee  status  in
         Iraq for the entirety of his life [21];

     ii) the appellant has established that because of his family background
         and his activities with Komala he would be  at  risk  of  death  or
         serious harm in Iran.  The appellant forms  part  of  a  particular
         social group i.e. a group acting against the Iranian state [22];

    iii) the respondent proposes to return the appellant to Iraq [23];

     iv) the appellant would not suffer persecutory treatment in  Iraq  and,
         in any event, it would not be unduly harsh to require the appellant
         to relocate from the IKR to Baghdad;

      v) the appellant cannot, as a consequence of (iv) above,  fall  within
         the protection of the Refugee Convention [29], nor is  he  entitled
         to humanitarian protection. His removal would not be  a  breach  of
         Articles 2 and 3 ECHR [34].

 4. In granting permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cruthers aptly stated as follows;

         "3.  In my assessment it is arguable, as per the grounds, that  the
             appellant's claim to refugee status is  not  defeated  by  the
             findings that the judge made.  In particular, it  is  arguable
             that any possibility of the appellant being returned  to  Iraq
             without a real risk of persecutory ill-treatment arising  does
             not take the appellant out of the definition of  'refugee'  to
             be found in the 1951 Geneva Convention (as amended)."





Discussion and Decision

 5. It is necessary at this stage to set out the definition  of  a  refugee
    found within Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention:

         "A person who owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted  for
         reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular
         social group or political opinion, is outside the  country  of  his
         nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is  unwilling  to
         avail himself of the protection of that country; or who, not having
         a nationality and being outside the country of his former  habitual
         residence as a result of such events, is unable or, owing  to  such
         fear, is unwilling to return to it ..."

 6. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Clarke properly accepted the following:

      a) Given the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions that the  appellant  is
         of Iranian nationality, is not of Iraqi  nationality  and  that  he
         would be persecuted for a convention reason if  returned  to  Iran,
         the appellant falls within the definition of a refugee;

      b) The First-tier Tribunal erred in directing itself to  the  contrary
         and its decision must be set aside.

 7. Mr Clarke further indicated/undertook that the Secretary of State would
    not seek to remove the appellant to Iraq. The previous indication  that
    Iraq would be the country to which the appellant would be  removed  was
    based on the Secretary of State's (now known  to  be  mistaken)  belief
    that the appellant is an Iraqi national.

 8. On the findings made by the FtT the appellant is  clearly  outside  his
    country of nationality as a consequence of having a  well-founded  fear
    of persecution in such country. The fact that he can return to  another
    country of which he is not a national and in which he will  not  suffer
    persecutory treatment does not defeat his claim to be a refugee.

 9. For the reasons succinctly identified by Mr  Clarke  I  find  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an  error  of  law  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal and I set such decision aside.

10. No submissions were made by Mr Clarke as to how  the  decision  on  the
    appeal should be re-made but, in all the circumstances  and  given  the
    uncontested findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  re-make  it  by
    allowing the appellant's appeal on the basis that he is a refugee.

11. In such circumstances the appellant's claim for humanitarian protection
    falls away. As to his Article 3 claim, as  indicated  above  Mr  Clarke
    gave an undertaking that the appellant would not be  removed  to  Iraq.
    This, it seems to me, is sufficient to dispose of any Article  3  claim
    the appellant may have before the Tribunal - although  I  observe  that
    any proposal to remove the appellant  to  his  country  of  nationality
    would, of course, inevitably lead to a breach of Article 3.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Upon re-making - the appellant's appeal is allowed.



Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 6 July 2017


