
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07213/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th November 2020                 |On 10th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     VS
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to directions sent on 28 July 2020  indicating  a  provisional
    view that in light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread
    of Covid-19 and the overriding objective, it would  be  appropriate  in
    this case to determine the issue of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision involved the making of an error of law and if so  whether  the
    decision should be set aside without a hearing;  the  parties  did  not
    raise any objections (subject to one point about  which  the  Appellant
    noted that oral submissions may be helpful  if  not  agreed)  and  both
    parties have made written submissions  on  the  issues  raised  in  the
    appeal.

 2. In circumstances where no objections were made in principle to the main
    error of law issues being determined without a hearing; where the  Rule
    15(2A) application can be justly determined on the papers and where the
    parties have made written  submissions;  it  is  in  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed to determine the error of law issues on  the  papers
    in light of the written submission available and the full appeal file.

 3. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Scott promulgated on 13 March 2020,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim dated 22 July 2019 was dismissed.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Ukraine, born on 28 December  1981,  who
    claims to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely  in  July
    2008.  He was encountered by  the  authorities  during  an  enforcement
    visit on 17 April 2019, following which he claimed asylum on  23  April
    2019.  The Appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Ukraine on  the
    basis  that  he  had  been  convicted  and  sentenced  in  absentia  to
    imprisonment for a period of three years for  draft  evasion  and  also
    that he was at risk on return from the Mafia, the original  reason  for
    him fleeing Ukraine.

 5. The Respondent refused the application the basis that although  it  was
    accepted that the Appellant had  previously  served  in  the  Ukrainian
    military as claimed, the remainder of his claim was not  credible.   In
    particular it was not accepted that there was any further  mobilisation
    after 2014, that the Appellant  was  too  old  for  a  call-up  to  the
    military; that call-up papers could not have been  legitimately  served
    on the Appellant's family members and as the findings  in  the  country
    guidance case of VB & Another (draft  evaders  and  prison  conditions:
    Ukraine) (CG) [2017] UKUT 79 (IAC) were that  very  few  draft  evaders
    have been subject to any criminal proceedings, let alone  convicted  of
    any offence or sent to prison.  The Respondent was not  satisfied  that
    there was any evidence supporting the  Appellant's  claimed  conviction
    and sentence.  For these reasons, the Appellant was not accepted to  be
    at real risk of persecution on return to Ukraine.  Further, he did  not
    meet the requirements for a grant of leave to remain on  the  basis  of
    private or family life set out in the Immigration Rules and there  were
    no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to  remain  on
    any other basis.

 6. Judge Scott dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 13  March
    2020 on all grounds.   In  summary,  there  was  no  dispute  that  the
    Appellant had previously served in the Ukrainian army and it was  found
    to be plausible that the Appellant, as a military reservist, was liable
    to be called up as part of a mobilisation, with the  rejection  of  the
    reasons given by the Respondent for not accepting the  same.   However,
    the First-tier Tribunal found that this alone was  not  sufficient  for
    the Appellant to be at risk on return to Ukraine, he would only  be  at
    risk of detention if in addition he had been prosecuted, convicted  and
    sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment for draft evasion such that he would
    be detained on return  to  Ukraine;  which  if  accepted,  pursuant  to
    country guidance, would be a  breach  of  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal, whilst accepting much of the  expert  evidence
    of Professor Galeotti, did not  attach  weight  to  his  views  on  the
    genuineness of the documentation relied upon, in particular because  he
    had not been provided with the  originals  and  he  did  not  have  any
    qualifications or expertise in the forensic examination  of  documents.
    The evidence was found to amount to little more than  saying  that  the
    documents looked authentic, which was not considered to take the matter
    very much further.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal found that even  if  the  call-up  papers  were
    reliable, the court documents  relating  to  conviction  and  sentence,
    together with the lawyer's letter were not  reliable  and  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant had established that he had been  sentenced
    to a term of imprisonment in Ukraine, such that he would not be at risk
    on return  there.   The  reasons  for  that  conclusion  are  contained
    primarily in paragraph 57 of the decision, which in summary  were  that
    (i) the country guidance in VB was that it was  not  reasonably  likely
    that a  draft  evader  avoiding  mobilisation  in  Ukraine  would  face
    criminal proceedings, or that an immediate custodial sentence would  be
    imposed in the absence of aggravating factors.  The expert evidence was
    broadly  consistent  with  this,  although  there   were   reports   of
    prosecutions  taking  place  and  custodial  sentences  being  imposed,
    particularly in cases of reservists failing to attend court;  (ii)  the
    Appellant had not relied on draft evasion as a problem for him  at  his
    screening interview; (iii) there was an inconsistency in the record  of
    the asylum interview as to  the  length  of  sentence  of  imprisonment
    imposed; (iv) there was no explanation of any difficulty  or  delay  in
    obtaining the court documents  relating  to  sentence  and  conviction,
    which were submitted some time after the asylum interview; (v) the date
    of the court hearing was a national holiday in Ukraine and there was no
    evidence that the court would, or did, sit on a national holiday,  with
    the inference that it did not;  (vi)  the  letter  from  the  Ukrainian
    lawyer was clearly unreliable for the same  reasons  as  found  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in OK and additionally the  translation  was  inaccurate
    undermining the accuracy and reliability of both documents such that no
    weight was attached to the letter; and (vii) the document  relating  to
    conviction and sentence was submitted at the same time as  the  lawyers
    letter, both in with same subject matter and the obvious  unreliability
    of the lawyers letter also tended to undermine the reliability  of  the
    court document.

The appeal

 9. The Appellant appeals on seven grounds, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law as follows:

      i) In erroneously relying on factual findings made in the case  of  OK
         (PTA: Alternative  findings)  Ukraine  [2020[  UKUT  44,  in  which
         adverse findings were made in relation to a letter  from  the  same
         Ukrainian lawyer, considered in the circumstances of that case  and
         without setting any precedent that such letters, even from the same
         source, could never be reliable.  Further, the First-tier  Tribunal
         relied on this case which was not reported until after the  hearing
         in the present appeal and the parties were not therefore given  the
         opportunity to make any submissions on it.

     ii) In failing to take into consideration relevant evidence in relation
         to the export  report  of  Professor  Galeotti,  in  particular  in
         relation to the authenticity of documents examined in circumstances
         where the Respondent held the originals (albeit  initially  denied)
         which were not therefore available for examination.  The First-tier
         Tribunal erred in attaching little  weight  to  this  part  of  the
         expert  evidence  because  the  author  did   not   have   forensic
         qualifications and without taking into account the  author's  reply
         on this specific matter or explanation as to  why  scanned,  rather
         than original documents, made no difference to  his  assessment  of
         them.

    iii) In  failing  to  take  into  consideration  that  evidence  of  the
         reliability of the Appellant's documents was  not  limited  to  the
         expert report, but included evidence from the Appellant's father as
         to how documents were obtained and the original envelopes in  which
         they were sent to the United Kingdom.

     iv) In failing to take into  consideration  evidence  relevant  to  the
         assessment of the Appellant's credibility  in  circumstances  where
         much of the Appellant's claim was considered to  be  plausible  and
         consistent with  background  country  information  and  the  expert
         evidence relied upon; and in placing reliance  on  the  Appellant's
         screening interview in circumstances where he explained that he was
         interviewed not in his first language and not  all  questions  were
         understood.

      v) In taking into consideration irrelevant  evidence,  including  that
         produced by the Respondent on the day of the hearing about national
         holidays in Ukraine, which was admitted in the appeal without clear
         explanation as to the reliance to be placed on it.   The  Appellant
         was not given an opportunity to produce any  evidence  in  response
         and failed to take into account the possible explanations given  in
         submissions for the date on the court documents corresponding  with
         a national holiday.  The Appellant  seeks  permission  to  rely  on
         further evidence not before the First-tier  Tribunal  showing  that
         under Ukrainian law, a Judge has discretion to sit  on  a  national
         holiday.

     vi) In making irrational findings that both the original document and a
         translation of it were unreliable because of  the  addition  of  an
         email address in  the  letterhead  which  did  not  appear  on  the
         original and therefore undermined the accuracy and  reliability  of
         the document.  The Appellant seeks permission to  rely  on  further
         evidence not before the First-tier Tribunal, namely a  letter  from
         the translator explaining the error.

    vii) In irrationally conflating the assessment of the genuineness of the
         court documents with the lawyer's letter, finding  the  reliability
         of one to be undermined by the obvious unreliability of the  other.
         The documents were not obtained together and the assessment of each
         should have been independent.

 1. Further to the directions stated 28 July 2020, written  submissions  in
    support of the appeal made on behalf of the Appellant,  with  continued
    reliance on the grounds set out above  and  submissions  made  on  them
    which  were  materially  the  same  as  the  original  grounds.   Those
    submissions include more detailed application under rule 15 to rely  on
    additional documents,  going  wider  than  those  referred  to  in  the
    original grounds of appeal and  including  (i)  a  document  about  the
    ability of Ukrainian  courts  to  sit  on  bank  holidays;  (ii)  email
    correspondence  between  Professor   Galeotti   and   the   Appellant's
    representatives;  (iii)  military  service  records  book;  (iv)  court
    document confirming conviction and sentence dated 1 May 2019,  together
    with  translations;  and  (v)  letter  from  Ukrainian   lawyer,   with
    translation.  It is stated that all of  these  documents  had  at  some
    stage been in the possession of  the  Respondent,  however  no  further
    submissions were made as to why it was appropriate  to  admit  them  at
    this stage.

 2. The Respondent made written submissions in response to the  grounds  of
    appeal on 25 August 2020 in the form of a rule 24 response opposing the
    appeal.  In relation to the first  ground  of  appeal,  the  respondent
    submits that the First-tier Tribunal properly summarised and adequately
    assessed all of the relevant evidence, including  the  expert  evidence
    and his lack of qualifications to forensically  examine  the  documents
    and the apparent improper translation of the lawyer's  letter,  without
    simply relying on the decision of OK to discount  or  cast  doubt  that
    letter.

 3. In relation to the second ground of appeal, it is not in  dispute  that
    the expert did not see the original documents and  no  adjournment  was
    sought to enable those documents to be placed  before  the  expert  for
    assessment.  The Respondent submits that in isolation, this ground does
    not undermine the evidence or the weight attached to it by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, upon which conclusions were drawn which  were  available
    to  the  Tribunal  on  the  evidence.   Further,  irrespective  of  the
    particular qualifications of the expert, the remained clear  issues  on
    the translation of documents.

 4. In relation to the third ground of appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision makes express reference to  the  written  statement  from  the
    Appellant's father (in paragraphs 12c, 21, 22, 23  and  24),  to  which
    little weight could be attached  because  the  evidence  could  not  be
    tested orally and in isolation could not  have  been  material  to  the
    claim.  In any event, the First-tier Tribunal is not required to  refer
    to each and every piece of evidence before it and in  this  case  dealt
    with the key focus of the  Appellant's  claim  relying  on  the  expert
    report and three core documents.  When read as a whole, it is submitted
    that the  decision  reached,  with  factual  findings  on  those  court
    documents, was one which was open to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. In relation to the fourth ground of  appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    gave clear and adequate reasons, having balanced all  of  the  factors,
    for documents not being reliable and it is perfectly plausible for some
    of the evidence to be  accepted  in  given  weight,  with  other  parts
    rejected with reasons.  It is submitted that the grounds  of  challenge
    offer only an alternative interpretation of the  evidence  rather  than
    identifying an error of law in the approach in conclusions  reached  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. In relation to the fifth ground of  appeal,  the  Respondent  does  not
    accept that reliance on additional documents on the day of the  hearing
    "ambushed" the Appellant or his Counsel; nor was the admittance of such
    evidence unfair, particularly ais no objection was made to  it  and  no
    application for an adjournment was made, at  the  outset  or  when  the
    relevance of the documents became clear.  The Respondent  submits  that
    the relevance of the information was self-evident and was in any  event
    addressed during final submissions on behalf of the Appellant.  In  the
    circumstances there was no error of law by the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. In relation to the sixth ground of appeal, the Respondent submits  that
    the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find  the  translation  of  the
    document to be  unreliable  given  the  anomaly  on  the  face  of  the
    documents and in any event the reasons given for not finding this to be
    genuine were wider than simply a translation error.

 8. Finally, the Respondent submits that the final ground  of  appeal  does
    not in any way undermine the whole findings and reasons  given  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and is not material to the outcome of the appeal.

 9. There was no specific response from the Respondent to  the  Appellant's
    application contained within the grounds of appeal to adduce  and  rely
    on further documents of an error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

10. Further submissions were made on behalf of the Appellant on  19  August
    2020, in which reliance  was  continued  on  the  original  grounds  of
    application and the earlier written submissions of 6  August  2020.   A
    number of specific points were made in reply to the Respondents written
    submissions.  These included that the Appellant had specifically relied
    on the written evidence from his father and  not  just  on  the  expert
    report and core documents, the statement being important evidence  upon
    which the First-tier Tribunal simply made no findings.  The  weight  to
    be attached to such evidence was for the First-tier Tribunal and it  is
    not appropriate after the event for the Respondent to state that in any
    event it would have been of limited evidential value in the absence  of
    oral evidence.  In relation to the original documents, it is  submitted
    on behalf of the Appellant that it is unrealistic to have  applied  for
    an adjournment to place the original documents  before  the  expert  in
    circumstances where the Respondent denied possession of the same  until
    partway through the appeal hearing.

Findings and reasons

11. As a preliminary matter, I determine the application under Rule  15(2A)
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to admit  further
    documents in support of the grounds of appeal and relevant to the issue
    of whether there was an error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    test to be applied to the application is set out  in  Ladd  v  Marshall
    [1953] 1 WLR 1489 as follows.

12. The three limbs of the test for new evidence to  be  admitted  are,  in
    summary, first, that the fresh evidence could not  have  been  obtained
    with reasonable diligence for use  at  the  trial;  secondly,  that  if
    given, it probably would have had an important influence on the result;
    and, thirdly, that it is apparently credible although  not  necessarily
    incontrovertible.

13. I deal with each of the documents listed in paragraph  10  above  which
    the Appellant seeks to rely on, taking the first two  linked  documents
    together.  First, the Appellant seeks  to  rely  on  a  document  which
    states that it is about the ability of the Ukranian courts  to  sit  on
    bank holidays.  The document is Ruling No.40 from the Council of Judges
    of Ukraine dated 2 July 2018, with  reliance  placed  on  paragraph  2.
    That paragraph states that it has been decided that:

         "2. Organisation of work (scheduled hours) of investigating  judges
         and court staff  during  off-duty  hours  (weekends  and  holidays)
         belongs to the issues of internal operation of the  court  and  the
         work of individual judges and court staff.  Therefore it belongs to
         the competence of the panels of judges."

14. The  next  document  is  referred  to  as  e-mail  correspondence  with
    Professor Galeotti, which refers to a document attached (presumably the
    first document) and  seeks  an  opinion  as  to  whether  a  particular
    paragraph includes trials.  The view is that it is ambiguous but  could
    be argued to relate to trials, such that there is  no  reason  on  this
    basis why the Appellant's trial couldn't have taken place on a  holiday
    (emphasis in the original).

15. These two documents could in theory  have  been  available  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, although in practice the date of the trial and the
    national holiday in Ukraine had not been raised prior  to  the  hearing
    such that there would have been no reason  to  obtain  either  at  that
    stage.

16. However, there is a difficulty in satisfying the second and third tests
    in Ladd v Marshall as although both documents are  apparently  credible
    (albeit not incontrovertible), the e-mail does not  identify  what  the
    document is that was attached  to  the  request  and  it  can  only  be
    inferred to be the first document.  There is  no  explanation  of  this
    document or the application of the decision  contained  therein.   More
    importantly, the part of the document relied upon is said by  Professor
    Galeotti to be ambiguous,  in  his  opinion.   At  best,  the  document
    together with the e-mail suggest that there might not be a  basis  upon
    which it could be said that a criminal trial definitely could not  take
    place on a national holiday; but does not refer to any arrangements  or
    decision by the specific court, nor any evidence of the  specific  case
    having been heard on a bank holiday.  In these circumstances, it cannot
    be said that it would probably have had an important influence  on  the
    outcome; the evidence can not undermine the finding in paragraph  57(e)
    of the decision that there "is no evidence that  the  Court  would,  or
    did, sit on a national holiday and the obvious inference is that it did
    not" which was only one of many reasons why it was  not  accepted  that
    the Appellant had been  convicted  and  sentenced  as  claimed.   These
    documents are not therefore admitted as they do  not,  individually  or
    together, meet all three limbs of the test in Ladd v Marshall.

17. The third and fourth items were not attached to the written submissions
    and in any event were already before the First-tier Tribunal such  that
    it is not understood why they were referred to at all as part of a Rule
    15(2A) application.

18. The final document is a letter from the translator explaining that  the
    letterhead in the original translation had been copied and pasted  from
    a different piece of translation  work  with  the  e-mail  address  not
    deleted in error; together with a copy of the Ukrainian lawyer's letter
    and an updated translation.  The letter and updated translation did not
    exist at the time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  but  it  is
    evidence which could (and should) have been  available  at  the  appeal
    with due diligence from the legal representative.   The  error  on  the
    face of the original translation had been identified by the  Respondent
    in correspondence on 16 December 2019, over 6 weeks before the  hearing
    and further to which the Appellant was  on  notice  that  this  was  an
    issue.  There is no explanation as to why this additional evidence  was
    not sought prior to the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In
    these circumstances, the first test is not met and these documents  are
    not admitted.

19. For these reasons, the Rule 15(2A) application is refused in respect of
    all documents referred to and sought to be relied upon by the Appellant
    either in the grounds of permission to appeal  and/or  in  the  written
    submissions subsequently filed.

20. The first ground of appeal concerns the First-tier Tribunal's  reliance
    on the decision in OK reported after the hearing of the present  appeal
    and without the parties being given any opportunity to make submissions
    on it.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  refers  to  the  circumstances  and
    findings in the case of OK in paragraphs 44  to  47  of  the  decision,
    including quotation from paragraphs 18 to 20 of  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in which no error was found in that case in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's approach to evidence.   This  included  limited  weight
    being given to Professor Galeotti's opinion as to  the  genuineness  of
    call-up papers and  court  documents  and  the  letter  from  the  same
    Ukrainian lawyer as in the present appeal on which it was found that no
    reasonable judge could have placed any weight  on  such  a  problematic
    document which was considered to be wholly  unreliable.   In  paragraph
    57(f) of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, the  materially  identical
    letter from the same Ukrainian lawyer was found to  be  unreliable  for
    the same reasons given by the Upper Tribunal  in  OK  and  in  addition
    because of the unreliable translation of the document.

21. The Tribunal did not  treat  the  decision  in  OK  as  binding  or  as
    establishing any precedent on the facts about the weight to be attached
    to the evidence from  Professor  Galeotti  as  to  the  genuineness  of
    documents (there being no reference at all to this case in relation  to
    this matter), or from the same Ukrainian lawyer; but merely adopted the
    reasoning given therein for  why  the  lawyer's  letter  was  given  no
    weight.  There is nothing  to  suggest  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered this to be binding, nor that it applied it such.  I find  no
    error of law in the cross reference to the findings and reasoning in OK
    in circumstances where there was materially identical  evidence  before
    both Tribunals and about which the same conclusions would inevitably be
    drawn.  This is particularly so in relation to the  Ukrainian  lawyer's
    letter, which had the additional difficulty of a translation  which  on
    its face contained an obvious error and upon which no reasonable  Judge
    could have placed any weight.

22. Whilst there is some force in principal in the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    the grounds of procedural fairness that neither party was permitted  to
    make any representations on the case of  OK  which  was  reported  only
    after the appeal hearing; in reality this could have  had  no  material
    impact on the outcome of the appeal.  Even  without  reference  to  the
    reasoning in OK, the First-tier Tribunal  could  rationally  only  have
    reached the same conclusions in relation to the weight to  be  attached
    to the Ukrainian lawyer's letter and translation on the evidence before
    it and for the reasons given.  For these reasons, there is no error  of
    law on the first ground of appeal.

23. The second ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to
    take into account the fact that the Respondent held  the  originals  of
    documents which Professor Galeotti examined  scanned  copies  of  (such
    that the originals  were  unavailable  for  inspection)  and  erred  in
    attaching little weight to the evidence  in  the  absence  of  forensic
    qualifications and the expert's explanation of his  assessment  of  the
    documents, including as to the nature of the scans.

24. The First-tier Tribunal set out in detail  the  evidence  of  Professor
    Galeotti and his  qualifications  from  paragraphs  35  to  39  of  the
    decision (which included his reasons for  finding  that  each  document
    was, in his best professional assessment,  apparently  genuine).   This
    was followed by detailed reference to  the  Respondent's  concerns  and
    submissions raised in her 'Position Paper' dated 16  December  2019  in
    paragraph 40 of the  decision  and  Professor  Galeotti's  response  in
    paragraph 41.  It is clear from this that the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    aware of and had  fully  taken  into  account  all  of  this  evidence,
    including the specific response to concerns about Professor  Galeotti's
    qualifications and that he had not seen the original documents.   There
    is simply nothing to suggest that these matters, having been  expressly
    set out, were not taken into consideration in the decision.

25. Further, it is of note that the Appellant did not at  any  stage  apply
    for an adjournment of the appeal so that the original  documents  could
    be placed  before  Professor  Galeotti  for  examination  and  that  is
    unaffected by any dispute with the  Respondent  as  to  their  location
    given the Appellant knew that they had been handed to the  Respondent's
    representative at a previous hearing and that this was a  matter  which
    could have been  resolved  in  the  process  of  consideration  of  any
    application  for  an  adjournment  or  the   practicalities   of   one,
    particularly  following  the  Respondent's  Position  Paper  dated   16
    December 2019.

26. It is  perfectly  permissible  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  have
    accepted much of Professor Galeotti's report, particularly those  parts
    on which he has specific expertise, experience and qualifications;  but
    not  to  attach  any  significant  weight  to  his  assessment  of  the
    genuineness of documents relied upon by the Appellant for  the  reasons
    given.  Those were in essence contained in paragraphs 53 and 54 of  the
    decision, that he had only seen copies of the documents and he  had  no
    qualifications or expertise in the forensic examination  of  documents.
    The view that the documents looked authentic did not advance the matter
    very far given that if someone was to produce false documents, they may
    well be expected to make them look as authentic as possible.

27. These were conclusions that the First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    reach on the weight to be attached to the evidence on the basis of what
    was before it, particularly in circumstances where there  had  been  no
    application for an adjournment or attempt to obtain  the  originals  to
    put before the expert and where Professor Galeotti accepted that  there
    were differences in court documentation  from  different  locations  as
    well as over  time,  such  that  comparison  had  not  been  made  with
    documents from the same court but only similar documents and little  or
    no explanation as to how it was  known  that  the  documents  used  for
    comparison were genuine either.  For these reasons there is no error of
    law on the second ground of appeal.

28. The third ground of appeal concerns  the  further  evidence  about  the
    court documents from the  Appellant's  father  upon  which  no  express
    findings are made by the First-tier Tribunal.  The Respondent refers to
    a number of parts of the decision which set out the Appellant's  claim,
    including by reference to the evidence of or obtained  by  his  father;
    albeit there is no express reference to the written  statement  at  all
    and no specific findings on it.

29. However, contrary to the grounds of appeal,  the  Appellant's  father's
    written statement does not contain any evidence as  to  how  the  court
    documents were obtained or why there was a delay  in  obtaining  and/or
    sending the same.  The statement refers to  attending  court  (with  no
    detail as to what happened other than the outcome  that  the  Appellant
    was convicted and sentenced), to being told by a single solicitor  that
    he could not assist with an appeal (again with  no  detail  as  to  the
    particular solicitor, reasons, nor  any  attempt  to  obtain  a  second
    opinion) and then to the Appellant asking  for  a  copy  of  the  court
    decision which was sent  by  the  Appellant's  mother.   There  was  no
    separate statement from the Appellant's mother about this.

30. The First-tier Tribunal, in paragraph 57(d) of the decision, noted that
    there was a delay in the court document showing conviction and sentence
    being submitted and rejected the claim that there was a  difficulty  in
    obtaining the same given that there was no explanation of this  or  any
    evidence as to why there should be any such difficulty.   That  finding
    was clearly  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there  was  no  such
    explanation or evidence and it  was  not  necessary  to  refer  to  the
    Appellant's father's written statement  specifically  in  this  regard.
    Documents failing to contain  relevant  evidence  do  not  need  to  be
    listed.

31. It is not necessary for the First-tier Tribunal to expressly  refer  to
    each and every  piece  of  evidence  in  the  appeal  and  despite  the
    Appellant's reliance on his father's written  statement,  it  is  self-
    evident that this was not one of the key pieces of evidence relied upon
    and nor could it have materially advanced his claim given the  lack  of
    detail contained within it (which did not include anything  information
    as to how the court documents were obtained or anything which  went  to
    the issue of whether they were genuine) and that the evidence could not
    be tested in court.   In  these  circumstances,  there  is  nothing  to
    suggest that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into  account  this
    evidence which could not in any event have had any material bearing  on
    the findings made in relation to the court documents or otherwise.

32. The fourth ground  of  appeal  focuses  on  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility.  The Appellant relies  on  a
    number  of  findings  in  favour  of  his  credibility,  including  the
    rejection of most of the Respondent's reasons for refusal and that  the
    further call-up for service  was  plausible  and  consistent  with  the
    background country evidence available.  The reasons for  rejecting  the
    final part of the claim, that the  Appellant  had  been  convicted  and
    sentenced for draft evasion  are  contained  in  paragraph  57  of  the
    decision, but the Appellant submits that it is unclear what  weight  is
    attached to the first four of these matters and appeals  on  the  basis
    that  neither  individually  or  cumulatively,  these  could   not   be
    determinative of adverse credibility  and/or,  in  doing  so,  had  not
    properly considered all relevant evidence.

33. In relation to paragraph  57(a),  the  Appellant  submits  that  it  is
    unclear whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  evidence  of
    Professor Galeotti about prosecution and sentence of reservists;  which
    supports the Appellant's claim.  It is however not asserted that  there
    was any specific submissions for departure from  the  country  guidance
    case of VB nor any sufficient or cogent evidence to do so, the basis of
    this evidence from Professor Galeotti or otherwise.

34. In paragraph 57(b) there  is  reliance  on  the  Appellant's  screening
    interview, that he had not raised within it the  main  reason  for  his
    claim to be at risk of persecution on return to Ukraine; and  generally
    as to the assessment of the Appellant's  credibility.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal in paragraph 57(b) states that it has  taken  account  of  the
    fact that the Appellant did not raise draft evasion as a problem during
    his screening interview, despite three sets of  call-up  papers  having
    been served as well as the summons to attend court; and the Appellant's
    evidence  that  he  was  interviewed  with  a  Russian,  not  Ukrainian
    interpreter, albeit at the time the Appellant  confirmed  that  he  had
    understood all of the questions.

35. There is no indication from the decision as to what weight is  attached
    to this factor, amongst a number of other reasons given  for  rejecting
    the claim.  Whilst it is generally the case that little weight is to be
    attached to a screening interview given the relatively brief nature  of
    the questions asked, or to any inconsistencies  between  that  and  the
    later claim; it is  still  likely  to  be  relevant,  even  if  not  of
    significant weight, that the main part of the claim advanced at  appeal
    had not been referred to at that stage.  This is particularly  so  when
    the Appellant was legally represented at that point.  When reading  the
    decision as a whole, I find that some weight has been attached to  this
    factor as adverse to the Appellant's claim, but nothing to indicate any
    undue weight was given to this point.

36. The First-tier Tribunal relies on an inconsistency in  the  substantive
    asylum interview as to the length of sentence in paragraph 57(c); which
    is referred to in two separate places as two  years,  compared  to  the
    court document which shows a sentence of three  years.   The  Appellant
    stated that this was simply a mistake by one of those involved  in  the
    interview, without any identification or who made the mistake  on  more
    than one occasion.

37. The Appellant also refers to the finding  at  paragraph  57(d)  of  the
    decision about the delay in obtaining the court documents and  evidence
    about it; which I have already dealt with above.  In short,  there  was
    no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of any substance as  to  how
    the document was obtained or why there was a delay or any difficulty in
    obtaining it.

38. The First-tier  Tribunal  states  that  when  considering  whether  the
    Appellant was convicted and sentenced as claimed, he must show that the
    documents which bear directly upon those matters are  reliable,  namely
    the court documentation  and  the  lawyer's  letter.   In  making  that
    assessment, the First-tier Tribunal states that account  is  taking  of
    the seven factors set out in paragraph 57 of  the  decision;  with  the
    conclusion in paragraph 58 that having regard to all of  the  evidence,
    the Appellant has failed to  show  that  the  court  documentation  and
    lawyer's letter was reliable, even to the lower standard of proof.

39. The First-tier Tribunal in part sets out the evidence for  and  against
    the genuineness of documents, including the Appellant's explanation  of
    certain matters and in part, sets out firmer conclusions  or  at  least
    the weight to  be  attached  to  certain  evidence  (in  particular  in
    relation to the  lawyer's  letter).   It  is  clear  from  reading  the
    decision that the First-tier Tribunal has balanced all of the  evidence
    in the round, as it is required to do, when deciding that the Appellant
    has not established that the court documentation was  genuine.   It  is
    clear that this was not based on any one individual piece of  evidence,
    but a rounded assessment of all of the factors in paragraph 57 assessed
    together and is specifically on the basis of this  final  part  of  the
    Appellant's claim, whether or  not  the  earlier  call-up  papers  were
    reliable (with a finding that these were at least plausible).

40. It is of course possible for the First-tier Tribunal to find that parts
    of the Appellant's claim are credible, or at least plausible (no actual
    positive credibility findings were made as to the call-up papers),  but
    make adverse findings specifically on documentation which needed to  be
    found to be genuine for the Appellant to establish that he was at  risk
    on  return  to  Ukraine.   The  factors  set  out  were,  cumulatively,
    sufficient for finding that the Appellant had not established that  the
    documents relating to his conviction and sentence were  genuine.   That
    conclusion  was  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  reach  having
    considered the evidence in the round.  For these reasons  there  is  no
    error of law on the fourth ground of appeal.

41. The fifth ground of appeal concerns  the  Respondent's  evidence  of  a
    national holiday on the date the Appellant claims that he was convicted
    and sentenced in Ukraine  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  in
    paragraph 57(e) of the decision that there was  no  evidence  that  the
    Court would, or did, sit on a national holiday and  the  inference  was
    that it did not.  As above, the further documents suggesting  that  the
    Court was not prohibited from sitting on a national  holiday  were  not
    admitted as at their highest, they did not undermine the  finding  that
    there was a lack of evidence that the Court would, or did, sit  on  the
    date claimed.

42. The focus of the written submissions on this ground were on  the  basis
    of procedural fairness, that no notice  of  this  being  an  issue  was
    raised before the hearing and the relevance of the additional  document
    from the Respondent was not apparent at the outset of the hearing.   It
    is also said that it would be an insurmountable financial burden on the
    Appellant to commission specific evidence on the practice and procedure
    of the specific court in his home area; albeit if the submission is not
    accepted by the  Respondent,  the  Applicant  would  need  to  consider
    obtaining such evidence.  In those circumstances it is suggested that a
    paper hearing may not be suitable.

43. However, whether or not this matter is determined  with  or  without  a
    hearing, it is a matter for the Appellant, on whom the burden  lies  to
    establish his claim, as to whether any further evidence is relied  upon
    and any such evidence would be required to be available  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, accompanied by an appropriate Rule 15(2A) application at  the
    time that the issues of error of law are to be determined.  It is clear
    that no such further evidence is available and  therefore  can  not  be
    taken into account, whether this decision is  made  on  the  papers  or
    following an oral hearing.

44. The  Respondent  has  not  expressly  accepted  the  evidence  nor  the
    submission and there is force in the submissions  made  on  her  behalf
    about the absence of any application for an adjournment  to  deal  with
    this evidence and that the Appellant's Counsel in any event having made
    submissions on it to the First-tier Tribunal.

45. For whatever reason, it remains the case that there is evidence, as was
    before the First-tier Tribunal, that the  court  date  was  a  national
    holiday and that there is no evidence that the relevant court would, or
    did, sit on that date and as such the First-tier Tribunal were entitled
    to draw the inference that it did, particularly in circumstances  where
    no application for an adjournment to advance evidence against this  was
    made (even if late in the proceedings when the relevance became  clear)
    and where submissions were made against the inference drawn.   If  this
    were the only reason that the court documents  were  found  not  to  be
    reliable, then there may be more force in  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    this point as a matter of procedural fairness, but it was not and again
    the circumstances that there was no  application  for  adjournment  and
    submissions were made on the evidence is relevant, as is the fact  that
    there is still no evidence against the inference that the court did not
    sit on a national holiday.  In all of the circumstances, I do not  find
    any procedural unfairness on the basis of the fifth  ground  of  appeal
    nor any error of law in the finding in paragraph 57(e) of the decision.

46. The sixth and seventh grounds of appeal concern the rationality of  the
    findings in  paragraph  57(f)  and  (g)  of  the  decision  as  to  the
    translation errors in the letter from the Ukrainian lawyer.  I  do  not
    find that it is irrational for the First-tier Tribunal to find that  an
    obvious error on the face of a  translation  calls  into  question  the
    accuracy and reliability of the letter as a  whole  -  it  is  entirely
    rational to find that it did, particularly in the absence of any  other
    means of checking the translation of a document in Ukrainian and in the
    absence of any explanation for the error despite  it  being  identified
    prior to the hearing.  As above, the later letter from  the  translator
    explaining the error has not been admitted as it could and should  have
    been available to the First-tier Tribunal.

47. I do find that the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  in  paragraph  57(g)
    that the unreliability of  the  lawyer's  letter  also  undermines  the
    reliability of the court document to be without foundation.   The  fact
    that the two documents  were  submitted  at  the  same  time  does  not
    rationally mean that they were intrinsically linked or obtained at  the
    same time or necessarily from the same source  (in  fact  there  is  no
    information at all about how the court document was obtained); nor that
    the reliability of one was relevant to the reliability  of  the  other.
    It is possible that one document could not be reliable  but  the  other
    is; albeit the First-tier Tribunal has given other independent  reasons
    as to why, in the round, that was not accepted.

48. The final question is however whether the error in paragraph  57(g)  in
    isolation, or even together with procedural fairness point in the fifth
    ground of appeal about the national holiday in paragraph 57(e)  of  the
    decision could have been material to the  outcome  of  the  appeal;  in
    circumstances where no other error of law has been  found.   I  do  not
    find that it could have been given the breadth of reasons given for the
    First-tier Tribunal's adverse  findings,  considered  together  in  the
    round.  The genuineness of the court document was clearly undermined by
    the background country evidence, the lack of any explanation as to  how
    it was obtained and the lack of any positive supporting evidence of its
    genuineness, in circumstances where it was not originally relied  upon,
    where inconsistent information was given about the length  of  sentence
    and where the document was dated on a national holiday with nothing  to
    suggest the court would, or did sit  on  that  day.   For  the  reasons
    already given, it was open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  attach  no
    weight to the lawyer's letter and there was nothing of substance in the
    Appellant's father's written statement to support  the  genuineness  of
    the document either.  For all these reasons,  there  were  no  material
    errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, who dismissed
    the appeal on the basis of findings  which  were  open  to  it  on  the
    evidence, having taken all relevant matters into account.   The  appeal
    is therefore dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   G Jackson                           Date         9th November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

