
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/07471/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18th January 2018                       | On 1st February 2018            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Bandegani of Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Andonian of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 16th August 2017.  The Appellant
    is a citizen of Pakistan who made an  asylum  and  human  rights  claim
    which was refused by the Respondent on 5th July  2016.   The  Appellant
    feared her family in Pakistan  as  she  had  entered  into  a  same-sex
    relationship with her aunt in the UK, and she did not wish to marry her
    cousin, and it was the wishes of her family that she should enter  into
    that marriage.

 2. The hearing before the FtT took place  on  27th  July  2017.   The  FtT
    refused the  Appellant's  application  for  an  adjournment  to  obtain
    further  documentary  evidence.   The  FtT  heard  evidence  from   the
    Appellant and her aunt.  The FtT did not accept the  Appellant's  claim
    to be a lesbian and did not accept that she had  had  sexual  relations
    with her aunt.  The FtT found that the  Appellant  had  fabricated  her
    claim.  It was not accepted that she would be forced into a marriage if
    returned to Pakistan, and not accepted that she  would  be  subject  to
    honour killing.  The FtT found that the Appellant had delayed making an
    asylum claim, and had failed to provide a satisfactory explanation  for
    this delay, and this damaged her credibility.

 3. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.  The  Appellant  then  applied
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  relied  upon  four
    grounds which are summarised below.

 4. Firstly it was contended that the FtT had acted  unfairly  by  refusing
    the  adjournment  request.   The  documents  in  question  would   have
    supported the Appellant's claim for protection on the ground  that  she
    was at real risk of serious harm from family members.  It was contended
    that the FtT had failed to consider the relevant  procedure  rule,  and
    failed to consider whether refusing  an  adjournment  would  result  in
    unfairness.  The FtT had refused the request  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant and her representatives had had sufficient time to obtain the
    documentation.  It was contended that this was an incorrect test.

 5. The second ground was that the  FtT  erred  by  failing  to  take  into
    account post-hearing evidence.  Documentary evidence had been  received
    from Pakistan after the hearing, and this was sent to the  FtT  by  the
    Appellant's representatives and  was  received  by  the  FtT  prior  to
    promulgation of the decision.   It  was  contended  that  the  FtT  had
    jurisdiction to consider that evidence prior to promulgation, and erred
    by failing to consider whether to admit the further  evidence  pursuant
    to the principles in SD Russia [2008] UKAIT 00037.

 6. The third ground contended that the FtT erred by failing to assess  all
    relevant evidence in the round.  Reliance was  placed  upon  Mibanga  v
    SSHD [2005] EWHC 367.

 7. The fourth ground contended that the FtT erred by  failing  to  provide
    reasoning on material matters.  In particular at paragraph 22  the  FtT
    identified an inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence  regarding  the
    chronology of events, but did not explain why  this  was  found  to  be
    damaging to credibility.  At paragraph  23  the  FtT  set  out  a  core
    feature of the Appellant's claim, concluding that it was  not  credible
    but did not explain why.  At paragraph 24 the FtT  found  part  of  the
    Appellant's account to be wholly inconsistent, but did not explain why.



 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Saffer  of  the  FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "3.  It is arguable that the judge may have materially erred in not
             adjourning the hearing to enable evidence from Pakistan to  be
             produced, and may have materially erred in not considering  it
             when  it  was  produced  shortly  thereafter  and   prior   to
             promulgation.  All grounds may be argued".

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  The Respondent indicated that the application for permission  to
    appeal was not opposed.  It was accepted that the  FtT  had  materially
    erred in law by not applying the correct test as  set  out  in  Nwaigwe
    when deciding to refuse the adjournment request.

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Walker, on behalf of the Respondent, adopted the  rule  24  response
    and confirmed that the Respondent  accepted  that  the  FtT  materially
    erred  in  law  as  contended  in  the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.  It was accepted that the  errors
    were material, and meant that no findings could stand.

12. I was asked by both representatives to set aside the  decision  of  the
    FtT and remit the appeal to the FtT to be heard again.

My Conclusions and Reasons

13. I set aside the decision of the FtT.  I find that the FtT did not apply
    the principles in Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) when considering  the
    adjournment request.  There is no  evidence  that  the  FtT  considered
    whether refusing the adjournment would result in unfairness, and it  is
    the fairness test that must be considered.

14. I also find that the FtT erred in not considering potentially  material
    evidence which was supplied to  the  FtT  prior  to  promulgation.   No
    adequate reasons are given for declining to admit this  evidence.   The
    first two grounds  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  therefore
    disclose material errors of law.  Linked to those two grounds,  is  the
    third ground which is a failure to assess all relevant evidence in  the
    round.  There was a failure to  consider  the  post  decision  evidence
    which had been the subject of the adjournment request.

15. I agree with both representatives in that the errors of law  mean  that
    the findings made by the FtT are unsafe and cannot stand.

16. The decision needs  to  be  re-made.   I  have  considered  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statements, paragraph 7.2  of  which  is  set  out
    below;

         The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to re-
         make the decision, instead of remitting the case to the  First-tier
         Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that;

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

17. This is a claim for international protection, and there is  significant
    fact-finding to be made, and the refusal to grant an adjournment  meant
    that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  a  fair  hearing,  as  there  was
    potentially  material  evidence  which  was  not  considered.   It   is
    therefore appropriate for this appeal to be remitted back to the FtT to
    be considered afresh.  There are no findings preserved.  The appeal  is
    to be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge  Andonian.   Both  parties
    will be advised of the hearing date in due course.  Both parties should
    ensure that any documentary evidence to be relied upon is  served  upon
    the FtT and the other party at least fourteen calendar days before  the
    next hearing date.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted back to the  FtT  to
be heard again with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction.  That direction is  continued  pursuant
to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless
and until a Tribunal or court orders otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Appellant or any member of her family.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date         18th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.  The issue of any fee award must  be  decided  by  the
FtT.



Signed                              Date         18th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
