
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07562/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 11 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                 Arsalan [M]
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sills (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms E Groves (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with
         the permission of a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  made
         on 16 March 2019 (the date of its  written  reasons)  following  a
         hearing of 7 March 2019.  The  tribunal  decided  to  dismiss  the
         claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  of  1
         June 2018, refusing to grant him international protection.

      2. I have not granted anonymity. The tribunal did not do so. Further,
         I was not invited to consider  doing  so  myself.  I  can  see  no
         obvious basis for my doing so and am sure, if there had been  such
         a basis, I would have been told about it.

3.    By way of background, the claimant is a male national of Iraq  and  he
was born on 12 November 1977. He first entered the United  Kingdom  (UK)  on
29 August 2003. Having done that, he claimed asylum using a  different  name
to that which he has given for the purposes of these proceedings as well  as
a different date of birth. But there is no reason to  think  that  the  name
and the date of birth he is now  using  are  false.  His  asylum  claim  was
refused on 26 March 2004 and  an  appeal  against  that  decision  was  then
dismissed on 24 March 2005. It is said  that  further  representations  were
sent to the  Secretary  of  State,  all  of  which  were  refused,  that  an
application for leave to remain on the basis of a relationship  was  refused
on 12 February 2010, and that he was removed  to  Iraq  on  17  March  2010.
There followed an out of country application for  a  settlement  visa  which
was granted and on the basis of which he returned  to  the  UK  but  it  his
leave was curtailed which  led  to  him  returning  to  Iraq  (I  understand
voluntarily and I proceed on that basis) shortly afterwards.

4.    The claimant says that, having returned to Iraq, he lived in the  area
of Sulemaniya, which is located in the part  of  Iraq  administered  by  the
Kurdish authorities (the IKR). He got to  know  a  Turkish  national  called
Atham, through work, and the two would  sometimes  socialise.  The  claimant
says that on a date in April 2016 he was at Atham's house  when  two  female
persons who turned out to be sex workers  arrived.  The  claimant  had  been
drinking and he had sexual relations with one of the sex workers. He  claims
that, unbeknown to him at the time, his sexual  encounter  was  filmed.  Two
days afterwards, Atham asked him to deliver some guns  to  a  place  in  the
Qandil Mountains, which he refused to do. He says that,  after  he  refused,
Atham showed him the footage of his sexual encounter and told  him  that  if
he delivered  the  guns,  the  footage  would  be  deleted.  But,  says  the
appellant, Atham also told him that if he did not do as asked,  the  footage
would be placed on social media outlets. The  claimant  says  he  maintained
his decision not to deliver the guns, informed his family  as  to  what  had
happened and went with his older brother, a captain within the military,  to
the authorities to give them the guns and tell them what had  happened.  The
authorities then, he  says,  spoke  to  Atham  who  denied  everything.  The
claimant says that, thereafter, members  of  the  authorities  came  to  his
house and arrested him. He was then beaten by the  authorities  and  accused
of working for the intelligence department of  the  Turkish  government.  He
claims to have been detained for a period of  one  week  until  his  brother
secured his release by making a payment. He says that  he  then  left  Iraq,
lawfully and via an airport, on 18 May 2016, and came to the UK once  again.
He says that since his arrival in the UK a member of the security forces  in
the IKR has attended at  his  father-in-law's  house  inquiring  as  to  his
whereabouts. He claims that if he is now to be returned to the IKR,  members
of the Sulemaniya security  department  will  kill  him.  The  Secretary  of
State, though, disbelieved the claimant and, was, therefore, satisfied  that
returning him would not place him at risk.  The  claimant  appealed  to  the
tribunal. It was that appeal that led  to  the  tribunal's  decision  of  16
March 2019.

5.    The claimant was represented before the tribunal as was the  Secretary
of State.  The  claimant  gave  oral  evidence  and  the  tribunal  received
submissions from each representative.  It  found  the  claimant  not  to  be
credible and, like the Secretary  of  State,  disbelieved  his  account.  It
spent some time, in its written reasons, explaining why. It relevantly  said
this:

    "27.   The Appellant's age, gender,  nationality  and  Sunni  faith  at
    birth are not in dispute in the appeal. During preliminary  discussions
    to identify the basis of the appeal and the issues that  needed  to  be
    resolved the Representatives  indicated  that  the  Refugee  Convention
    reasons relied on were imputed political opinion and  membership  of  a
    particular social group resulting in the Appellant  being  at  risk  of
    being the victim of an honour crime. The Appellant's Article  2  and  3
    claims under the ECHR stand or fall with his asylum claims.  The  terms
    of the Qualification Directive are not engaged as the Appellant is from
    the IKR and there are direct international flights to the IKR. There is
    no discreet claim under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR
    is not engaged.

    28.    The Appellant adopted the contents of his witness  statement  as
    true and accurate accounts of his claim which he fully understood prior
    to signing. The Appellant at SI 1.8  stated  that  he  gave  his  Iraqi
    passport to the agent en route to the UK but kept  a  copy  of  it  and
    still has his original passport. He stated that he was unaware if Atham
    had uploaded the film that he took of the Appellant and the  prostitute
    onto the internet.

    29.    During the cross-examination by Mrs Fell he  confirmed  that  he
    took the pistols given to him be Atham to the security forces  the  day
    after he received them. He accepted that he had not been given  a  copy
    of the video recording but stated that it had  been  shown  to  him  by
    Atham.

    30. He accepted that neither he nor his brother had asked the  security
    forces to deliver the guns to the recipients and arrest them and  Atham
    concurrently. He stated that he had told the security  forces  who  had
    given him the pistols and where he was to  deliver  them  to  plus  the
    telephone number he was given to contact the recipient.

    31.    He corrected  the  contents  of  paragraph  11  of  his  witness
    statement saying that he and his brothers only went out at  night  time
    and that he would call one of his brothers to come  and  pick  him  up.
    This was to prevent him being seen by Atham as security forces told him
    to avoid his employer.

    32.    The Appellant stated that if someone else sought to pay  him  to
    deliver a parcel which he did not know the contents of in his  taxi  he
    would refuse to do so. Additionally, if Atham had asked them to deliver
    a package and he did not know what the contents of  it  were  he  would
    refuse to do so.

    33.    He clarified his answer at A150 stating that the Turkish  people
    that he drove in his taxi are owners of the building projects  and  not
    ordinary customers and he would take  them  from  building  project  to
    building project to their work.

    34.    He clarified that Atham had never owned the barber shop and that
    he did not work for Atham but was "just with him". The barber shop  was
    owned by himself and  Atham's  business  involved  the  importation  of
    building materials  from  abroad.  When  he  had  spoken  to  Atham  he
    mentioned to him that he had been to the United Kingdom and he was then
    invited to Turkey. He had known Atham about nineteen  months.  He  knew
    Atham had a wife and children although he could not remember  how  many
    children.

    35.    The drinking session was at Atham's home when his wife  was  not
    present or he had not seen her there. He was  not  shown  the  guns  at
    Atham's house. They were shown to him at Atham's workplace. He accepted
    that he had put himself at risk but that he had got to know Atham  over
    a period of time and had been to his house a number of times before  he
    was asked to deliver the pistols. On the previous occasions  there  had
    been no sexual encounters with anyone. It was on the last occasion when
    he was plied with drink and drugs by Atham  that  the  two  women  were
    brought to the house and they had sexual intercourse with them. He  did
    not know what he was doing at the time due to drink and drugs  and  did
    not know the women were prostitutes.  He  could  not  remember  Atham's
    surname as it was Turkish and very difficult to pronounce.

    36.    He clarified the contents of the documents at HOB at B3  stating
    that he came to the United Kingdom in 2012 to visit his ex-wife,  [MA],
    but unfortunately their marriage broke down and they were divorced that
    year. He stated he returned to Iraq voluntarily.

    37.    In re-examination the Appellant stated he was asked  to  deliver
    the guns to the Qantil mountainous region.  He  had  never  been  there
    before but knew it was a place where PKK guerrillas were based in their
    conflict with Turkey.

    The Honour Crime Basis claim

    38.    The first and only reference by the Appellant that prevents  his
    return on the basis that his own family and  his  wife's  family  would
    kill him is at paragraph 17 of his witness statement dated 11  February
    2019 where he stated "I also fear my own  family  including  my  wife's
    side of the family. I fear that they will kill me for bringing shame on
    the family by sleeping with the prostitute". There is no further detail
    of any threats that either his or his wife's family members had made to
    him either directly despite the fact that, on his own  account,  he  is
    still in contact with his mother in Iraq  and  his  wife  is  still  in
    contact with her family. Additionally, there is no  suggestion  by  the
    Appellant at any stage of his Protection Claim that his  brother-in-law
    in the United Kingdom has made any  threats  either  personally  or  on
    behalf of any of the Appellant's relatives and in-laws in  the  IKR  to
    him.

    39.    On the Appellant's own account he was plied with alcohol and his
    drinks were spiked with drugs. He does not suggest  that  the  film  he
    claims was made of him having sexual intercourse with a prostitute  has
    ever been uploaded to any social media platform.

    40.    I conclude that the Appellant is not credible in this aspect  of
    his claim and he has not shown, to  the  low  standard  required,  that
    either his or his wife's family have taken any adverse interest in  him
    for any reason recognised by the Refugee Convention and, in particular,
    that he has become a potential victim of an honour crime  for  bringing
    dishonour to either of those families.

    The Imputed Political Opinion Basis of Claim

    41.    On the Appellant's own account the IKR Security Forces appear to
    have preferred the account given to them by Atham than  that  given  to
    them by the Appellant despite the fact that it was  he,  together  with
    his brother who was a captain in the  Iraqi  military,  who  approached
    them to give them information about Atham, a Turkish National,  seeking
    to get the Appellant to take pistols to a man  named  Mohammed  in  the
    Qandil mountainous area of Iraq. He has given no explanation other than
    corruption of officials in the IKR, which he claims is prevalent, as to
    why they would accept the word of a Turkish National as opposed to that
    of a Kurdish Sunni Muslim who was born and  spent  his  whole  life  in
    Sulemaniya with his family, one of whom is a captain  in  the  army.  I
    reject the Appellant's explanation  that  Atham,  a  Turkish  National,
    would be able to use any influence and financial power that he  had  to
    persuade the IKR Security Forces that he  was  innocent  and  that  the
    Appellant was telling a pack of lies to get him into trouble.

    42.    It is submitted by Mr Sills on the Appellant's behalf  that  the
    CPIN at AB 23 shows there is an armed conflict between Turkey  and  the
    IKR and that the PKK are engaged in that conflict from a  base  in  the
    Qandil  Mountains.  It  is,  therefore,  being  submitted  the  correct
    inference to be drawn is that the pistols given  to  the  Appellant  by
    Atham were intended for a member of the PKK, namely Mohammed.

    43.    The background  material  shows  that  the  IKR  government  and
    security forces are operated by the PKK and the KDP and that those  two
    parties co-operate with each other. There is  no  reliable  explanation
    before me as to why the  security  forces  would  seek  to  arrest  the
    Appellant on the basis that he would be effectively assisting  the  PKK
    in their fight against the Turkish government by taking the PKK guns.

    44.    At paragraph 12 of his witness statement  the  Appellant  stated
    that "he was able to leave Iraq on his own documents because  when  the
    problem happened "my case didn't go any further"". He also states  that
    "one of his brother's friends would  be  sorted  without  it  going  to
    court" and that "Even though I was told it would not go any further,  I
    was scared and I was not prepared to accept what  my  brother's  friend
    said about it would not go any further. I did not  trust  that  it  was
    going to stop. I was scared that the problem would get worse and that I
    would be killed because of what I had been accused  of.  I  was  scared
    that this was not going to go without punishment. I was sure that I was
    in danger".

    45.    The Appellant, on his own account, was able  to  leave  the  IKR
    seven to ten days later via an  international  airport  using  his  own
    identity despite the fact he claims he was being released on bail, with
    his brother acting as a surety, without being detained at  the  airport
    as a suspect  in  either  criminal  and/  or  terrorist  offences.  The
    Appellant provided no details of how the agent was able to procure  his
    departure via the airport using his own identity.  I do not regard  the
    Appellant as credible and reliable in this aspect of his claim or  that
    he has reached the low standard of proof required.

    46.    On the evidence taken as a whole the Appellant  is  inconsistent
    in his account of his relationship with Atham. At, for example,  AI  50
    he stated "I was working with some Turkish people. Some of these  Turks
    were Kurds originally from Turkey. So I worked with  them  in  building
    decoration. I was trusted by them, I became a driver. My English was ok
    so I communicated in English with them. So the boss/ owner trusted  me.
    We associated in friendly events such as meals and drinking.  The  last
    occasion he invited me for a meal for  his  house  in  Sulemaniya".  At
    answer AI 59, relating to his last visit to Atham's home, he stated "we
    sat there usually as before. After a bit, two females, two  ladies  got
    in. We all started drinking together. I believe they put drug as  well,
    I was not sure what type of it. I  became  semi-conscious.  We  started
    having sex with these females. The ladies were Kurds".

    47.    In my judgment, the above answers indicate  that  the  Appellant
    was either transporting Atham and his colleagues around the  IKR  as  a
    taxi driver or as an independent person simply driving them around.  He
    did not claim to be Atham's employee. Throughout his witness  statement
    the Appellant referred to Atham  as  his  boss  which  I  infer  is  an
    indication that he was employed by Atham (paragraphs 6, 8, 11 and  16).
    During cross-examination by Mrs Fell the Appellant stated that he drove
    the owners of the building projects who were not ordinary customers  to
    other building projects where they worked. When asked directly  how  he
    got the job at Atham's barbers shop he stated that it was he who  owned
    the barber shop and not Atham and that he did not work  for  Atham.  He
    was "just with him". He also stated in his oral testimony that he would
    refuse any request by Atham to deliver a parcel which he did  not  know
    the contents of. This answer, in my judgment, is a strong indication by
    him in cross-examination that Atham did not employ him.

    48.    The Appellant was  inconsistent  about  his  condition  when  he
    claims to have been  plied  with  drink  and  drugs  resulting  in  him
    sleeping with at least one Kurdish woman whom he  later  learnt  was  a
    prostitute paid for by Atham. In his Asylum Interview at answer 59,  as
    set out above, he stated that he was semi-conscious  at  the  time.  At
    paragraph 5 of his witness statement he stated that he was "shocked and
    scared when he was with the prostitute" as he had never  been  in  that
    situation before and he was scared that his wife  would  find  out.  He
    further stated "However, as I have said, they gave me alcohol and  they
    put drugs in my drink as well and  this  affected  me.  I  didn't  have
    control of myself". At paragraph 6 of his witness statement  he  stated
    "To this day I do not know how my boss filmed the encounter that I  had
    with the prostitute. I can only suspect. If I knew  that  I  was  being
    recorded then I am sure I would not have done it, even though I did not
    have control of myself. There must have been a  hidden  camera  in  the
    room. That is the only explanation I can think of". In my judgment, the
    Appellant's contention that he was semi-conscious, shocked  and  scared
    when he was  with  the  prostitute  is  wholly  inconsistent  with  his
    explanation that he would not have done it if he had known that he  was
    being filmed despite the fact that he claimed he was not in control  of
    himself.

    49.    The inconsistencies set out above are examples of why I did  not
    find the Appellant credible and reliable in  the  core  aspect  of  his
    account that he was  plied  with  drink  and  secretly  filmed  with  a
    prostitute in preparation for him being forced to take guns  to  a  man
    named Mohammed in the Qandil Mountains and that following him informing
    the security forces, with his brother who was a captain in the army, he
    was arrested and tortured as a suspected double agent for  the  Turkish
    authorities. Additionally, the Appellant gives no explanation as to why
    he could be regarded as a double agent when he does not claim to be  an
    agent of the IKR authorities.

    50.    I have taken the Appellant's lengthy  immigration  history  into
    account as one factor to be weighed in the balance of the evidence as a
    whole in reaching my conclusion that he is not a credible and  reliable
    witness in respect of the core aspects of his account".

6.    An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
followed. Although not delineated in this way, there were,  on  my  reading,
four separate but related grounds of appeal. I say related because they  are
all concerned with the soundness or otherwise of the tribunal's  credibility
assessment. I paraphrase a little,  but  essentially,  the  grounds  may  be
summarised as follows:

    Ground 1 - The tribunal failed to give any reasons or adequate  reasons
    for its conclusion that the claimant's contention that he is at risk at
    the hands of family members in Iraq was not credible.

    Ground 2 - The tribunal comprehensively  misunderstood  the  background
    material and an argument which was being put to it, this caused  it  to
    make a significant factual error, it wrongly thinking that the claimant
    was asserting, as part of his case, that there was  an  armed  conflict
    between Turkey and the IKR.

    Ground 3 - The tribunal erred through failing to explain why it thought
    it significant, with respect to its credibility assessment, whether the
    claimant was employed by a person named Atham or whether he was in fact
    self-employed.

    Ground 4 - The tribunal  had  misrepresented  the  claimant's  evidence
    concerning the incident involving the sex workers  and  had  failed  to
    explain why it detected an inconsistency in his evidence  that  he  had
    "lost control of himself" but in different  circumstances  "if  he  had
    realised that  he  was  being  filmed,  he  would  not  have  committed
    adultery".

7.    The author of the grounds (Mr Sills) concludes by observing  that,  in
light of the above matters, it is contended that  the  tribunal  "has  given
inadequate reasons for dismissing  his  appeal  and  that  the  decision  is
irrational".

8.    I shall start with Ground 2. I shall then set  out  my  evaluation  of
the other grounds. I shall then assess whether what I make  of  the  grounds
means that the credibility assessment is vitiated by legal error.

9.    As to Ground 2, Ms Groves accepted that the tribunal had erred in  the
manner suggested by Mr Sills in the grounds  and  in  his  oral  submissions
although she  contended  it  was  an  error  which  was  not  material.  The
pertinent part of the tribunal's written reasons is that  at  paragraphs  42
and 43. I accept Mr Sills' submission that it was not, in  fact,  argued  on
behalf of the claimant, that background material demonstrated the  existence
of an armed conflict between Turkey  and  the  IKR,  in  which  the  Turkish
Kurdish separatist organisation known as the PKK are  engaged,  or  that  it
was submitted that it should be assumed or inferred that the guns  given  to
the claimant by  Atham  were  intended  for  a  member  of  the  PKK.  That,
therefore, invalidates the  point  the  tribunal  was  seeking  to  make  at
paragraph 43 of its written reasons to the effect that the  security  forces
in the IKR would not disapprove of the claimant assisting the PKK (in  their
fight against the Turkish Government). But it does not  follow,  of  itself,
that simply because one adverse credibility point is shown to be  erroneous,
the overall credibility assessment must fall.

10.   As to Ground 1, the point the tribunal was  seeking  to  make  at  the
passage from paragraph 38 to 40 of its written reasons, was that whilst  the
claimant had expressed the fear that he might be harmed by  family  members,
as a result of his sexual liaison, he had not asserted that any  threat  had
been made by  any  family  member  in  circumstances  where  it  would  have
reasonably been expected that, if there was such an intention to  harm  him,
such a threat would have  been  made  (bearing  in  mind  that  on  his  own
account, as the tribunal had pointed out, the claimant was still in  contact
with family in Iraq). In my judgment that was  a  perfectly  proper  adverse
credibility point to take and it was open to the tribunal, if it wished,  to
take it for the reasons it gave. I do  not  accept  the  contention  in  the
grounds that, in effect, it amounts  to  an  adverse  credibility  assertion
without reasoning.

11.   As to Ground 3, the tribunal was concerned that the claimant had  been
inconsistent with respect to his claimed employment relationship with  Atham
(see paragraph 46 and paragraph 47 of the written reasons).  The  attack  in
the grounds is to the effect that the  tribunal  did  not  explain  why  any
inconsistency was of significance or, as it was put in the written  grounds,
why it was "relevant to resolving the issues in the appeal".   The  tribunal
identified material which it felt demonstrated that the  claimant  had  been
inconsistent as to whether he was employed by Atham or whether he  was  not.
It  is  not  argued  that  the  tribunal  was  wrong  to  detect   such   an
inconsistency.  Anyway,  in  my  judgment,  it  was  entitled  to  find   an
inconsistency on the material before it and for the reasons it gave.  Viewed
from one perspective it  might  be  thought  the  question  of  whether  the
claimant was employed by Atham or not  was  immaterial.  But,  nevertheless,
Atham was, on the claimant's account, a key figure in the scenario which  he
says led to his fearing for his safety to the extent that he had fled  Iraq.
Further, the question of whether he was or was not employed  by  Atham  was,
on the face of it, a simple  and  straightforward  matter  about  which  one
might reasonably expect consistency from a truthful claimant.  Against  that
background I am satisfied that it was open to the  tribunal  to  treat  that
inconsistency as being relevant to its overall  credibility  assessment.  It
was not required, as a matter of law, to offer any  further  explanation  as
to why  it  considered  the  matter  to  be  important.  Quite  simply,  the
inconsistency informed as to whether the claimant was telling the  truth  or
whether he was not.

12.   As to Ground 4, the relevant part of the  tribunal's  written  reasons
is at paragraph 48. On my reading, the  tribunal,  in  that  paragraph,  was
identifying what it thought to be  an  inconsistency  with  respect  to  the
claimant's assertion, on the one hand, that he no  longer  had  "control  of
myself", presumably as a result of his being given alcohol  and  drugs,  and
his assertion that, nevertheless, he would  not  have  participated  in  the
liaison had he known he was being filmed. The point the tribunal was  making
was that if he was not in control of himself, as he had  claimed,  he  would
not have been in a position to make a rational decision to  desist  even  if
it had come to his attention that he was being filmed. I do not  accept  the
contention  in  the  grounds  that  the  tribunal  had  misrepresented   the
claimant's evidence  at  paragraph  48  of  its  written  reasons.  Further,
notwithstanding what is said in the written grounds, it does seem  clear  to
to me that the tribunal was  itself  clear  in  what  inconsistency  it  was
identifying. It is not  contended  and  I  am  not  able  to  say  that  the
tribunal's  conclusion  that  there  was  an  inconsistency  was   perverse,
irrational or otherwise not open to it. I do not,  for  myself,  think  that
the point is a particularly strong  one  with  respect  to  the  credibility
assessment but the tribunal did not suggest that it was. Of  course,  it  is
inevitable in a credibility assessment that some points which are taken  are
stronger than others. But in  my  judgment  the  tribunal  was  entitled  to
detect an inconsistency and to apply that as  a  component  of  its  overall
credibility assessment and that is all it did.

13.   It is  fair  to  say  there  were  other  components  of  the  adverse
credibility assessment which were not the subject of a  specific  attack  in
the grounds. As to that  I  noted  the  tribunal's  reliance  upon  what  it
described as the claimant's "lengthy immigration history" (paragraph  50  of
the written  reasons).  Its  reference  to  that  was,  I  accept,  somewhat
fleeting. But I have set out the relevant immigration history above and,  to
repeat, it is right to say that that history  discloses  the  making  of  an
ultimately  unsuccessful  asylum  claim  under  a  different  identity.   In
context, it seems to me that the tribunal must have had that  in  mind  when
it made its reference to the claimant's  immigration  history,  despite  its
not fleshing out precisely what it meant. I put the point to  Mr  Sills  who
argued that the question of the immigration history "could  go  either  way"
on the basis that after returning to  Iraq  the  claimant  had  subsequently
lawfully re-entered the UK and, when his leave had then been curtailed,  had
voluntarily departed. He suggested, in effect, that the tribunal might  have
taken a different view as to what the claimant's  immigration  history  told
it about his credibility had it had in mind "the full  factual  background".
But there is nothing to suggest that it did not have  the  full  immigration
history in mind. After all, it set it out in summary form at paragraph 1  of
its written reasons. Further, insofar  as  it  was  being  argued  later  in
compliance  with   immigration   requirements   might   neutralise   earlier
noncompliance, I do not accept the proposition. Compliance is simply  to  be
expected and not something which affords significant credit in  a  balancing
exercise. The tribunal was, clearly  it  seems  to  me,  taking  an  adverse
credibility point with respect to the pursuing  of  an  asylum  claim  in  a
false name and, notwithstanding any subsequent compliance, it  was  entitled
to do that.

14.   The tribunal also  took  an  adverse  credibility  point  against  the
claimant as a result  of  his  being  able  to  leave  Iraq  using  his  own
documentation notwithstanding his claim that he was,  by  then,  of  adverse
interest to the authorities. The tribunal set out its reasoning as  to  that
at paragraph s 44 and 45 of its written  reasons.  That  reasoning  has  not
been the subject of any specific challenge either.

15.   Mr Sills argued that if the tribunal had considered the  evidence  "in
the round" which it was required to do, then the error  it  is  accepted  it
made must  have  been  one  which  impacted  upon  its  overall  credibility
assessment. He further pointed out that the tribunal had not indicated  what
matters, in its credibility assessment, it thought might  be  of  particular
importance so that, in effect, it had not  demonstrated  that  the  admitted
(by Ms Groves) error it made was not in relation to  what  it  had  regarded
itself as a significant point with respect to credibility.

16.   Insofar as Mr Sills argument is one to the effect that  the  impugning
of a single point with respect to a credibility assessment would  always  or
normally result in that credibility assessment being unsafe as a  matter  of
law,  I  would  disagree.  What  is  needed,  in  my  view,  is  an  overall
consideration of the credibility assessment, in circumstances such as  this,
to see whether it would have been the same without a particular  discredited
point. In my judgment this  credibility  assessment  would  have  inevitably
remained the same. The unchallenged or barely  challenged  points  regarding
the claimant's ability to depart Iraq through  normal  immigration  channels
and his having demonstrated through previous conduct that he is prepared  to
mislead in making immigration applications, seem  to  me  to  be  persuasive
ones. I  do  not  at  all  discount  the  possibility  that  sometimes,  the
discrediting  of  a  single  credibility  point  will  render  the   overall
assessment unsafe. That will depend upon the circumstances  and  the  detail
of the assessment. In my judgment, though, this is clearly not such a  case.
The tribunal took a number of points which had not  been  discredited,  some
unchallenged and some unsuccessfully challenged, and taken an  overall  view
I have concluded that its credibility assessment remains sound.

17.   In the circumstances  I  have  concluded  that  the  decision  of  the
tribunal did not involve an error of law, or, at least not a  material  one.
It follows that I must dismiss the claimant's appeal.



Decision

The claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed.


Signed:     Dated: 3 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




To the respondent
Fee award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:     Dated: 3 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

