
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07908/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6th April 2018                             |On 30th April 2018           |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     AS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, instructed by OA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  AS.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings





   1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan  dismissed  AS'  appeal  against  the
      refusal of his protection and human rights claim for reasons  set  out
      in a decision promulgated on 27 September 2017. Permission  to  appeal
      was granted by UTJ Gill:


                  "although it may well  be  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  may
                  decide ultimately that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Morgan
                  did not materially err in law, I am just  about  persuaded
                  that, at this stage at least, it is  just  about  arguable
                  that the judge may have failed to consider the appellant's
                  explanation's fully. Much will  depend  on  the  view  the
                  Upper Tribunal takes  of  the  fact  that  the  judge  did
                  mention the appellant's explanations  for  various  issues
                  taken by the Presenting Officer and whether this means  he
                  did take the appellant's explanations into account."


            Background


   2. The appellant, a Nigerian citizen, arrived in the UK in  October  2002
      as a student, such leave being extended until October 2012. Thereafter
      he remained unlawfully. An application for leave to  remain  based  on
      long residence and caring for his brother, made in  October  2012  was
      refused and his appeal dismissed for reasons set out in a decision  in
      November 2013. AS did not leave the UK. He was  subsequently  arrested
      and detained by the respondent and, in January 2017, he claimed asylum
      based on his claimed sexuality as a gay man. That protection claim was
      refused on 2  August  2017  and  his  appeal  came  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Morgan on 14 September 2017.


            Error of law


   3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge records the appellant's evidence in  the
      decision under the subheading "The appellant's claim"  and  notes  the
      evidence that the appellant had no homosexual relationships in Nigeria
      and  no-one  there  was  aware  of  his  sexuality.  He  records   the
      appellant's evidence that he has had three relationships  in  the  UK,
      one with a woman and two with two different men which he  "consciously
      kept" secret. The judge records that  the  appellant  was  subject  to
      lengthy and robust cross-examination.


   4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge does not summarise the reasons  for  the
      respondent's refusal under the subheading  "respondent's  reasons  for
      refusal"  but  notes  that  the  presenting  officer  summarised   the
      respondent's  position  as  being  that  the  appellant  was  "not   a
      homosexual" as claimed and that the central question  was  whether  he
      was. The respondent did not suggest that if the appellant were gay the
      appellant could internally relocate within Nigeria or be discreet.


   5. Under a subheading "Evidence and  findings"  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge states that he has considered all the evidence before him,  that
      he notes the credibility concerns raised by the respondent which  were
      reiterated and expanded upon by the  presenting  officer  ([16]).  The
      judge notes the failure of the appellant to claim asylum  earlier  and
      that this is damaging to his credibility ([17]). Between [18] and [22]
      the judge sets out in detail the respondent's submissions  and  refers
      to the appellant's responses to questions put in cross examination. In
      [23] the judge states that he has considered the appellant's  evidence
      "in its totality" and concludes that he is


                  "persuaded  by  the  respondent's  concerns  ....  And  in
                  particular the respondent's submission that the  appellant
                  has failed to provide a reasonable explanation as  to  why
                  he has not sought to provide  any  corroborative  evidence
                  particularly of his previous two homosexual relationships,
                  given that his homosexuality was explicitly  not  accepted
                  within the refusal and this is the sole matter in issue in
                  this appeal...."


   6. The grounds relied upon in the appeal before me include the  assertion
      that  because  the  earlier  appeal  in  2013  was  for  a   different
      application and on a different basis,  then  the  adverse  credibility
      findings should not have been a starting point for First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Morgan's consideration. This is plainly incorrect. It is further
      incorrect for the grounds to state that no reasons were given by Judge
      Morgan why s8 of the 2004 Act was considered by him to apply.  Reasons
      were given and in any event, having been in the UK since 2002, a claim
      for asylum not being made until 2017 clearly engages s8; the delay  in
      making such a claim is plainly a matter that must be considered by the
      judge.


   7. Although poorly worded  in  the  written  grounds  but  clarified  and
      explained in oral submissions by Mr  Coleman,  the  appellant  submits
      that there is unacceptable and inordinate emphasis placed by the judge
      on the respondent's views and the lack of any corroboration  from  the
      appellant as to  his  relationships.  It  is  correct  that  there  is
      considerable emphasis in the assessment of the evidence by  the  judge
      of the respondent's submissions but within that emphasis there is also
      specific reference to the appellant's evidence. The  judge  refers  to
      the lack of corroboration and the failure by the appellant to  attempt
      to obtain some form of corroboration from the two people with whom  he
      claims to have had a relationship. Submissions were made to the First-
      tier Tribunal by the  appellant's  representative  that  the  lack  of
      corroboration was because of the nature of the relationships and their
      secrecy together with the time that has passed since the relationships
      ended. Nevertheless, there is a dearth of evidence from the  appellant
      about the relationships which lasted between one and four years. It is
      not asserted by Mr Coleman that the appellant gave  detailed  evidence
      of his relationships for example how frequently they met,  where  they
      met, the activities they enjoyed together,  what  mutual  celebrations
      they had, whether other friends saw them  together  even  though  they
      were not acknowledged to be gay, and so on. There is scant evidence of
      the nature and context of the relationships in the  papers  that  were
      before the judge or in the oral evidence.  The  judge  can  only  take
      account of that which is before him. As said by the judge, the fact of
      whether the appellant is or is not gay was the central issue  and  yet
      the evidence relied  upon  by  the  appellant  was  little  more  than
      assertion. Of course, it may well have been difficult to  contact  the
      individuals with whom he claimed to have been in a  relationship  with
      but that does not prevent the appellant  from  providing  day  to  day
      details of those relationships. A relationship that lasts for  a  year
      or more inevitably consists of shared events for which  a  description
      can be given. That evidence is missing.




   8. The burden of proof is upon the  appellant.  Although  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge has produced a decision that gives  the  impression  of
      over emphasis on the respondent's views, the evidence relied  upon  by
      the appellant was scant and was referred to by the judge. The lack  of
      reference by the judge to  the  potential  cumulative  effect  of  the
      appellant's shyness and the age of the relationships  is  insufficient
      to  conclude  that  reference  to  those  matters  and  the   specific
      consideration of  those  matters  could  have  led  to  any  different
      decision. There was simply insufficient evidence before the  judge  to
      enable a conclusion to be drawn that the appellant was, as he claimed,
      gay.


   9. There is no material error of law.

     Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set  aside  the  decision.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal stands.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







                                    Date 26th April 2018
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
