
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07419/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2020                            |On 31 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                   m a a o
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L King instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure  to  comply  with  the
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on  3  July  1997.   He
    comes from Mosul and is of Kurdish ethnicity.

 3. The appellant left Iraq in August 2014 together with other  members  of
    his family.  He remained in Turkey until travelling to the UK where  he
    arrived, clandestinely, on 8 December 2016.

 4. On 10 December 2016, the appellant claimed asylum.

 5. On 5 December 2017, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights  grounds.



The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   That  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge Wilson in a determination dated 31 August 2018.   On
    3  February  2019,  the  Upper  Tribunal  (DUTJ  Lever)   allowed   the
    appellant's appeal and remitted the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a de novo rehearing.

 7.  The  appeal  was  again  heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a
    determination sent on 21  August  2019,  Judge  Mathews  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.  The judge rejected the appellant's claim to be  at
    risk because of his (or his family's  association)  with  the  American
    forces in Iraq.  As regards the appellant's claim under  Art  15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive, the appeal  proceeded  on  the  assumption
    that the appellant was at risk in his home area following the  relevant
    country guidance decision of AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  The
    judge,  however,  concluded  that  the  appellant  could   safely   and
    reasonably be expected to  relocate  to  the  IKR.   In  reaching  that
    conclusion, he found that the appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  a
    passport from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK  and,  on  arrival  in  Iraq,
    would within a reasonable period of time be able to obtain a CSID.

 8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on three grounds.   First,
    in finding that the appellant would be able to obtain a CSID the  judge
    had failed properly to apply the relevant country guidance decision  in
    AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00212  (IAC)  (Ground  1).
    Secondly, the judge had  failed  to  apply  AAH  in  finding  that  the
    appellant could reasonably be expected to live in the IKR  (Ground  2).
    Thirdly, the judge had been wrong to find that the appellant would  not
    be at risk on his onward journey to the IKR as a perceived collaborator
    (Ground 3).

 9. On 1 October 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Kelly)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Discussion

10. Ms King, who represented the appellant, relied upon a detailed skeleton
    argument  which  she  expanded  upon  in  her  oral  submissions.    In
    particular, she relied upon grounds 1 and  2.   She  candidly  accepted
    that she was in some difficulty in relying upon Ground 3 as  the  judge
    had found that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  as  a  perceived
    collaborator and as such, that finding was, in effect, determinative of
    any risk whilst travelling to the IKR.

11. Having heard Ms King's submissions, Mr  Howells,  who  represented  the
    Secretary of State, conceded that Grounds 1 and 2  were  made  out.  He
    accepted that the judge's decision could not stand and  should  be  set
    aside.  He accepted that, given the judge's factual findings, the judge
    had erred in law in concluding that the appellant could obtain within a
    reasonable period of time a CSID when returned to Baghdad.  He  further
    conceded that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  all  the  relevant
    circumstances  in  determining  whether  it  was  reasonable  for   the
    appellant to relocate to the IKR.

12. I agree with Mr Howells' concessions.  The judge made factual  findings
    that the appellant had no family in Iraq and the judge proceeded on the
    basis that the appellant's home area, namely  Mosul,  was  an  area  in
    which there was an Art 15(c) risk.  The  judge,  as  a  result,  failed
    properly to apply AAH in finding that the appellant would  be  able  to
    obtain a CSID in Iraq on return.   Likewise,  the  option  of  internal
    relocation required a holistic assessment  of  all  the  circumstances,
    including whether the appellant would have a CSID.   The  judge  failed
    properly to carry out that assessment.

13. For these reasons, the judge materially erred in law in dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal and is set aside.

14. Having accepted that the judge's decision  should  be  set  aside,  the
    representatives agreed that certain of the judge's findings  should  be
    preserved.  Those are the findings in paras 24 - 31 and 37 - 38.

15. Both representatives agreed that the  judge  had  made  no  finding  in
    relation to Art 15(c) applying in the appellant's home area  of  Mosul.
    Judge Lever, in remitting the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  had
    not preserved any of the findings of Judge Wilson.  The  appeal  before
    Judge Mathews had, therefore, proceeded on the assumption that, in  the
    light of the country guidance in AA, Mosul was a 'contested area' where
    an Art 15(c) risk existed.  Both representatives acknowledged  that  at
    the remitted appeal, it would be for the  judge  to  determine  in  the
    light of the more recent country guidance in  SM,  KSP  &  IM  (Article
    15(c); identity documents)  Iraq  (CG)  [2019]  UKUT  00400  (IAC)  all
    remaining issues, in particular whether there was a 15(c) risk  to  the
    appellant in his home area, and if there were, whether he could  safely
    and reasonably internally relocate to the IKR.  The issues  of  whether
    he could obtain any relevant documents, including a passport  and  CSID
    (or its more recent equivalent), whilst in the UK or on return to Iraq,
    should also be decided in the light of the guidance in SM, KSP & IM.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.  That  decision  is  set
    aside.

17. In the light of the fact-finding required and para 7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Direction, and in the light  of  the  most  recent
    country guidance decision, the proper disposal  of  the  appeal  is  to
    remit it for rehearing by the First-tier Tribunal.

18. As indicated above, the judge's findings in paras 24 - 31 and 37  -  38
    are preserved.  The decision is to be remade in respect of Art 15(c) of
    the Qualification Directive and Art 3 of the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            29, January 2020





