
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07008/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2018                           |On 25 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                               Christelle [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Semega-Janneh, instructed by Sentinel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision promulgated 10 May 2018,  I  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set  aside.



 2. At the resumed hearing  at  Bradford  on  22  November  2018,  I  heard
    evidence from the appellant.  The witness who had given evidence at her
    previous hearings has since died.  The burden of proof  in  the  appeal
    was on the appellant and the standard of proof was that  of  reasonable
    likelihood.   It  is  for  the  appellant  to  prove  that  there   are
    substantial grounds for believing there to be  a  real  risk  that  she
    would be persecuted or ill-treated upon return to DRC.

 3. In reaching my decision on the Article 2/3 ECHR in  asylum  appeals,  I
    have  had  regard  to  all  the  documentation  including  the  medical
    evidence.  I have considered the evidence as a totality before reaching
    any findings of fact.  I have sought to identify "core" elements of the
    appellant's case and to distinguish these from more peripheral aspects.



 4. The appellant gave evidence  in  Lingala  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter.  The appellant claimed that she was still a member of  the
    International  Congolese  Rights  organisation  (ICR).   This  is   the
    organisation with which the late Mr Mukendi (who gave evidence  at  the
    previous Tribunal hearing) was connected. I have  documentary  evidence
    from Mr Mukendi which have taken into account in reaching my  decision.
    The appellant claimed that she had  attended  demonstrations  and  held
    signs  at  those  demonstrations.   She  had  been   to   about   three
    demonstrations in London since she arrived at the age of  16  years  in
    June 2010.

 5. Cross-examined by Mrs  Pettersen,  the  appellant  said  that  she  had
    attended demonstrations in her home town of  Barnsley.   She  moved  to
    Barnsley in 2013.  She said that she had not been to a demonstration at
    all in the United Kingdom since 2013.  She said it was a "standoff"  at
    the embassy in London.  However, she could not remember exactly when it
    was.  As regards activities in Barnsley, she distributed  leaflets  and
    propaganda.

 6. The appellant has a partner in the United Kingdom, Mr [HM].  He  is  an
    asylum seeker whose application for asylum has been rejected.  She  did
    not know whether Mr [M] had appealed that decision.

 7. The appellant continued to take medicine for stress  and  inability  to
    sleep.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9. The appellant seeks to rely on arrest warrants  which  were  issued  in
    2010 after she left to come to the United Kingdom.  I bear in mind that
    she was then a very young  woman  aged  only  16  years  old.   Medical
    evidence indicates that she did suffer some trauma in her past but  the
    causes of it are unclear.  Her sur place  activity  is  at  the  lowest
    level.  She has not attended a  demonstration  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 2013.  I questioned whether handing out leaflets  and  propaganda
    in Barnsley amounts to a form of sur place activity  which  would  ever
    come to the  attention  of  the  Congolese  authorities.   Indeed,  the
    appellant does not purport to be a senior member  or  activist  of  the
    Congolese opposition movement.   In  my  opinion,  even  taken  at  its
    highest, the appellant has no genuine fear  which  is  well-founded  of
    persecution or ill-treatment in DRC.  Even on the assumption  that  the
    warrants that she has produced are genuine, she would be  returning  to
    DRC almost ten years after they were issued and at that time issued  to
    a child.  She  has  done  nothing  whatever  whilst  in  the  Congolese
    diaspora in the United Kingdom which would have maintained any  profile
    she may have had as a 16-year-old in DRC or formed  a  new  significant
    profile.  I find that she  is  at  the  present  time  unknown  to  the
    Congolese authorities.  I find that there has been no evidence produced
    to show that upon return to DRC anything that she has done in the  past
    or any of her sur place activities would bring her to the attention  of
    the Congolese authorities.

10. As regards Article 8, the appellant's circumstances have moved on since
    previous Tribunal hearings.  All of her children have been born in  the
    United Kingdom.  The eldest child has now been here for more than seven
    years and is therefore a "qualifying child" for the purposes of Section
    117 of the 2002 Act (as amended). Section 117B(6) provides:

         In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

11. Mrs Pettersen, who appeared for the Secretary  of  State,  acknowledged
    that the appellant should be granted a period of  leave  to  remain  on
    account  of  the  fact  that  she  is  in  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with her eldest child who is a "qualifying child".  It  is
    only  on  this  basis  that  she  is  entitled  to  leave;  absent  the
    "qualifying" characteristics of the eldest child,  the  appellant,  her
    children and her partner are all Congolese  and  could  continue  their
    family life in their country of nationality.

Notice of Decision

12. This appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

13. This appeal is dismissed on Article 2/3 ECHR grounds.

14. The appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

15. The appellant's appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

16. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 21 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 21 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

