
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07683/2016 (A)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Case Management Review by BT MeetMe          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|                              |
|On 12th January 2021                         |                              |                              |
|                                             |On 19 January 2021            |                              |
|                                             |                              |                              |
|                                             |                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DIRECTIONS AND REASONS (A)

IT IS DIRECTED THAT:


     i) The directions of the Upper Tribunal that the appeal will be re-
        heard in the Upper Tribunal, are set aside.


    ii) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.
        The only finding preserved is the finding at paragraph [22] of the
        decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler that the Tribunal was
        not satisfied the appellant's father was involved in the Ba'ath
        party as claimed, or that this was the reason for his death.


   iii) The parties shall be notified of a hearing date before the First-
        tier Tribunal in due course.  The Tribunal shall arrange a Kurdish
        Sorani interpreter.


REASONS


   1. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He appealed the respondent's
      decision of 12th July 2016 to refuse his claim for asylum and
      humanitarian protection. His appeal was dismissed for reasons set out
      in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler promulgated on 7th
      March 2018.  The appellant was granted permission to appeal and the
      decision of Judge Pooler was set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
      Chamberlain for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 13th
      August 2019. Judge Chamberlain directed that the decision is to be
      remade in the Upper Tribunal and that in view of the country guidance
      in force at the time, the sole issue to be decided was whether the
      appellant could internally relocate to the IKR.  The appeal was listed
      for hearing before me on 20th February 2020 but had to be adjourned
      because neither party had addressed the issues that now arise in the
      appeal, following the subsequent country guidance set out in SMO &
      Others.


   2. The hearing before me on 12th January 2021 had been listed as a face-
      to-face resumed hearing at which it was intended that the Upper
      Tribunal would remake the decision as previously directed. Notice of
      the hearing was sent to the parties on 15th December 2020.
      Unfortunately, because of further restrictions announced in January
      2021 and the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
      the hearing could not proceed as a face-to-face hearing and was
      instead listed as a Case Management Review hearing, using BT MeetMe.




   3. Having had the opportunity of considering submissions helpfully made
      by the parties, I accept that the most appropriate course is for the
      appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh,
      with only one finding preserved. That is, the finding at paragraph
      [22] of the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler that the
      Tribunal was not satisfied the appellant's father was involved in the
      Ba'ath party as claimed, or that this was the reason for his death.
      That finding was preserved by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain.




   4. There has already been a lengthy delay in the disposal of the appeal,
      and I was again urged by the parties to consider remitting the appeal
      to the First-tier Tribunal because the remaking of the decision is to
      be almost entirely de novo and it is likely that the First-tier
      Tribunal will be able to accommodate a face-to-face listing of the
      appeal considerably sooner than might be possible in the Upper
      Tribunal.


   5. It is in the interests of justice for there to be a timely disposal of
      the appeal.  I am satisfied that the nature and extent of any judicial
      fact-finding necessary will be extensive, and following enquiries, I
      am satisfied that a rehearing of the appeal is likely to be
      accommodated in the First-tier Tribunal within weeks rather than
      months. Following the updated country guidance set out in SMO & Others
      and the unforeseen delays that have occurred because of the current
      pandemic, I am satisfied that there has been a change of circumstances
      since the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain such
      that the appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to the
      First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade.  The parties will
      be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due
      course.



Signed   V. Mandalia                Date:        12th January 2021


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

