
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07772/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral determination given following   |                                     |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 4 December 2017                   |On 28 February 2018                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                    [m m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant who was born in April 1986 is a  national  of  Sri  Lanka
    whose application for asylum was refused by the respondent on 4  August
    2017.  He had entered the UK in 2010 with entry clearance as a  student
    which leave was curtailed.  He was subsequently granted  further  leave
    to remain which was  curtailed  yet  again.   His  applications  for  a
    residence  card  in  accordance  with  the  EEA  Regulations  had  also
    apparently been refused twice, the last occasion  being  17  May  2017.
    The appellant having been encountered and detained on 13 May 2017  made
    representations which were refused and certified as  clearly  unfounded
    on 13 June 2017.  He  subsequently  claimed  asylum  and  it  was  this
    application which was refused.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox, sitting at  Harmondsworth  on  18
    September 2017 but in a decision and reasons promulgated the  following
    day Judge Fox dismissed the application.  The appellant now appeals  to
    the  Upper  Tribunal  permission  having  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Keane on 9 October 2017.

 3. There are a number of grounds of appeal but it is  only  necessary  for
    the purposes of this appeal to consider one  of  them,  which  was  the
    first ground of appeal contained within the grounds.  The judge records
    at paragraph 35 that the submissions made on behalf  of  the  appellant
    included the following:

         "GJ applies.  The appellant was not asked about LLRC.  It  was  not
         addressed in cross-examination.  The appellant's evidence should be
         accepted if not challenged in cross-examination."

 4. The judge, having recorded this submission then  failed  completely  to
    deal with this aspect of the appellant's case in his  findings.   There
    is absolutely no  reference  to  the  evidence  relating  to  what  the
    appellant had told to the  LLRC  (which  is  the  Lessons  Learned  and
    Reconciliation Commission which had been established in  Sri  Lanka  in
    2010).

 5. I record what is said  about  the  LLRC,  and  people  who  have  given
    evidence to that commission in the country guidance case of GJ & Others
    (post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319,  which  is
    still current country guidance for Sri Lanka.  The country guidance  is
    set out within the head  note,  which  repeats  what  is  contained  at
    paragraph 356 of the substantive decision in that case.   At  paragraph
    356(7) it is stated as follows:

         "7.  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are: ...

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes
                  witnesses."

 6. The appellant has made statements as to what he had said to the LLRC in
    his screening interview,  his  asylum  interview  and  in  his  witness
    statement.  At paragraph 4.1 of his screening interview he stated  that
    he had witnessed the kidnapping of a friend of his by the army in  2008
    and had reported this to the LLRC and that "the army tried to blackmail
    applicant to withdraw kidnapping of friend statement".   The  appellant
    expanded on this in his answers in his  substantive  asylum  interview.
    He mentioned at his answer to question 13 that in 2010 he  had  made  a
    complaint to the LLRC.  In his answer to question 50 he  said  that  he
    had started receiving threatening phone calls a week after he had  made
    the complaint [to] the LLRC in 2010.  In answer to question 51 he  said
    that, "they told me to withdraw the complaint I made to  LLRC  or  they
    will kill me as I was the eye witness".

 7. At paragraph 8 of his witness statement, which  was  before  Judge  Fox
    (and concerning which he had apparently not been cross-examined at  the
    hearing), the appellant stated as follows:

         "It is stated that as to why I logged a complaint about  my  friend
         'Theepan' after 2 years of kidnapping.  But I wish to state that  I
         gave a statement to the LLRC in 2010  because  the  commission  was
         formed in 2010.  This is very clearly stated in  the  questions  40
         and 41 of my asylum interview.  Mr Manoharan told me that they have
         set up an organisation in search of the missing people and asked me
         to go with him to make a complaint and I said I will do it for  the
         sake of my friend.  LLRC was informed in 2010 after the  conclusion
         of war and this question was asked from  me  several  times.   LLRC
         commission was concluded in November 2011."

 8. The appellant then goes on to say how he had  also  complained  to  the
    police  station  about  the  abduction  and  that   subsequently   "the
    authorities, instead of finding the missing person they started  coming
    behind me.  If they could catch me, the same thing would have  happened
    to [me] as well and most probably I would not be among living by  now."
    He then continues that, "with all these comments it is  quite  apparent
    that the authorities are behind the abduction".

 9. Clearly, as the appellant would on the face of it appear  arguably  (if
    his evidence was credible) to  be  amongst  those  at  risk  on  return
    following the guidance given within GJ he is, on his own case,  someone
    who has given evidence to the LLRC implicating the authorities  in  the
    kidnapping of one particular person.   He  has  identified  himself  by
    giving such evidence  (obviously,  if  he  did  do  so)  and  he  would
    accordingly be known to the Sri Lankan authorities and might  therefore
    be "at real risk of adverse attention or persecution  on  return  as  a
    potential or actual war crime witness" (extrajudicial kidnapping  being
    amongst what might be properly categorised as a war crime).

10. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Lindsay fairly  accepts  that  as  this
    Tribunal had noted that there was a total absence of  consideration  of
    the evidence relating to the alleged reporting of the incident  by  the
    appellant to the LLRC, "there is not a lot I can say in the absence  of
    any specific reference to the LLRC by the judge".  However, Mr  Lindsay
    nonetheless invites this  Tribunal  to  draw  the  inference  from  the
    decision as a whole "that the judge considered  all  the  evidence  and
    roundly rejected it because of his reasons for rejecting credibility".

11. While it is undoubtedly the case that there are reasons why it may have
    been open to the judge to make some adverse credibility findings,  this
    did nor relieve the judge of the obligation to make findings as to  the
    core element of the appellant's claim.  The fact  that  this  appellant
    may not be wholly reliable does not  mean  that  his  evidence  on  any
    specific point is necessarily false.  The appellant consistently (after
    making his claim for asylum if not before) maintained that he would  be
    known to the authorities as someone who had given evidence to the  LLRC
    and that this in itself puts him at risk upon return.  It was incumbent
    upon the judge to make a finding first as to whether or not he accepted
    that the appellant  had,  as  he  claimed,  told  the  LLRC  about  the
    kidnapping of his friends and secondly, if he did, whether this  factor
    would put him at risk.  This Tribunal cannot simply infer from the fact
    that adverse credibility findings were made that the judge  would  have
    been bound to reject his evidence on this core element of his claim.

12. It follows that because this aspect of the claim  is  so  central  that
    this is a material omission and for this reason  Judge  Fox's  decision
    will have to be set aside and remade.  In these circumstances,  because
    there will have to be a fresh hearing at which all  his  evidence  will
    have to be reconsidered, the appropriate course is to remit this appeal
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing before  any  judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox and I shall so order.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox,  dismissing  the
appellant's appeal, as containing a material error  of  law  and  remit  the
appeal  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  (or
Harmondsworth or such other venue as is directed) by any  judge  other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                Date: 22 February 2018

