
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07893/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2021                  |On 10 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     H B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Corben, Counsel on behalf of the appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Diwncyz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge P-J White (hereinafter referred to as the
         "FtTJ")  promulgated  on  the  25  September  2019,  in  which  the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection
         claim was dismissed.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


      3. The hearing took place on 26 February 2021, by means of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not object1d  to  by  the
         parties. A face- to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant  who  was  able  to  see  and  hear  the
         proceedings being conducted. There were no issues regarding  sound,
         and no technical problems were encountered during the hearing and I
         am satisfied both advocates were  able  to  make  their  respective
         cases by the chosen means.

Background:

      4. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He entered the United
         Kingdom on 29 May 2010 with a visit visa valid until 4 November
         2010. He was encountered on 5 November 2013 and thereafter made an
         application for leave to remain on human rights grounds, which was
         refused on 12 August 2014. He made a similar application which was
         refused on 14 March 2016. He submitted further representations,
         which were treated as a further application, on 9 August 2016, but
         that application was refused on 8 September 2016.


      5. On 3 November 2017 he claimed asylum. He underwent a screening
         interview and subsequently an asylum interview. The basis of his
         claim was that he had converted to a being an Ahmadi Muslim who had
         been threatened by his father and who had a fatwa issued against
         him.

      6. In a decision letter of 4 May 2018, the respondent refused his
         protection claim. Beyond accepting the appellant's nationality, the
         respondent rejected the factual basis of is claim and the
         appellant's conversion to the Ahmadi faith and the threats from his
         father. It had not been accepted that he had a genuine subjective
         fear on return to Pakistan nor that there was any reasonable degree
         of likelihood that he would be persecuted given that he had not
         demonstrated that he was a genuine Ahmadi convert.

      7. The appellant appealed that decision, and it came before the FtT
         (Judge Morris) on 29 November 2018. In a decision promulgated on 13
         December 2018, the FtTJ dismissed his appeal finding that the
         appellant had not demonstrated on the evidence that he was a
         genuine Ahmadi convert and therefore would not be at risk on return
         to Pakistan.
         .
      8. The appellant submitted further representations on 9 May 2019 and
         provided further evidence in support of his claim. It was accepted
         as a fresh claim but was refused in a decision of 25 June 2019.

      9. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         his protection claim came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge P-J
         White) on the 16 August 2019.

     10. In a determination promulgated on the 25 September 2019,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed his protection claim. The judge heard evidence  from  the
         appellant  and  his  partner  and  also  consider  the  documentary
         evidence that had been provided on behalf  of  the  appellant.  The
         judge concluded that having considered all of the evidence  in  the
         round and in the absence of any clear and consistent chronology  or
         explanation of his claimed conversion and the lack of any genuinely
         independent and testable  confirmation  of  his  claim,  the  judge
         reached the conclusion that he was not a witness of credibility and
         that he reached the same conclusion as the previous judge that  the
         appellant had  not  demonstrated  that  he  was  a  genuine  Ahmadi
         convert.

     11. The FtTJ therefore dismissed the appeal.

     12. Permission to appeal was issued on the 9 October  2019  and  on  27
         January 2020,
         permission to appeal was granted by FtTJ Shimmin stating:-

         "It is arguable that the judge has made a material mistake of fact
         or unfairness in respect of the appellant's oral evidence.
         Furthermore, it is arguable that the judges made inconsistent
         and/or unclear findings in respect of the AMA /Jamaat policies
         towards the vetting of individuals and that organisations supported
         them in asylum appeals with the result that inconsistent and
         or/unclear findings have been made. I grant permission on both
         grounds."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     13. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 13 July 2020, inter alia, indicating that it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face- to- face hearing. Following the  parties
         submitting their written submissions on 9 October  2020  directions
         were given for a remote hearing to take place and that  this  could
         take place via Skype. Both parties have indicated  that  they  were
         content for the hearing to proceed by this method.  Therefore,  the
         Tribunal listed the hearing to enable oral submissions to be  given
         by each of the parties with the assistance of their advocates.

     14. Mr Corben on behalf  of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal and the written submissions dated 21 July 2020.

     15. There was a written response filed  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
         dated 13 July       2020.

     16. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

Preliminary issue:

     17. Before dealing with the substantive grounds,  it  is  necessary  to
         address a preliminary issue raised by Mr Corben on  behalf  of  the
         appellant. It had  not  been  raised  in  the  written  submissions
         previously served on the Tribunal and the respondent.

     18. It relates to the grant of permission. Mr Corben submitted that the
         FtTJ when granting permission considered that the  arguable  errors
         related to the first two grounds but had made no reference  to  the
         ground 3 and that above the line  in  the  decision  it  is  stated
         "granted". Mr Corben submitted that this should not be  read  as  a
         limited grant of permission.

     19. I have considered the submission in  the  light  of  the  grant  of
         permission. The relevant  decision  is  that  of  Safi  and  others
         (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC).

     20. The headnote to that decision stated as follows:


         (1) It is essential for a  judge  who  is  granting  permission  to
         appeal only on limited grounds to say so, in terms, in the  section
         of the standard  form  document  that  contains  the  decision,  as
         opposed to the reasons for the decision.
         (2) It is likely to be only in very exceptional circumstances  that
         the Upper Tribunal will be persuaded to entertain a submission that
         a decision which, on its face, grants permission to appeal  without
         express limitation is to be construed  as  anything  other  than  a
         grant  of  permission  on  all  of  the  grounds  accompanying  the
         application for permission, regardless of what might be said in the
         reasons for decision section of the document.

     21. The grant of permission makes no reference to Ground. 3 Not only it
         is unclear why the FtTJ did not consider the third ground which was
         clearly set out in the application, if he intended  this  to  be  a
         limited grant of permission,  the FtTJ has not done  so  in  a  way
         which  complies  with  Safi  and  others  (permission   to   appeal
         decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC) as set out above.  The FtTJ failed
         to incorporate his intention (if there was such  an  intention)  to
         grant permission on limited grounds within the decision section  of
         the standard document, where it is simply stated, ' granted'. If  a
         judge intends to grant permission only on limited  grounds,  he  or
         she must make that fact absolutely clear. That is not the  position
         here and there is no reference to the appeal grounds being  limited
         in the way set out by the Upper Tribunal  in  Safi  (see  paragraph
         43).  I   am  not  satisfied  that  there   are   any   exceptional
         circumstances that exist to limit the grant of appeal nor have  any
         been identified by Mr Diwnycz and I am further satisfied that there
         is no unfairness  to  the  respondent  who  has  submitted  written
         submissions dealing with all of the grounds and thus being able  to
         engage with the issues raised. I shall therefore consider with  all
         three grounds.

The grounds of challenge:


     22. Mr Corben submitted that his primary submission was that grounds 2
         and 3 were the stronger grounds. He submitted that the ground 1
         raised three points from the evidence and that he accepted that a
         finding on any individual point would not be sufficient in itself
         to cause the decision to be subject to sufficient criticism as
         there were other aspects of the decision that weighed against the
         appellant. However if it could be said that there were a collection
         of errors the combination of them would tip the scales in favour of
         the appellant. Therefore it did not require much for ground 1 to
         tip the balance to demonstrate the decision was unsafe. In his
         submission, a favourable finding on grounds 2 and 3 would be
         sufficient even ground 1 was rejected in its entirety.

     23. Mr Corben began his submissions by referring the Tribunal to ground
         3 on the basis that this was the strongest ground.  I  shall  refer
         the parties' submissions when considering each ground.

Ground 3:

     24. In respect of ground 3, it is submitted that  the  FtTJ  failed  to
         make any findings on the possibility of risk  arising  from  family
         members or others in Pakistan on  the  basis  that  notwithstanding
         whether he was a credible Ahmadi convert, the things  that  he  had
         done in light of the activities posted on Facebook, would mean that
         he would be perceived as having converted to the Ahmadi faith.

     25. Mr Corben on behalf  of  the  appellant  submitted  that  the  FtTJ
         considered the issue in his decision at [31] but  only  dealt  with
         the general risk arising from "extremist  factions".  He  therefore
         submits that  there  was  no  reference  to  the  reaction  of  the
         appellant's family even though there was evidence of his uncle  who
         heard of his conversion and reacted strongly by ejecting  him  from
         the home in the UK.  He  submitted  that  it  was  the  appellant's
         account that it was his uncle who told his  father  which  prompted
         him to disown him and threatened him  and  that  and  a  fatwa  was
         issued against him.

     26. It is further submitted by Mr Corben that there was evidence of his
         involvement in Ahmadi activities posted on  Facebook  and  whatever
         the  FtTJ  found  about  his  credibility,  the  images  would   be
         available.

     27. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the written submissions dated 13 July  2020.
         It is argued there that the respondent did not accept that  it  was
         necessary for the judge to make findings of risk  from  his  family
         because the judge had found that the appellant's conversion not  to
         be genuine. Therefore, in the circumstances they would be no reason
         to believe that the family would be unaware of this or that if they
         were aware,  they  would  still  pursue  the  appellant  once  they
         understood that it was not a genuine conversion.

     28. I have carefully considered the submissions of  the  advocates  and
         having done so I am satisfied that ground 3  is  not  made  out.  I
         shall set out my reasons for reaching that view.

     29. The point raised on behalf of the appellant is  that  even  if  the
         FtTJ reached the conclusion that the appellant was  not  a  genuine
         Ahmadi convert, there was an arguable risk that on return  that  he
         would be perceived as an Ahmadi convert, and thus would be at  risk
         of harm.

     30. Mr Corben points to paragraph [31] of the decision and submits  the
         judge failed to properly address the alternative basis of  risk  of
         serious harm on return.

     31. The evidence relied upon in support of the  submission  relates  to
         the appellant's activities in the UK in the form  of  his  Facebook
         posts and activities and the  fatwa.  However,  the  FtTJ  at  [31]
         expressly considered these activities stating,

          "I have noted the alternative submission that he will be  at  risk
         as a perceived Ahmadi on return.  I  have  no  evidence  which  can
         regard as reliable that anything he has done  in  this  country  to
         create the impression of conversion has or will come to the  notice
         of extremist factions  in  Pakistan.  In  any  event,  the  country
         guidance makes clear that while all Ahmadi's face discrimination in
         Pakistan, not all of them  face  persecution.  Those  who  seek  to
         practice their faith openly are at risk, and those who would do  so
         but for fear of persecution will also be  entitled  to  protection.
         The appellant will not seek to practice his Ahmadi faith on return,
         I am satisfied, not because of fear of the consequences but because
         he is not genuinely a convert to the Ahmadi faith.  Accordingly  he
         will not be at risk on this basis either."

     32. Whilst the judge referred to "extremist factions" it could  equally
         apply to any other person in Pakistan. The important  part  of  the
         FtTJ's assessment was that he found  that  there  was  no  evidence
         which he could regard as  "reliable  evidence"  that  any  activity
         carried out in the UK to create an impression of  conversion  would
         come to the attention of anyone in Pakistan. This was based on  the
         FtTJ's earlier assessment of the appellant's evidence  set  out  at
         paragraphs [26] - [27]. In respect of the  photographs  taken,  the
         appellant attending the Jalsa Salana 2019  and  attending  prayers,
         the judge considered that  his  face  was  "very  indistinct".  The
         evidential  inference  drawn  from  that  finding   is   that   the
         photographic  evidence  did  not  identify  the  appellant  in  any
         distinctive or readily ascertainable way. Whilst the judge accepted
         that he had put material on his Facebook page  suggesting  that  he
         was now in Ahmadi, it had not  been  established  in  the  evidence
         whether the access to the Facebook page was either open to  all  or
         was in fact closed or controlled by the  appellant  (at  [26]).  At
         [27] the judge considered the evidence of the fatwa and threats  to
         kill by the appellant. The FtTJ made the following findings:

         "I have a document with translation, which on its face is  a  fatwa
         dated 1 February 2019 issued by K N and signed by  someone  styling
         himself Principal Patron. I have no explanation why this  has  been
         issued if there is already a fatwa, as claimed before judge Morris,
         or  by  whom,  or  how  the  issuer  learned  of  the   appellant's
         conversion. I also  have  a  text  message  sent  from  a  Pakistan
         telephone number to the appellant's  phone  on  16  February  2019,
         threatening to kill him, this text being in English and accompanied
         by what looks like a photo of the fatwa if it  is  not  I  have  no
         evidence how the appellant obtained the fatwa. Again  there  is  no
         indication from whom this comes, save  that  it  said  it  is  from
         someone who was already cut off relations with the  appellant,  and
         have since learned from his Facebook page of his  conversion.  That
         is strange, since  the  only  account  I  have  of  a  severing  of
         relations, from friends or family, is because  of  the  conversion,
         but this person must have severed relations for some other  reason.
         While how the writer was later accessing the  appellant's  Facebook
         page or learned his mobile number  is  unclear.  It  is  remarkably
         convenient within two months of the dismissal of his  first  appeal
         the appellant received two separate documentary confirmations  that
         his life is indeed at risk."

     33. It is therefore plain from those factual findings made by the  FtTJ
         that he did not accept that the evidence relating to the threats or
         the fatwa was reliable evidence upon which he could  place  weight.
         Consequently those findings at paragraphs [26] - [27] when seen  in
         the context of paragraph [31] demonstrate that the judge did make a
         factual assessment of the risk the  appellant  on  the  alternative
         basis claimed, but was entitled to find that the appellant had  not
         demonstrated that any of  his  claimed  conduct  had  come  to  the
         attention of others in Pakistan or would come to anyone's attention
         given the lack of credible and reliable evidence in support  either
         in the form of threats, or  activities  undertaken  in  the  United
         Kingdom. Therefore the FtTJ did not find that the appellant had any
         profile that would bring him to the  attention  of  any  others  on
         return to Pakistan.

     34. Whilst it is argued that the risk also exists in  relation  to  his
         family on the basis of threats made by them, I do not consider that
         this evidence  can  be  considered  in  isolation  from  the  other
         credibility findings made  by  the  FtTJ.  It  is  plain  from  the
         decision when read as a whole that after  considering  all  of  the
         evidence, which included the evidence of threats  (  see  [27]  and
         [28])  that  he  found  the  appellant  to  be  "a  witness  of  no
         credibility" and that he was not a genuine Ahmadi convert and  that
         is "asylum claim is a fabrication" and that he would not be at risk
         on return (see conclusion  at  [30]).  It  must  follow  from  that
         overarching finding that the FtTJ did not find that  the  appellant
         had given  a  credible  account  concerning  any  of  his  evidence
         including  threats  from  family  members  concerning  his  claimed
         conversion. That being the case, on the factual  findings  made  by
         the FtTJ, there can be no possible basis for  the  submission  made
         that he would be perceived as someone who converted to  the  Ahmadi
         faith. As the respondent submitted the judge having found  that  he
         was not a witness of truth or credibility, and that his  claim  had
         been fabricated, there was no basis for any alternative finding  in
         relation to the risk from family members.

    Ground 2:

     35. Dealing with ground 2, it is submitted by Mr Corben that  the  FtTJ
         made inconsistent findings regarding the vetting and support  given
         in asylum claims by the AMA UK at  paragraphs  22  and  23  of  the
         decision.

     36. Mr Corben directed the tribunal's attention to paragraph [22] where
         the FtTJ stated: "despite the comments of Judge Morris on the point
         none of the writers attended to give oral evidence, nor indeed  did
         anyone else from the mosque or from any Ahmadi events attended. The
         letters did not explain why they did not attend." He  submits  that
         the judge was relying on the point that no witnesses  had  attended
         court from the AMA UK in support of the appellant's account.

     37. Mr Corben then directed the tribunal to the FtTJ's  decision  where
         the judge set out the appellant's explanation  (also  at  [22])  as
         follows: "the appellant told me they were not there because  Jamaat
         would not allow them to give evidence.  No  evidence  of  any  such
         policy or ruling was provided. " It is therefore submitted that the
         judge did not believe the appellant's explanation that there was  a
         restriction upon the Ahmadi members giving evidence but at [23] the
         judge stated that he was "aware of the policy of  the  AMA  not  to
         issue formal letters confirming a  person's  conversion  until  two
         years have passed."

     38. In summary it is therefore submitted that at one  stage  the  judge
         condemned the appellant for not having  more  substantial  material
         from the AMA UK for his  claim  but  then  criticised  the  written
         evidence which had been provided on the basis of the policy  stated
         that no such evidence would be given until the expiry of two years.



     39. Mr Corben therefore submits that the approach taken by the FtTJ  is
         both inconsistent and unfair to the appellant. At  [22]  the  judge
         was not satisfied that  the  policy  existed  to  prevent  the  AMA
         attending court but at [23] the FtTJ that did appear to accept that
         there was such a policy of the AMA  not  to  issue  formal  support
         letters until two years vetting in  past.  He  submitted  that  the
         judge failed to understand or properly make any clear  findings  on
         the policies and  this  affected  the  assessment  of  whether  the
         appellant was a genuine Ahmadi convert.

     40. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the  respondent  relies  upon  the  written
         submissions. It is submitted that the references  to  the  evidence
         and the judge's findings are selective and that by placing reliance
         on those highlighted paragraphs ignore the decision as a whole  and
         that within paragraphs [22] - [29] the FtTJ carefully  weighed  all
         the evidence in support of the claimed conversion  before  reaching
         the conclusion at [30] that he was not witness of truth as  to  his
         claim to be a genuine Ahmadi convert.

     41. Having considered with care the submissions made on behalf  of  the
         appellant, I am satisfied that there is no  error  of  law  on  the
         basis advanced in ground 2.

     42. The grant of challenge focus on two particular  paragraphs  of  the
         FtTJ's decision. However the references made are selective  in  the
         sense that the submission fails to consider the different  type  of
         evidence the FtTJ was referring to and the content of that evidence
         in those two particular paragraphs.

     43. At [22] the judge considered letters  from  two  named  individuals
         (not elders  or  committee  members  of  the  AMA)  and  the  judge
         identified the  lack  of  detail  in  that  evidence  and  apparent
         inconsistencies. The FtTJ set out that in relation to Mr M he  said
         that he knew the appellant to be an Ahmadi and had  recent  threats
         but gave no further detail. In relation to  Mr  A  (author  of  the
         second letter) he set out that he first met the  appellant  in  the
         mosque but as the FtTJ observed whilst the  author  of  the  letter
         stated that he had known the appellant  for  two  years,  the  date
         given was less than two years before  the  letter.  The  judge  did
         refer to a letter "apparently from the AMA" and reference  is  made
         to the appellant having entered the community  by  filling  in  the
         initiation form, but the judge observed that  in  relation  to  the
         evidence, no copy of the form had been provided and in  respect  of
         two of the letters, no identity documents from the claimed  writers
         had been exhibited.  Therefore the judge identified  matters  which
         affected the weight attached to such evidence.

     44. The judge then went on to make reference to  the  witness  evidence
         from Mr M and Mr A (the letters) stating at [22]:

         "despite the comments of Judge Morris on  the  point  none  of  the
         writers attended to give oral evidence, nor indeed did anyone  else
         from the mosque or from any Ahmadi events attended."

         It is plain that the judge is expressly referring to  the  previous
         decision of Judge Morris who had found that the appellant  had  not
         provided any cogent evidence in support of his claimed  conversion.
         At that stage, the appellant had given an explanation for the  lack
         of  evidence  that  they  would  not  issue  documents   confirming
         conversion until someone had been a member of the community for two
         years. At [31] Judge Morris stated  "as  accepted  by  Mr  Sedgwick
         (respondent's counsel), this would appear to be a  sensible  stance
         on behalf of the authorities. However, that would not  prevent  the
         appellant from producing evidence from individuals who are aware of
         his conversion, his attendance at the mosque and his activities  as
         an Ahmadi. The appellant produced no witnesses at  the  hearing  to
         provide such evidence and the only evidence before me as a document
         which purports to be a statement of Mr A...".

     45.  It  is  plain  in  my  judgement  that  Judge  Morris   here   was
         distinguishing between evidence that  could  be  given  by  way  of
         verification by the AMA and that which  could  be  given  by  other
         individuals who knew the appellant.




     46. It is also correct to note that at [31] Judge  Morris  went  on  to
         consider  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  had   provided   but
         highlighted not only the lack of attendance but the inconsistencies
         in the evidence that had been provided.




     47. Returning to the present appeal, it is equally  plain  in  my  view
         that Judge White referred to the previous finding made on the basis
         that the same circumstances had  occurred  in  the  present  appeal
         before him. Judge White then proceeded to consider the  appellant's
         explanation for the lack of non-attendance stating as follows:



         "the letters did not explain why they did not attend. The appellant
         told me that they were not here because Jamaat would not allow them
         to give evidence. No evidence of any  such  policy  or  ruling  was
         provided. If it exists, it did not prevent them from giving written
         evidence. I am not persuaded that such a  bar  exists,  still  less
         that it would prevent anyone from attending to  confirm  that  they
         know the appellant and have seen in the mosque or preaching in  the
         streets."



     48. In my judgement, the FtTJ was not referring to any policy on the
         part of the AMA UK but was directly referring to the general
         evidence given by witnesses who knew the appellant as an Ahmadi by
         his conduct, being seen at the mosque or preaching in the streets.
         As the FtTJ correctly stated, there had been no evidence of any
         policy from the AMA UK which referred to others who knew the
         appellant and could give general evidence about his conduct to be
         prohibited from giving such evidence.


     49. The policy on the part of the AMA UK and its process of
         verification is set out in Annex B of the CPIN dated May 2019 (that
         was before the FtTJ). It does not refer to general witness evidence
         given by those who know the appellant but refers to the type of
         evidence that the AMA UK could provide by way of
         verification/support.


     50. Furthermore, as the FtTJ correctly observed if such a policy/ruling
         did exist (in respect of that general evidence), such a ruling had
         not prevented the two witnesses giving written evidence in the form
         of letters as set out at [22]. Therefore the judge was not
         inconsistent when he stated, "I am not persuaded that such a bar
         exists, still less that it would prevent anyone from attending to
         confirm that they know the appellant and have seen that the mosque
         or preaching in the streets."


     51. There is therefore no error on the basis of any inconsistency in
         paragraph [22]. In my view, the ground fundamentally misunderstands
         the nature of the evidence the judge was considering at paragraph
         [22].


     52. Turning to paragraph [23], the FtTJ was plainly referring to the
         policy of the AMA UK itself (as opposed to the general witness
         evidence). This is set out in the decision letter at paragraph 23
         and also at Annex B of the CPIN exhibited in the respondent's
         bundle where it is stated at paragraph 15 " in the case of
         applicants who have joined the association by doing a ba'iat in the
         UK, the Association shall only confirm that the applicant join the
         association as a member two years after the ba'iat and may set out
         a report about the applicant's attachment to the Association after
         the second anniversary of that applicants joining as a member."  It
         is in the context of that evidence the judge noted that despite the
         period of two years not having elapsed, two letters from the AMA UK
         had been provided.


     53. The FtTJ made two findings about that evidence. Firstly, there had
         been no explanation as to why those letters have been provided in
         contravention of that stated policy or position adopted and
         secondly, as a result of the lack of detail, they were so lacking
         in factual information concerning his activities and conversion
         that little or no weight could be attached to them. This is
         consistent with the decision of AB (Ahmadiyya Association UK:
         letters) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  511, where the Upper Tribunal
         concluded that in deciding a claim for international protection
         based on a person's Ahmadi faith where credibility is an issue, the
         more specific information a letter from the AMA UK contains, as to
         the persons activities in the United Kingdom, the more likely the
         letter is to be given weight (see paragraph 44 of that decision).


     54. In my judgement the ground fundamentally fails to take into account
         the different type of evidence the judge was considering at
         paragraphs [22] and [23]. In my view, the judge properly considered
         the evidence provided in the form of such statements but found it
         to be either lacking in detail, lacking in support and no
         reasonable explanation for the failure to call relevant witness
         evidence and inconsistencies in its content. Therefore I am not
         satisfied there is any error on the basis as advanced on the
         grounds.


     55. I also satisfied that the respondent is correct in her written
         submissions to state that the evidence at paragraphs [22] - [23]
         was not the only evidence considered by the FtTJ when reaching his
         conclusion at [30] that the appellant was not a genuine Ahmadi
         convert but formed part of that holistic assessment of the
         evidence.

Ground 1:

     56. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the FtTJ may have
         misstated or misunderstood parts of the appellant's oral evidence.
         The grounds identify three areas.


     57. The directions given by the tribunal required the parties to
         provide copies of their record of proceedings. The appellant's
         counsel has provided this however the respondent was not able to
         provide a copy as the paper file has not been accessible due to
         COVID 19. However there is a short extract from the presenting
         officers note. As to the judge's ROP I provided a typed copy to the
         parties at the hearing which both parties had the opportunity to
         read and consider. Mr Corben on behalf of the appellant confirmed
         that he did not require any further time or a copy of the
         handwritten notes and was content to proceed in his submissions.

     58. Dealing with the first point raised from the evidence, it is
         submitted that at paragraph [18] the FtTJ recorded that the
         appellant said that he did not know of the differences between
         Sunni and Shia Muslims and that the judge considered that this was
         "difficult to credit" and thus was a point taken against the
         appellant.

     59. The grounds cite counsel's note of the evidence as follows:


         Q; before visiting the mosque, were you aware of the existence of
         Ahmadi's as a sect?
         A: no
         Q: were you aware of other different sects in Islam... Sunni and
         Shia?
         A; yes
         Q; were you aware it was sometimes the cause of considerable
         difficulty?
         A; yes


     60. Thus the ground asserts that the appellant had not claimed that he
         had any such ignorance.  The FtTJ's ROP does not reflect the same
         exchange. The issue arose in the evidence as a result of the
         questions asked by the judge and it is recorded as follows:


         "IJ
         didn't know about existence of Ahmadi's before.
         I didn't know of difficulty between sects the Sunni and Shia.
         I knew of this 14-year prophecy... ".


     61. Mr Corben acknowledged that the note of counsel appeared to be
         different from that set out in the ROP but that having a
         handwritten note would not assist. I take into account the
         submission made by Mr Corben that as the judge would have been
         asking the questions, he would have recorded the answers after they
         have been given rather than counsel who would be taking the note
         contemporaneously. However, given the circumstances, even if
         Counsel's note is correct, the issue is whether such a difference
         in the evidence is material. Mr Corben  submitted that the grounds
         raised three points from the evidence and that he accepted a
         finding on any individual point would not be sufficient in itself
         to cause the decision to be subject to sufficient criticism as
         there were other aspects of the decision that weighed against the
         appellant. However if it could be said that there were a collection
         of errors the combination of them would tip the scales in favour of
         the appellant.


     62. I have also considered the  second issue raised in respect of
         paragraph 18. It is submitted that the judge erred by
         misrepresenting the appellant's oral evidence as to when he first
         became aware that converting to the Ahmadi faith might put him at
         risk in Pakistan. The grounds concede that this was a major issue
         in the previous appeal but that the appellant was consistent before
         this FtTJ and records counsels note in support. It is submitted
         that the appellant's evidence was clear-that he had not initially
         known about the treatment of Ahmadis in Pakistan until a day or so
         after his conversion on 23 October 2017 when his aunt and uncle
         discovered him reading Ahmadi books and told his family. It was
         then upon receipt of threats from his family that the appellant was
         aware that Ahmadi's were at risk. It is therefore submitted that
         the judge did not fairly portray the evidence and it was unfair to
         maintain that the appellant was still confused.


     63. I have carefully considered the points raised in relation to
         paragraph [18] of the decision. In respect of the first point
         raised, I am satisfied that even if the judge's note is incorrect,
         it was of no materiality. By placing emphasis on extracts of the
         evidence the submissions fail to consider the full context of the
         material the FtTJ was considering. As the respondent submits, the
         extracts set out in the grounds are a selective part of the overall
         evidence. The key issue the judge was considering was not the
         difference between Sunni and Shia but the appellant's apparent
         ignorance of the Ahmadi sect and risks to them. This is clearly
         illustrated by careful reading of paragraph [18]. In that paragraph
         the judge was addressing the evidence concerning the appellant's
         claimed conversion to the Ahmadi faith. At [17] the judge set out
         the previous adverse findings made by Judge Morris in 2018 based on
         the evidence that he had given before the tribunal which was found
         to be both inconsistent and not credible. The FtTJ noting that he
         was revisiting the issue of the appellant's conversion.  Thereafter
         at paragraphs [18]-[21] the FtTJ considered the appellant's
         evidence concerning his conversion. I observe that the grounds only
         make reference to paragraphs [18] and [19].

     64. At paragraph [18]-[19] the FtTJ stated as follows:

         "18. He was asked some questions about his conversion. He said this
         happened on 23 October 2017. About a month before he had gone into
         a mosque at prayer time, where he met [NB], who began preaching to
         him, having established that the appellant was not an Ahmadi. The
         appellant says before he did not realise that there were different
         sects of Muslims or know how Ahmadi's were treated. In answer to me
         he said that he did not even know of the existence of Ahmadi's
         before this, or of the existence of differences and difficulties
         between Sunni and Shia Muslims. I am bound to say that I find this
         claim to extensive ignorance about is them difficult to credit. I
         further note in this regard that he told me that he did not know
         how Ahmadi's were treated until he got threats of his family,
         including his uncle: that on his account was in late October or
         early November. Judge Morris's decision includes a detailed
         discussion of when the appellant realised that he would be at risk
         as an Ahmadi. He told her that he realised he could claim asylum
         when he converted, in December 2017. That would seem to make no
         sense, since he had already claimed, and is clearly different from
         what he told me. In the course of the discussion before judge
         Morris his counsel (not Mr Georget) referred to evidence that he
         was told a fatwa had been issued in October 2017. That would be
         almost immediately upon his conversion. His present witness
         statement refers to a fatwa, without saying when he became aware of
         it, and the documents submitted include what is said to be a fatwa,
         but that is dated 1 February 2019. There is thus considerable
         continuing confusion over when he became aware that he would be at
         risk, and indeed how he became so aware, if he was indeed wholly
         unaware of the treatment of Ahmadi's before his conversion.


         19. In his evidence before judge Morris the appellant also referred
         to going into an Ahmadi mosque to pray as the start of his
         conversion process. He also told her that he hardly ever went to
         Friday prayers, or to the mosque: the only reason he gave me the
         going in this because it was time for prayer, which seems odd if he
         was not normally troubled. I do not know what further details he
         gave judge Morris of the procedure, but he explained that the main
         reason for conversion was at the Ahmadi's offered prayers, not
         jihad. He told me that on the first occasion he and NB talked for
         two hours, during which he was asked whether he knew what the
         Prophet had said about someone coming after him. This was a
         reference to the prophecy of the coming of the Mahdi after 14
         years, a prophecy of which the appellant told me he was aware. He
         went back the following day asking Mr B to show him the proof. Mr B
         shown in some books. After that the appellant was going back every
         2 to 3 days for further talks, before his eventual conversion. In
         answer to me he said that when Mr B shown in the book he realised
         that he must believe. Seems to be a different explanation for the
         decision to convert from that given to judge Morris. Why the site
         of an unidentified book containing a prophecy said to have been
         made many many years ago, on only his second visit to this mask,
         should persuade a man who until then had not been particularly
         religious that Ahmadi's and was the true faith I struggle to
         understand. "

     65. As can be seen from paragraph [18] the FtTJ was not placing adverse
         weight solely on the issue of whether the appellant knew the
         existence of differences between Sunni and Shia Muslims but that
         the judge was considering the general knowledge concerning the
         Muslim faith relevant his conversion : "The appellant says that
         before that he did not realise that there would different sects of
         Muslims or knew how Ahmadi's were treated. In answer to me he said
         he did not know the existence of Ahmadi's before this or as to the
         existence of difficulties in differences between Sunni and Shia
         Muslims."


     66. It was in this context that the FtTJ found that his ignorance about
         Islam was "difficult to credit". The judge was therefore not solely
         considering his answer concerning differences between the Sunni and
         Shia sects but his claim that he did not even know about the
         existence of Ahmadi Muslims who, in the objective material was well
         documented to be a section of society subject to discrimination and
         persecution in Pakistan.

     67. Furthermore, the judge did not end his consideration there and in
         the next part of the paragraph states:

         "I further note in this regard that he told me that he did not know
         how Ahmadi's were treated until he got threats from his family,
         including his uncle: in his account that's in late October or early
         November. Judge Morris's decision includes a detailed discussion of
         when the appellant realised that he would be at risk as an Ahmadi.
         He told her that he realised he could claim asylum when he
         converted, in December 2017. That would seem to make no sense,
         since he had already claimed, and is clearly different from what he
         told me. In the course of the discussion before judge Morris his
         counsel (not Mr Georget) referred to evidence that he was told a
         fatwa had been issued in October 2017. That would be almost
         immediately upon his conversion. His present witness statement
         refers to a fatwa, without saying when he became aware of it, and
         the documents submitted include what is said to be a fatwa, but
         that is dated 1 February 2019 . There is thus considerable
         continuing confusion over when he became aware that he would be at
         risk, and indeed how he became so aware, if he was indeed wholly
         unaware of the treatment of Ahmadi's before his conversion".

     68. The grounds assert as a second point that there was no confusion
         about when he was first aware of the risk to Ahmadi's because of
         the reaction of his family members. However on a careful reading of
         paragraph 18 are set out above, the judge correctly noted and took
         into account the appellant's evidence that " he told me that he did
         not know how Ahmadi's were treated until he got threats from his
         family, including his uncle: in his account that's in late October
         or early November" (see paragraph 19 above). In my judgement there
         is no unfairness or misrepresentation of the evidence. What then
         followed was the judge setting out the inconsistencies between the
         evidence he gave previously on the evidence given before judge
         White but also in the context of the evidence as a whole.


     69. The FtTJ stated that in the previous decision Judge Morris included
         a detailed discussion of when the appellant realised that he would
         be at risk as an Ahmadi (as set out in the previous decision at
         paragraph [33]). The judge recorded that "he told her (referring to
         judge Morris) that he realised he could claim asylum when he
         converted in December 2017. That would seem to make no sense since
         he had already claimed, and it is clearly different from what he
         told me."

     70. Here the FtTJ was referring to the previous account given by the
         appellant that he realised that he would be at risk when he claimed
         asylum which was in December 2017. However, as the judge found,
         "that would make no sense because he had made a claim (asylum) in
         November 2017. The judge was therefore identifying an inconsistency
         in his evidence. The judge also identified that the evidence of the
         date of conversion was different from the evidence that the
         appellant had given before him which was that in late October/early
         November (following threats from his family). The judge considered
         this in the context of the other evidence provided by the appellant
         and in particular the fatwa. As the judge noted, the previous
         evidence was that the fatwa had been issued in October 2017 which
         as the judge observed on the chronology now provided "would be
         almost immediately upon his conversion." The judge then contrasted
         that evidence with evidence in his present witness statement, he
         did not say when he became aware of the fatwa but made reference to
         the fatwa on the document in support was dated 1 February 2019 (
         not the earlier date referred to). It was against this evidential
         background that the FtTJ made the finding "there is thus
         considerable and continuing confusion over when he became aware
         that he would be at risk, and indeed how we became so aware, if he
         was indeed wholly unaware of the treatment of Ahmadi's before his
         conversion."

     71. In my judgement it is important to consider paragraph [18] in its
         entirety and in its evidential context. The grounds are selective
         in the parts of the evidence relied on when reading the evidence is
         a whole. In my view a careful reading demonstrates the judge did
         not misunderstand the evidence but was seeking to underscore and
         demonstrate the inconsistencies in his evidence and did so by
         reference to the earlier account and the evidence was before him.
         As the judge recorded at [21] the account given before the present
         tribunal gave an account which was not consistent when considering
         the dates. The explanation that he had given for giving
         inconsistent dates at the first of appeal was that he got confused
         about the 10th and 11 months despite speaking good English. The
         judge observed that that was an explanation rejected by judge
         Morris but that "the point was not further explored before me."
         Contrary to the grounds, the judge did not misstate or
         misunderstand the evidence when reaching the conclusion that there
         had been a "continuing and considerable confusion" in the
         appellant's account at [18] as this was demonstrated in the FtTJ's
         analysis.

     72. The third point relied upon refers to paragraph [19] and that the
         FtTJ misunderstood the evidence which records the FtTJ as saying
         "whilst Mr B showed him the book he realised he must believe.". The
         grounds go on to say "the tribunal then goes on to express great
         scepticism that the mere sight of a book should persuade the
         appellant, who had not been particularly religious to the point, to
         convert the Ahmadi faith. The grounds go on to cite Counsel's note:

         "Q; what was it that persuaded you that this was so serious that
         you wanted to follow it...
         A: it was the books. Once I read and found out I believed. I
         accepted I was wrong."

     73. It is therefore asserted that the judge's finding that it was the
         "mere" sight of an unidentified book was incorrect and that the
         appellant's evidence was that he went away and read the book and it
         was that which persuaded him to convert.

     74. The full note provided by counsel states:

         You were aware of the prophecy and believed it hadn't happened? It
         was the books. Once I read and found out I believed. I accepted I
         was wrong. To be a good Muslim you have to believe."


     75. Having read the grounds in the context of the entirety of paragraph
         [19] I am satisfied that the judge did not misunderstand or
         misstate the evidence or that there was any confusion on the part
         of the FtTJ. At [19] the judge set out further evidence relating to
         the conversion. The judge began by noting the evidence that
         previously before judge Morris and recorded in that decision that
         he had said that he had gone into an Ahmadi mosque to pray at the
         start of his conversion process. The judge records "he also told
         her that he hardly ever went to Friday prayers, or to the mosque:
         the only reason they gave me for going in was because it was time
         for prayer, which seems odd if he were not normally troubled." The
         judge then set out the main reason for conversion was that
         "Ahmadi's offer prayers not jihad". The judge then went on to
         consider the evidence that he had given before the tribunal as
         follows "he told me that on the first occasion he and NB talk for
         two hours during which he was asked whether he knew what the
         Prophet had said about someone coming after him. This was a
         reference to the prophecy of the coming of the Mahdi after 14
         years, a prophecy of which the appellant told me he was aware. He
         went back the following day asking Mr B to show him the proof. Mr B
         shown in some books. After that the appellant was going back every
         2 to 3 days for further talks, before his eventual conversion. In
         answer to me he said that when Mr B shown in the book he realised
         that he must believe. This seems to be a different explanation for
         the decision to convert from that given to Judge Morris. Why the
         site of an unidentified book containing a prophecy said to have
         been made many years ago, on only his second visit to this mosque,
         should persuade a man who until then had not been particularly
         religious that Ahmadism was the true faith I struggle to
         understand. "


     76. It is plain from reading paragraph [19] in its entirety to the
         judge did not misunderstand the appellant's evidence that when he
         read the book he had believed but had identified a different
         explanation for converting to the Ahmadi faith. On the evidence
         before the FtTJ, his explanation was different from the previous
         account given and the present judge was entitled to consider this
         as the appellant giving inconsistent evidence. Furthermore, the
         grounds do not make any reference to paragraphs 20 and 21 of the
         decision where judge set other inconsistent evidence given by the
         appellant, for example at [21] where the judge set out the
         differences between the appellant's account in his asylum interview
         and other evidence.


     77. In my judgement, the FtTJ's decision should not be read by
         reference to specific paragraphs alone but by reading the decision
         as a whole. The judge was required to consider whether the
         appellant was a credible Ahmadi convert and this included
         considering his conversion, and evidence in support of his claimed
         conversion and his activities before reaching an overall decision.
         After carrying out a careful analysis of the evidence, which
         included consideration of previous evidence given, both the asylum
         interview and the evidence given before judge Morris, and the
         documentary evidence advanced on his behalf, alongside his fresh
         evidence, the judge set out at [30] "I have considered all of this
         evidence with care and in the round. In the light of the various
         matters discussed above, including the absence of any clear and
         consistent chronology of or explanation of his claimed conversion
         and the lack of any genuinely independent and testable confirmation
         of what he says I am satisfied that the appellant is a witness of
         no credibility. For reasons which include those given by Judge
         Morris but also encompass new material provided I reach the same
         conclusion, that the appellant is not a genuine Ahmadi convert,
         that his asylum claims is a fabrication and that he is not at risk
         on return."


     78. In my judgement the FtTJ carried out a careful consideration of the
         evidence in the round and reached overall conclusions that were
         open to him. The grounds amount to nothing more than a disagreement
         with that evidence that I am satisfied that there is no material
         error of law in the way the grounds assert.


     79. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the decision of
         the FtTJ did not make an error on a point of law and the decision
         of the FtT stands. The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision.

     80. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT
         stands.




Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated 8 March  2021


I make a direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as  the  proceedings  relate  to
the circumstances of a protection claim. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.




