
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: PA/07336/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th May 2017                             |On 14th June 2017             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                                     NH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Cole, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr MDiwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal from the decision of Judge Moxon, promulgated on  the
    15th December 2016, in which he dismissed the appeal of NH against  the
    respondent's refusal of his Protection Claim. NH, who I shall refer  to
    hereafter as 'the appellant', is an Afghan national who was born on the
    [ ] 1986.

 2. The essence of the appellant's claim is that in 2006 he  began  working
    in partnership with another as a self-employed tailor in two successive
    camps run by coalition forces in Afghanistan. However, he ceased  doing
    so in about July 2014 following threatening telephone  calls  from  the
    Taleban. In about October 2014, the  Taleban  called  at  his  home  in
    Kabul, whilst he was absent, and told his father that they intended  to
    kill him.   He therefore immediately moved to  Jalalabad.  On  the  3rd
    June 2015, he was challenged by a person in the street as to whether he
    was 'NH'. Fearing  that  this  meant  that  his  whereabouts  had  been
    discovered by the Taleban, he left Afghanistan a week later. He claimed
    asylum on the 8th January 2016, having been arrested for  entering  the
    United Kingdom illegally.

 3. Judge Moxon accepted (as did the respondent)  that  the  appellant  had
    worked as a tailor for coalition forces in two of their  camps  but  he
    did not believe that he had been threatened by the Taleban, whether "as
    alleged or at all". He further found that because his work in the camps
    was "kept secret", the Taleban did not currently know or  suspect  that
    he had ever done such work  [paragraph  40].  Those  findings  are  not
    challenged in this appeal.  However,  permission  to  appeal  has  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on the arguable ground that Judge
    Moxon "ought to have considered not  only  whether  the  appellant  had
    previously attracted adverse attention but whether  there  was  a  real
    risk that he would  attract  such  adverse  attention  if  returned  to
    Afghanistan. The decision in MSM (journalists; political opinion; risk)
    Somalia [2015] UKUT 413 (IAC) was cited by  Judge  Coker  as  providing
    possible support for this ground of appeal.

 4. I am grateful to  the  representatives  for  their  assistance  at  the
    hearing and I am especially grateful to  Mr  Cole  for  the  additional
    assistance that he has provided by way of further  written  submissions
    and relevant case law following the conclusion of the hearing. I should
    perhaps make it clear that the possibility of Mr  Cole  making  further
    written submissions was canvassed at the hearing whereupon  Mr  Dwnzycz
    indicated that he would not wish to take advantage of  the  opportunity
    to respond.

 5. As I made clear at the hearing, I am satisfied that it was an error  of
    law for Judge Moxon not to  have  considered  whether  the    appellant
    would be at risk of persecution by   the  Taleban  solely  due  to  his
    trade as a tailor. The remaining issue,  to  which  Mr  Cole's  helpful
    written submissions are addressed, is whether that error is such that I
    ought to exercise discretion in setting aside Judge Moxon's decision to
    dismiss the appeal by substituting a decision to allow it.

 6. The essence of Mr Cole's argument is that it is reasonably likely  that
    the appellant would return to the only means of earning his living that
    he has ever known in Afghanistan and that this would  eventually  bring
    him to the adverse attention of the Taleban.  He  further  argues  that
    such adverse attention would be  the  result  of  the  appellant  being
    imputed with the political opinions of coalition forces  with  whom  he
    would be perceived as collaborating. He cannot therefore be expected to
    exercise discretion in the practice of his trade given that this  would
    deprive him of the very  protection  that  the  Refugee  Convention  is
    designed to provide. I reject that argument for the following reasons.

 7. Whilst I accept that it is reasonably likely that the  appellant  would
    return to his former occupation as a tailor upon return to Afghanistan,
    I am not satisfied that he would be  at  risk  of  persecution  by  the
    Taleban due to this fact alone. It is abundantly clear to me  that  any
    risk of the appellant being imputed with an adverse  political  opinion
    by the Taleban would not be the result of him plying  his  trade  as  a
    tailor, but arises instead  from  the  possibility  of  him  once  more
    supplying uniforms to members of the coalition forces.  He  could  thus
    avoid persecution, without sacrificing his chosen occupation, simply by
    setting up a tailoring business that  serves  an  exclusively  civilian
    clientele. I am satisfied of this because my attention was not drawn to
    any  evidence  that  suggests  the  appellant  would  face  significant
    difficulties in setting up such a business in any location  other  than
    one of the camps occupied by coalition forces. The issue is thus one of
    internal relocation rather  than  forced  abandonment  of  a  protected
    right.  The position is therefore different from that in MSM (Somalia),
    wherein it was suggested that the appellant could avoid persecution  by
    changing his occupation from journalist to teacher,  or  in    Minister
    for Immigration and Border Protection v SZSCA [2013] FCAFC 155, wherein
    it was suggested that the appellant might  avoid  being  persecuted  by
    changing his occupation from lorry  driver  to  that  of  jeweller.  By
    contrast with the position  in  those  cases,  the  appellant's  chosen
    occupation as a tailor is not  -  to  adopt  the  language  of  counsel
    appearing for UNHR  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MSM  (Somalia)  -
    "indissociable from his actual or imputed political opinion".

 8. I therefore conclude that Judge Moxon's failure to consider whether the
    appellant would be at risk of  persecution  solely  by  reason  of  him
    resuming his chosen occupation  as  a  tailor  was  immaterial  to  the
    outcome of the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal. It follows that  this
    appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is directed



Signed                              Date: 6th June 2017


Judge Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



