
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07171/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 November 2017                        |On 29 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                    [L A]
                                (AKA ['L M'])
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Arkhurst, Counsel, instructed by Caulker & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with leave  against  a  decision  of  First  tier
    Tribunal (FtT) Judge NMK Lawrence promulgated on 29  August  2017.  The
    appellant was convicted under the  name  ['ML'],  otherwise  ['LM'],  a
    Slovakian national, of five counts of burglary and an offence under the
    Sexual Offences Act 2003 at Southwark Crown Court on 14 March 2017.  He
    was sentenced to a cumulative sentence of two years  eight  months.  He
    was served with a Notice of Decision to  Deport  but  in  the  meantime
    admitted that he was really an Albanian from Kosovo with the name [LA].
    On 3 February 2016 the appellant was served with a Notice  of  Decision
    to Deport. On 10 March 2016 the appellant claimed asylum. On 10th  June
    the appellant was  served  with  a  notice  under  section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  On  13  July  2017  the
    Secretary of State refused the appellant's application for  protection.
    The decision was certified under section 72(9) of the  2002  Act.  Both
    the decision and the certificate were the  subject  of  appeal  by  the
    appellant. Both were refused by Judge Lawrence.

 2. In the course of his asylum interview the appellant claimed that he had
    been trafficked to the UK. The  issue  was  referred  to  the  National
    Referral Mechanism. On 26 August 2016 the Competent  Authority  made  a
    positive Reasoned Grounds decision in relation to the claim and gave  a
    45 day reflection and recovery period. The Home Office decision  letter
    states that on 21 December 2016 a Conclusive Grounds decision was  made
    but it was decided not to grant the appellant any leave. We  asked  the
    parties whether they had a copy of the decision of 21 December but they
    did not. It appears not have been before the F-tT.

 3. In granting permission to appeal FtT Judge Gibb noted inter  alia  that
    the strongest ground was in relation to  the  section  72  certificate.
    Judge Lawrence appeared to have taken the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    sentence was in excess of two years as determinative of the certificate
    whereas it was a presumption; the judge had an obligation  to  consider
    the evidence presented in rebuttal.  Judge  Gibb  also  noted  that  he
    appeared not to have noted the trafficking finding in his reasoning.

 4. Mr Duffy accepted that there was an error of law  in  relation  to  the
    s.72 certificate but argued  that  it  was  not  material  since  Judge
    Lawrence found that he was not  at  risk  on  return.  Accordingly  the
    Refugee Convention did not apply. So far as the  Judge's  treatment  of
    him as a victim of trafficking is concerned Mr Duffy argued that it was
    significant that the appellant had  not  been  granted  leave.  On  the
    findings it looked as if the appellant had come through the  experience
    relatively unscathed. If there was an error it was not material.

 5. At paragraph 15 of the decision Judge Lawrence says that if a person is
    convicted  by  a  UK  court  and  sentenced  to  at  least  two   years
    imprisonment that means that he or  she  has  ipso  facto  committed  a
    particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to the  community
    in the UK. The appellant presented evidence  of  the  training  schemes
    that he had undertaken while in custody. Nowhere is this  evaluated  in
    the decision letter. It is clear therefore that rather than  treat  the
    certificate as raising a presumption that may be rebutted the Judge has
    proceeded on the basis that, having been  sentenced  to  at  least  two
    years imprisonment, the certificate must stand. That was a clear  error
    of law.

 6. At paragraph 24 of the  decision  in  evaluating  the  ability  of  the
    appellant to re-integrate to Kosovo the Judge states that the appellant
    has no recognised  vulnerabilities.  In  reaching  that  conclusion  he
    appears not to have considered the positive finding that the  appellant
    is a victim of trafficking. Other than  in  the  preamble  he  has  not
    mentioned the fact or made any attempt to include it in his evaluation.
    It may be, as Mr Duffy says, that he did not require help as  a  victim
    of trafficking but without the  Conclusive  Grounds  decision  and  any
    other supporting material it is  difficult  to  be  clear  about  that.
    Moreover the starting point for the Judge's consideration ought to have
    been that the appellant, as a victim of trafficking, was  a  vulnerable
    witness.

 7. These errors of law are material and go to the heart of the  assessment
    of the evidence for the  appellant.  Accordingly  we  shall  allow  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal, set aside the decision of  the  FtT  and
    remit the case back to the FtT to be heard before a  judge  other  then
    Judge Lawrence.

 8. We asked Mr Duffy to make available the Conclusive Grounds decision  of
    21 December 2016 and any other relevant  material  connected  with  the
    National Referral Mechanism. As a victim of trafficking the FtT  should
    be alive to the appellant's  vulnerabilities.  In  that  connection  we
    would draw attention to the terms of the  joint  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No. 2 of 2010 and to the  further  guidance  to  be  found  in  AM
    (Afghanistan v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1123.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                             Date 29 November 2017


Right Honourable Lord Boyd of Duncansby





