
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07555/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10 April 2017                    |On 11 May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S K A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G S Peterson, instructed by CK Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is an  Iranian
    national born in 2000. His appeal against the refusal of his protection
    claim was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian on 24th January
    2017.
2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the following grounds: Firstly,  the
    judge recorded the evidence of the  Appellant  and  the  arguments  put
    forward by the parties but failed to make any clear findings of fact on
    the Appellant's account. Secondly, the judge  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal under the Refugee Convention but failed to  identify  the  basis
    upon which the Appellant has a well founded  fear  of  persecution  and
    failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant has such
    a fear. Thirdly, the judge referred to the most recent country guidance
    of SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]  UKUT
    308 IAC, in which it was found there was no generalised risk on  return
    to Iran for Kurds, but failed to make any finding  on  the  Appellant's
    case. The judge had therefore misdirected himself and failed  to  apply
    relevant country guidance or, alternatively, failed to set out on  what
    basis he could depart from it.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    15th February 2017 on the grounds that:


         "It is arguable that whilst the Tribunal found that  the  appellant
         (as a 13 year old child) would be oblivious to the risk inherent in
         distributing leaflets on behalf of the KDP, it failed to  make  any
         finding  concerning  the  plausibility  of  the  KDP   causing   or
         permitting the Appellant to undertake that risk in the first place.
         It is also arguable that the Tribunal failed to identify  the  risk
         to the appellant on return to Iran given that he did  not  seem  to
         have any  direct  evidence  of  him  having  come  to  the  adverse
         attention of the Iranian authorities as a  result  of  his  claimed
         activities on behalf of the KDP. It is  further  arguable  that  in
         finding that the Appellant left Iran illegally because,  'there  is
         no evidence that he left Iran  legally',  the  Tribunal  applied  a
         reverse burden of proof. All three grounds of the  application  are
         thus arguable and permission was granted."


Submissions

4.   Mr Tarlow relied on the  grounds  and  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    recited the facts in some detail but had failed  to  make  findings  on
    those facts. It was accepted that the Appellant was an ethnic Kurd from
    Iran and that he was a child. However, there were no findings as to the
    plausibility of a young boy distributing leaflets or  whether  the  KDP
    would permit him to do so at such a  young  age.   Even  to  the  lower
    standard the Appellant had not shown he was in  need  of  international
    protection. The judge had also erred in reversing the burden  of  proof
    in finding that there was no evidence the Appellant had  left  legally.
    The decision could not stand because there were no findings made on the
    facts and no reasons for why the Appellant  was  seeking  international
    protection. Mr Tarlow submitted that if I found an error I should remit
    the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   Ms  Peterson  submitted  that  the  judge  dealt  with  credibility  at
    paragraphs 6 and 7 and found the Appellant's account to be credible. He
    had been distributing leaflets with his friends  and  had  exited  Iran
    illegally. The judge had in mind a Convention reason, imputed political
    opinion, which he dealt with at paragraph 3 of the decision.
6.   The  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  has  a  fear  of
    persecution because  of  his  ethnicity,  Kurdish,  and  his  political
    opinion or imputed opinion because he distributed leaflets for the KDP.
    Also, the Appellant feared persecution on return because of what is set
    out at paragraph 24. The Appellant said that two of his work mates were
    arrested and he did not know what had happened to them.

7.   Ms Peterson submitted that  the  judge  had  accepted  the  Appellant's
    account as credible and he dealt with the distribution of  leaflets  in
    some detail, stating at paragraph  10:  "There  is  nothing  incredible
    about this evidence in my view looking through the eyes of  a  13  year
    old which I must and not an adult. Here was a child in effect  who  was
    bored in his village; there was nothing to do and he was asked by  some
    friends to him distribute leaflets.  He had not met any KDP members  to
    advise him how and when to distribute and  all  he  knew  was  that  he
    wanted something to do, he did not understand the dangers  of  what  he
    had done until later when two friends  of  his  were  arrested  by  the
    Iranian authorities for distributing leaflets."

8.   Ms Peterson submitted that the judge had found the Appellant's  account
    credible. He had distributed leaflets for the KDP. His friends had been
    arrested for doing the same. As a result, another  friend  had  advised
    the Appellant to leave Iran and he did so illegally, on foot across the
    border into Turkey with the help of an agent, all  organised  and  paid
    for by his father. Ms Peterson submitted the judge applied the  country
    guidance of SSH and HR to those findings. She submitted that  being  of
    Kurdish ethnicity and leaving Iran illegally may not in  itself  result
    in persecution on return.  However, the judge found that the  Appellant
    would be at risk because of  his  imputed  political  opinion.  He  had
    distributed leaflets on behalf of the KDP, his  two  friends  had  been
    arrested and may well have given his name. Applying the lower  standard
    the Appellant was a refugee and there was no arguable error of  law  in
    the judge's decision.


Discussion and Conclusions

9.   The judge accepted the Appellant's account and  dealt  at  length  with
    what the Appellant said in relation to distributing  leaflets  for  the
    KDP. His finding that the Appellant had distributed  leaflets  for  the
    KDP was one which was open to the judge on the evidence before him  and
    he gave adequate reasons for his conclusions. The  point  made  in  the
    grant  of  permission,  that  the  judge  failed  to  deal   with   the
    plausibility of the KDP causing or permitting  the  Appellant  to  take
    such a risk, was not relevant given the judge's findings at  paragraphs
    9 to 24. In those paragraphs, the judge deals with what  the  Appellant
    said about distributing leaflets  and  found  that,  not  only  did  he
    distribute leaflets, but his friends were arrested and  he  was  afraid
    that they would give his name.



10.  This was not a case where the judge recited  the  Appellant's  account,
    and the submissions, and failed to make findings of fact. I  accept  to
    some degree Mr Tarlow's criticism that the  decision  could  have  been
    clearer and the  factual  findings  made  clear  but,  on  reading  the
    decision as a whole, the judge accepted  the  Appellant's  account  and
    accepted that he had distributed leaflets on behalf of the KDP. He gave
    adequate reasons for coming  to  those  conclusions.  Accordingly,  the
    Appellant has a well founded fear of  persecution  on  account  of  his
    imputed political opinion.

11.  The judge did not reverse the burden of proof. He made  a  finding,  at
    paragraph 19, that the  Appellant  had  left  Iran  illegally  with  no
    passport. That, as well  as  being  Kurdish,  would  draw  him  to  the
    attention of the authorities  on  return.  The  judge's  statement,  at
    paragraph 25, that "There is  no  reason  for  me  to  doubt  that  the
    Appellant exited Iran illegally. There is no evidence that he had  left
    Iran legally in any way and entered through a port of  entry"  was  not
    inconsistent with his previous finding and did not demonstrate that  he
    had  applied  a  reverse  burden  or  proof.  The  judge  accepted  the
    Appellant's evidence of how he left Iran and there was no  evidence  to
    the contrary.

11.  Accordingly, I am not persuaded by the grounds  of  appeal.  The  judge
    did make findings on the main issue in dispute and the majority of  the
    decision deals with the Appellant's distribution of  leaflets  for  the
    KDP.  The judge concentrates on that issue because  it  is  that  issue
    which puts the Appellant at risk on return and that issue which engages
    the Convention. The judge's  findings  could  have  been  clearer,  but
    reading the decision as a whole, it was plain that the  judge  accepted
    the Appellant's account and found that he would be at  risk  on  return
    because of his imputed political opinion.

12.  Grounds 2 and 3 are not made out because the judge found  there  was  a
    Convention reason and he gave adequate reasons for  why  the  Appellant
    has a well founded fear. The judge did  not  find  that  the  Appellant
    would be at risk because of his Kurdish ethnicity. He  found  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk because he was a Kurd, he  exited  illegally
    and there was a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  the  authorities
    would be aware that he had distributed leaflets  for  the  KDP  in  the
    past. The Appellant would be at risk because of his  imputed  political
    opinion. The judge did not fail to apply relevant country guidance.

13.  I find that there is no error of law  in  the  judge's  decision  dated
    24th January 2017. I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 10th May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



