
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07163/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2017                          |On 6 December 2017            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          MR JUSTICE JULIAN KNOWLES
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S A

                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare issues.  We  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the respondent (the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal appeal) is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Toal, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   For the sake of continuity, we will refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision dated 30  June
    2016 to refuse a human rights  claim  in  the  context  of  deportation
    proceedings. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey allowed the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 03 October 2017.  He  was  satisfied  that  the
    particular care provided by the  appellant  to  his  severely  autistic
    child amounted to 'very compelling circumstances' that  outweighed  the
    significant public interest in deportation.

3.   We find that the grounds do not disclose  any  errors  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.

4.   The grounds essentially raise two points.  The first  ground  was  that
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to  address  the  issue  of  alternative
    care.  First, it is not clear that that point was even  argued  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing although it is of  course  reasonable
    to infer that social services have  a  duty  to  assist  families  with
    children with special needs if the family is unable to provide adequate
    care.  Second, we are satisfied that the judge made sufficient findings
    at paragraph 42 to explain why it was that the particular  relationship
    the  appellant  has  with  the  child  was  so  important.    In   such
    circumstances, it was the separation of the child from his father  that
    formed  part  of  the  very  compelling  circumstances  the  judge  was
    considering.  We do not consider that it was an error of  law  for  the
    judge not to go on to consider whether social services  care  would  be
    adequate when, on his own findings, it would clearly not be adequate.

5.   The second point asserted that the judge failed to give  clear  reasons
    as to why other family members could not assist with the  care  of  the
    child.  Again, we consider that  the  judge  gave  more  than  adequate
    reasons to explain why he concluded  that  other  family  members  were
    unable to assist in paragraph 21.  The judge heard evidence  and  could
    assess the difficulties that those family members might have.  He noted
    in that their evidence was not  challenged  in  cross-examination.   In
    such circumstances, it was open to the judge to conclude that the other
    family members in the UK were unable to  provide  adequate  care  to  a
    child with such special needs.

6.   Mr Tufan raised  other  points  in  his  submissions,  which  were  not
    included in the grounds of appeal. We find that  there  is  nothing  in
    those  points.  Whether  the  judge  referred  to  the  test  as  'very
    exceptional  circumstances'  or  'very  compelling  circumstances'   is
    immaterial. Even if the judge referred inaccurately to a test of  'very
    exceptional circumstances' it is arguably a higher test. The judge  was
    nevertheless satisfied that there were such compelling circumstances in
    this case.

7.   Mr Tufan also argued  that  the  judge  made  unclear  findings  as  to
    whether the children were British. Again, we conclude that the point is
    immaterial. Whether or not the children were 'qualifying  children'  at
    the date of the deportation decision  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    consider whether there were very compelling compassionate circumstances
    that outweighed the weight to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
    deportation regardless of the nationality of the  appellant's  children
    or their length of residence.

8.   For these reasons, we conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand

Signed   [pic]                  Date  05 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


