
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07053/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2018                              |On 20 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  daud [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Fazli, Sohaid Fatimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Daud [S], was born on [ ] 1998 and is a male citizen  of
    Afghanistan.   He  applied  for  international   protection   but   his
    application was refused by a decision of the respondent dated  14  July
    2017.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Buckwell)  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 13 September 2017, dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside.  My reasons for reaching that decision are as follows.  First, I
    find that the judge has misunderstood the evidence.  The judge properly
    observes at [56]  that  the  credibility  of  the  appellant  was  "the
    critical aspect" of the appeal.  He rejected that credibility,  finding
    that the appellant was wholly unreliable as a witness.   At  [58],  the
    judge noted  that  the  appellant  had  given  "differing  accounts  in
    relation to his family and their claimed death or disappearance".   The
    judge wrote that,

         "The appellant of course stated at the hearing that his father  had
         sold their sheep to raise funds  for  him  to  be  brought  out  of
         Afghanistan by an agent.  However, at least in one version  of  the
         account about the sale of the sheep, the appellant's  father  would
         in fact have been dead (as the appellant believed) before  he  left
         Afghanistan and before the claimed sale of sheep would  have  taken
         place."

    At the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal, it was  not  possible  to
    identify any part of the appellant's written evidence or the record  of
    the hearing kept by the judge or the representatives of the appellant's
    oral evidence which indicated that the appellant had claimed  that  his
    father had sold the sheep.  Whilst some considerable confusion  appears
    to have arisen, not least in the appellant's own mind, as to whether or
    not his parents were alive or dead, the particular anomaly  upon  which
    the judge relied (that a dead man could not sell sheep) was not present
    at all in the appellant's evidence.  On any reading  of  the  decision,
    the judge attached considerable  weight  to  what  he  thought  was  an
    anomaly in the evidence; indeed, he considered that he had rendered the
    appellant's account "absurd" [59].  The  appellant  is  entitled  to  a
    rational decision based on the evidence which he has  actually  adduced
    not on a misreading of the evidence.  In the circumstances,  the  judge
    has erred in law such that the decision cannot stand.

 3. Secondly, the judge has not made any findings regarding the documentary
    evidence upon which the appellant relied.   The  judge  refers  to  the
    evidence at [14] and goes on  to  note  at  [40]  that  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the evidence should  be  considered  on  Tanveer
    Ahmed principles (Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 402).   Whilst  the  judge
    records that he was "asked to accord [the  documentary  evidence]  very
    low evidential weight" at no point in his analysis does he refer  again
    to the documentary evidence.  He remains entirely unclear  as  to  what
    weight, if any, he has attributed to the documentary evidence.

 4. In the circumstances, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside.  The findings of fact are set aside.  There will need  to  be  a
    new fact-finding exercise which is better conducted in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to which this appeal is now returned to remake  the  decision.
    At the Upper Tribunal hearing, the appellant's representative went into
    some detail regarding the appellant's knowledge at  various  points  in
    time regarding the death of his parents.  In particular,  it  is  clear
    that the evidence which the appellant  gave  at  his  asylum  interview
    regarding his parents was, for whatever reason, not accurate.  No doubt
    this aspect of the case and the explanations  given  by  the  appellant
    will become the subject for scrutiny at the  next  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 13 September 2017  is
set aside.  None of the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The  appeal  is
returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Buckwell) for  that  Tribunal
to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 18 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date     18 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
