
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07549/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 August 2017                        |On 19th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                    Mr KJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Allison, Allison Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a national of Kosovo whose date of birth is [ ]  1994.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  16  June  2010  as  an
    unaccompanied minor.  He claimed asylum on 2  July  2010.   His  asylum
    claim was refused on 26 August 2010 but he  was  granted  discretionary
    leave until 9 April 2012.  He did not appeal against the refusal of his
    asylum claim.

 3. On 4 April 2012 the appellant made an application for further leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.   The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    application for further leave on 4 December 2014  and  his  appeal  was
    certified.  However, after an application for judicial review  of  that
    decision and the signing of a consent order, it  was  withdrawn  and  a
    fresh decision made on 23 June 2016.  It was against this  decision  to
    refuse  his  claim  that  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant confirmed that the appeal  on  asylum  grounds
    was withdrawn and the appeal would  proceed  on  human  rights  grounds
    only.

    The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. In a decision promulgated on 24 February 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Talbot dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The Tribunal found  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   The
    Tribunal found that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant and his wife continuing their family life in Kosovo and  that
    there  were  not  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   appellant's
    integration into Kosovo.  The judge considered the appellant's  Article
    8 private and family life outside of the Immigration  Rules  and  found
    that it would not be disproportionate to remove the appellant.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 16 June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen
    granted permission to appeal on 3 of the  4  grounds  of  appeal.   The
    appellant renewed his application  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    remaining ground and on  10  July  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede
    granted the appellant permission to appeal so that all grounds  may  be
    argued.

    The appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 6. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge made insufficient  findings
    in respect of insurmountable obstacles.  It is submitted that the judge
    failed to grapple  with  the  specific  fears  raised  in  the  witness
    statement of Mrs J and the supporting evidence.  Reference is  made  in
    particular to crime  that  she  would  be  constantly  targeted,  civil
    disorder in Kosovo, not being able freely to  earn  a  living  or  live
    there, health in grave danger  because  of  a  widespread  shortage  of
    medicines and other essentials,  Crimean  Congo  haemorrhage  fever  is
    endemic in Kosovo.  It is  asserted  that  given  the  issue,  specific
    reasons itemised by Mrs J in her witness statement and  the  supporting
    evidence from the Foreign & Commonwealth Office it was incumbent on the
    judge to provide a degree of particularity of reasoning  and  that  the
    generalised findings are insufficient to dispose of the issue.

 7. It is asserted that the judge in balancing the factors outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules noted that there are  significant  balancing  factors
    the first of which was the basis of the appellant's  claim  for  asylum
    which the judge concluded he  considered  it  highly  likely  that  the
    appellant's claim of blood feud was simply an  attempt  to  secure  his
    stay in the UK.  The judge had no jurisdiction to make a finding on the
    asylum claim or the basis of the asylum claim of  the  appellant.   The
    asylum appeal had been withdrawn.   It is  asserted  that  the  judge's
    finding was unsustainable in view of the evidence.  At its highest  the
    evidence before the judge was  a  factually  unresolved  but  withdrawn
    asylum appeal.  It was not open to the  judge  to  resolve  the  asylum
    appeal or the basis of the asylum claim.  The judge's finding  was  not
    open to him to  make  on  the  evidence  and  therefore  rendering  his
    findings perverse and unsustainable.

 8. It is asserted that the judge having set out  the  proper  standard  of
    proof in paragraph 14 of the decision  nevertheless  adopted  a  higher
    standard than that required when assessing the proportionality  of  the
    removal of the appellant in concluding that he was not  satisfied  that
    this significantly tilts matters in  the  appellant's  favour.   It  is
    submitted that to establish a balance of probability  the  pendulum  of
    evidence does  not  have  to  swing  significantly  in  favour  of  the
    appellant.  It appears from the judge's conclusion  that  there  was  a
    swing in favour of the appellant but that it was not significant.   The
    adoption of a standard  of  proof  that  the  tilt  in  favour  of  the
    appellant had to be significant for him to be successful was  an  error
    of law.  It is submitted that this error of law is material because  it
    is on this basis that the determination was ultimately decided.

 9. It is submitted that there was no evidence to justify  the  finding  of
    fact made by the judge that  the  appellant's  immigration  status  was
    precarious when he established his private and family life in  the  UK.
    No reason has been given for that finding.  Reliance is placed  on  the
    case of Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803,  in  particular  paragraph
    44.  It is submitted that the errors are individually  or  collectively
    material.

10. In oral submissions Mr Allison submitted that the task of the judge was
    to deal with the concerns of Mrs J.  The judge  was  required  to  deal
    with each point and to engage with the concerns raised by Mrs J in  her
    witness statement and with the Foreign & Commonwealth Office  guidance.
    He referred to paragraph 10 of Mrs  J's  witness  statement  where  she
    expressed concern about the advice given by the Foreign &  Commonwealth
    Office.  She was concerned about the great  danger  and  the  level  of
    crime.  He submitted that she would be assumed  to  be  carrying  large
    amounts of cash and therefore be a target for criminals.

11. He submitted that she would be going to Kosovo as a  foreigner  because
    her accent when speaking Albanian would be very different  because  she
    has lived in the United Kingdom  all  her  life.   The  judge  has  not
    considered the explanation that when visiting Kosovo she was  with  her
    family.  He submitted that it is clear from the Foreign &  Commonwealth
    Office report that the health system is poorly funded.  In  essence  Mr
    Allison's submissions  were  that  any  woman  going  to  Kosovo  as  a
    foreigner would face insurmountable obstacles in integrating.

12. With  regard  to  the  assessment  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  he
    submitted that the adverse findings with regard to the asylum appeal at
    paragraph 26 were not open to the judge on the evidence.  The judge has
    taken this into account in the balancing exercise and therefore this is
    a material error of law.  This  infected  the  judge's  proportionality
    assessment.

13. With regard to the precarious immigration status he submitted that  the
    judge had made it clear that the appellant was in the UK lawfully.  The
    appellant's leave could not be considered to be precarious  because  he
    had been granted discretionary leave to remain.  Discretionary leave to
    remain that was granted before 2012 led automatically to settlement and
    therefore the appellant could not be considered to have considered  his
    leave in the United Kingdom to have been precarious.  He submitted that
    all this information was in the  public  domain  even  if  it  was  not
    brought to the judge's attention. The judge would have known  that  the
    appellant was granted discretionary leave to remain  from  the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter.  The appellant had come to the United Kingdom as  a
    child and that if granted discretionary leave at  no  point  could  the
    appellant have thought his leave was precarious.  When undertaking  the
    proportionality assessment the judge  applied  the  wrong  standard  of
    proof by referring to the delay requiring  to  have  been  significant.
    This together with the asylum finding was core to the weight  that  the
    judge gave to the appellant's  case  and  tainted  the  proportionality
    exercise.

14. Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that in  essence
    the grounds of appeal and submissions amount to a disagreement with the
    findings of the judge.  He submitted that the appeal did not proceed on
    the basis  of  the  asylum  claim.   The  judge  correctly  dealt  with
    insurmountable obstacles referring to Agyarko in the Court  of  Appeal,
    now approved in the Supreme Court.  The  judge  gave  adequate  reasons
    between paragraphs 20 to 22 referring to aspects of the claim  such  as
    the language ability, the qualifications, the fact that  the  appellant
    can work.

15. The conclusions of the judge at paragraph 26 were ones that  were  open
    to him.  Any error regarding use of the word significantly would not be
    a material error of law but in any event what the judge was saying  was
    that he was not satisfied that  this  assisted  the  appellant's  case.
    Although there might be elements of hardship for the  appellant's  wife
    to go to Kosovo the very stringent  test  of  insurmountable  obstacles
    requires something significantly more than hardship.

16. In reply Mr Allison asserted that the judge gave no reason for  finding
    that the appellant's private life was established when his  immigration
    status was precarious.  The evidence before  the  judge  was  that  the
    appellant came to the UK when he was 15 and  sought  asylum  which  was
    refused but he was granted discretionary leave to remain for two and  a
    half years.  The judge  appears  to  have  misconstrued  how  the  word
    precarious is interpreted in the European and domestic law.   Reference
    is made to Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 at paragraph 28.

17. The judge's task is to provide reasons why the appellant's  immigration
    status throughout his stay was precarious or for imputing the requisite
    knowledge that the appellant knows or should have known that he has  no
    right to be in the UK.  Reference is made to  Rhuppiah  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 803.  Unlike the appellant in Rhuppiah, who came to the UK  as
    a student a condition of which was the intention to return at  the  end
    of the course, the appellant sought refuge  in  the  UK  as  an  asylum
    seeker and there is no condition and requirement of such  applicant  to
    have a temporary intention to stay in the United Kingdom.  The issue is
    whether a child of 15 could be imputed with the knowledge that  he  had
    no right to stay in the United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain in the UK and the Secretary of State  has
    a continuing policy that recipients of such discretionary  leave  leads
    to settlement.

    Discussion

18. The hurdle that the appellant must surmount to satisfy  the  test  that
    there are insurmountable obstacles to him and his wife integrating into
    Kosovo is a stringent test and a high hurdle to overcome.

19. In R (on the application of Agyarko) (Appellant) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department (Respondent) [2017] UKSC 11 the court held:

         43  ..."Insurmountable  obstacles"  is,  however,  the   expression
         employed by the Grand Chamber; and the court's  application  of  it
         indicates that it is a stringent test. In  Jeunesse,  for  example,
         there were said to be no insurmountable obstacles to the relocation
         of the family to Suriname, although the  children,  the  eldest  of
         whom was at secondary school, were Dutch nationals  who  had  lived
         there all their  lives,  had  never  visited  Suriname,  and  would
         experience a  degree  of  hardship  if  forced  to  move,  and  the
         applicant's  partner   was   in   full-time   employment   in   the
         Netherlands...

         44...The expression "insurmountable obstacles" is  now  defined  by
         paragraph EX.2 as  meaning  "very  significant  difficulties  which
         would be faced by the applicant  or  their  partner  in  continuing
         their family life together outside the UK and which  could  not  be
         overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or
         their partner." That definition appears to me to be consistent with
         the meaning which can be derived from the Strasbourg case law.

20. The judge in this case carefully considered all the evidence. The judge
    set out from paragraph 16:

         "16. I shall start by considering the evidence submitted by and  on
             behalf of the appellant.  I note that there is a  quantity  of
             supporting evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  private  and
             family life in the UK.  This includes  letters  and  character
             references from friends and family members  of  the  appellant
             and his wife; letters from his old school and evidence of  his
             educational qualifications; evidence of voluntary work he  has
             undertaken.  There are also photographs of the  appellant  and
             his wife, their marriage certificate  and  evidence  of  their
             cohabitation in the form of a council tax  bill.   I  have  no
             reason to challenge any of this evidence.  I am satisfied that
             the appellant and his wife have given a true account of  their
             private and family life in the  UK.   I  note  also  that  the
             appellant's life in the UK has significantly changed since  he
             made his application for  further  leave  in  2012,  which  is
             hardly surprising given the amount of time  that  has  elapsed
             since then.  The  most  important  change  of  course  is  his
             marriage and this raises key Article 8 issues relating to  his
             family life in the UK.

         17.  ...  With regard to the immigration status  requirements,  the
             appellant's immigration status is not that of  a  visitor;  he
             was not granted leave for a period of six months or less;  and
             he is not on temporary admission or in breach  of  immigration
             laws.

         18.  The appellant would therefore have to show that paragraph EX.1
             applies.  ...  The expression  'insurmountable  obstacles'  is
             defined at EX.2 as

                  'the very significant difficulties which would be faced by
                  the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
                  life together outside  the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
                  overcome or would entail very  serious  hardship  for  the
                  applicant or their partner.'

         19.  The key issue is whether there are insurmountable obstacles to
             the appellant and his wife continuing  their  family  life  in
             Kosovo.   In  assessing  this,  I  have  taken  note  of   the
             jurisprudence regarding  this  expression  and  including  the
             Court of Appeal case of Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 ...

         20.  On the one hand, I note that that appellant has lived  in  the
             UK for a period  of  some  six  and  a  half  years  during  a
             formative period of his life and has integrated well into  the
             country in terms of friendship,  studies,  qualifications  and
             marriage to a British citizen.  His wife has lived in  the  UK
             from the age of 1 and all her close family live here too.   On
             the other hand, the appellant still has his mother and brother
             in Kosovo and it is where he lived up to the age of 15,  which
             is still  the  majority  of  his  life.   His  wife,  although
             British, was born in Kosovo, still has extended family  living
             there and has visited Kosovo  with  her  family.   She  speaks
             Albanian as well as English.   Both  of  them  therefore  have
             continuing links with Kosovo and  could  therefore  expect  to
             enjoy some form of emotional and practical (if not  financial)
             support on their return.  The appellant is a qualified plumber
             and clearly this is a transferable skill which could help  him
             to find work in  Kosovo  even  if  he  needs  to  obtain  some
             additional local qualifications or certification.  I take into
             account the concerns expressed by Mrs J  about  poor  economic
             circumstances in Kosovo and the  prevalence  of  crime  and  I
             accept that the general quality of life is likely to be  lower
             than in the UK.  I turn finally to the oral evidence that  Mrs
             J's brother has cancer.  This  was  not  referred  to  in  her
             witness  statement  and  it  appears  that   the   appellant's
             representative was not even aware of the matter.  It  was  not
             backed up by any supporting evidence, no  details  were  given
             regarding the diagnosis or prognosis, and there  was  also  no
             indication of the appellant's closeness to her brother and any
             specific element of dependency.  In  the  absence  of  further
             evidence on this matter, I cannot give it great weight.

         21.  After taking into account all these  factors  and  bearing  in
             mind that EX.1(b) constitutes  a  stringent  test,  I  am  not
             satisfied that there are  'insurmountable  obstacles'  to  the
             couple continuing their family life  in  Kosovo.   I  conclude
             that the appellant does not come within Appendix FM.

         21. The judge has clearly considered and taken  into  account  all
             the evidence. A judge does not  have  to  particularise  every
             piece of evidence. The judge has referred to the evidence  and
             submissions regarding the appellant's wife's evidence and  the
             FCO travel advice in paragraphs 4, 10 and 13.  There  were  no
             specific  characteristics  identified  that  would  make   the
             appellant's  wife  particularly   vulnerable.   Mr   Allison's
             submissions were that any woman going to Kosovo as a foreigner
             would face insurmountable obstacles in  integrating.  In  this
             case the  judge,  when  reaching  his  decision,  specifically
             refers to the concerns expressed by the appellant's  wife.  It
             is of note that the appellant's wife has visited her  extended
             family in Kosovo and speaks Albanian. She would not  be  going
             to Kosovo as a lone woman as she would go with the  appellant.
             It is  not  the  task  of  the  judge  (as  submitted  by  the
             appellant) to set out how any obstacles can be  overcome.  The
             burden is on the  appellant  to  demonstrate  that  there  are
             insurmountable obstacles. The findings of the judge were  ones
             that were open to him and it is clear that  the  evidence  was
             fully considered and adequate reasons were given

         22. With regard to the incorrect standard of proof the  judge  set
             out:

         "With regard to the delay in the Home Office's  decision-making,  I
         am not satisfied that  this  significantly  tilts  matters  in  the
         appellant's favour, ..."

         23. The judge is not departing from the standard of proof (as  set
             out correctly by the judge in paragraph 14). On the  facts  of
             this appeal, which  was  solely  concerned  with  private  and
             family life, the delay is a  factor  he  has  accrued  to  his
             advantage. The judge is simply recording that  the  delay  did
             not make a difference to the outcome.

         24. The appellant asserts that the judge had  no  jurisdiction  to
             determine his asylum claim and that his findings infected  the
             proportionality assessment. The judge set out the following:

         "Firstly,  I  note  that  the  appellant  came  to  the  UK  as  an
         unaccompanied minor in 2010, claiming that he was in mortal  danger
         on return because of a blood feud against him (which would continue
         until no men were left alive in the family).  The Home  Office  did
         not accept his claim of a blood feud and refused his asylum  claim.
         The appellant has now dropped his claim and in  seeking  to  resist
         his removal, he now no longer relies on it in this appeal.  In  the
         absence of any explanation for this, I consider  it  highly  likely
         that the appellant's claim of a blood feud was simply an attempt to
         secure his stay in the UK. "

         25. The judge has not 'determined' the appellant's  asylum  claim.
             To do so the judge would have  had  to  reach  a  decision  on
             whether or not the appellant was entitled to protection  as  a
             refugee. The appeal was against the  respondent's  refusal  of
             his asylum claim as well as the private and family life claim.
             As recorded by the judge at  the  start  of  the  hearing  the
             appellant confirmed that he had withdrawn his  asylum  appeal.
             The reason for withdrawing the asylum appeal was not  relevant
             and therefore the judge ought not to have speculated as to why
             the appeal had been withdrawn. The judge  also  ought  not  to
             have  factored  this  into   the   proportionality   balancing
             exercise.  However,  this  was  only  one  factor  taken  into
             consideration and I do not consider,  on  the  facts  of  this
             case,  that  this  error  was  material.   In   Agyarko   when
             explaining how a court or tribunal should consider  whether  a
             refusal of leave to remain was compatible with Article  8  the
             Supreme Court made  it  clear  that  the  critical  issue  was
             generally whether, giving due weight to the  strength  of  the
             public  interest  in  removal,  the  article   8   claim   was
             sufficiently strong to outweigh it. In SS (Congo)  (Appellant)
             v Entry Clearance Officer, Nairobi (Respondent [2017] UKSC  10
             the court (referring to the case of Huang) confirmed:

         "Failure to qualify under the rules is not conclusive; rather it is
         (in Lord Bingham's words) - "... the point at which to  begin,  not
         end, consideration of the claim under article 8. The terms  of  the
         rules  are  relevant  to  that  consideration,  but  they  are  not
         determinative."" (para 6)

         26. In this case the First-tier Tribunal found that the  appellant
             did not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  This
             is the starting point. There were no specific factors relevant
             to the circumstances of the appellant or his wife that had not
             already been considered under the Rules  that  would  indicate
             that their claim under Article 8 was  sufficiently  strong  to
             outweigh the public interest in removal of the appellant.  The
             judge having considered in detail all the factors relevant  to
             the appellant and his wife under the Rules clearly  considered
             those  factors  weighing  in  favour  of  the  appellant  when
             undertaking the proportionality exercise.  The  reasoning  and
             findings of the judge were:

          i) "I shall  consider  together  the  overlapping  issues  as  to
             whether there are compelling circumstances justifying a  grant
             of leave outside the Rules and whether any  interference  with
             the appellant's Article 8 rights would be proportionate to the
             legitimate  aim  of  the  respondent  in  the  maintenance  of
             immigration control.

         26.  I accept that there would be an element  of  hardship  to  the
             appellant in having to return to Kosovo after spending so long
             in the UK.  There would be an even greater degree of  hardship
             in his wife having to relocate to Kosovo, which clearly  is  a
             foreign country to her, as she has effectively  spent  all  of
             her life in the UK.  This would require a major adjustment  on
             her part.  However, there are significant  balancing  factors.
             Firstly, I note that the  appellant  came  to  the  UK  as  an
             unaccompanied minor in 2010, claiming that he  was  in  mortal
             danger on return because of a blood feud  against  him  (which
             would continue until no men were left alive  in  the  family).
             The Home Office did not accept his claim of a blood  feud  and
             refused his asylum claim.  The appellant has now  dropped  his
             claim and in seeking to resist his removal, he now  no  longer
             relies  on  it  in  this  appeal.   In  the  absence  of   any
             explanation for this, I consider it  highly  likely  that  the
             appellant's claim of a blood feud was  simply  an  attempt  to
             secure his stay in the UK.  So far as his life in  the  UK  is
             concerned, I note that under Section  117B(5),  little  weight
             should be given to a private life which was established  at  a
             time when his immigration status  was  precarious.   (Although
             S.117B(5) does not extend to the issue of family life,  it  is
             relevant to note that the appellant's  relationship  with  his
             wife was  also  established  at  a  time  when  his  stay  was
             precarious.) When considering both 'compelling  circumstances'
             and  proportionality,  I  also  take  into  account  that  the
             appellant's wife does have an option of remaining  in  the  UK
             and waiting  for  her  husband  to  make  an  entry  clearance
             application under the Immigration Rules.  With regard  to  the
             delay in the Home Office's decision-making, I am not satisfied
             that this  significantly  tilts  matters  in  the  appellant's
             favour, especially given the fact of his having arrived in the
             UK on the basis of an unsubstantiated asylum claim that he has
             now withdrawn.

         27.  Taking all of the above factors into account, I conclude  that
             there are no compelling circumstances to support an Article  8
             claim  outside   the   ambit   of   the   Immigration   Rules.
             Furthermore, any interference with the appellant's private and
             family  life  (and  that  of  his  family  member)  would   be
             proportionate to the  Secretary  of  State's  legitimate  aim.
             ..."

         27.  There  was  no  material  error  of  law   in   the   judge's
             proportionality balancing exercise.

         28. The appellant asserts that the judge is  required  to  explain
             why the appellant's immigration status is precarious. That  is
             incorrect. The starting position is that where a  person  does
             not have leave to remain in the UK on a permanent  basis  then
             generally their leave will be precarious. In Deelah and others
             (section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT 00515  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
             held that the adjective "precarious" in section 117B(5) of the
             2002 Act does not contemplate only, and is not restricted  to,
             temporary admission to the United Kingdom or a grant of  leave
             to remain in a category which  permits  no  expectation  of  a
             further grant. In Rhuppiah it  was  held  in  the  context  of
             section 117B, the relevance of precariousness  of  immigration
             status was the effect it had on the extent of protection which
             should be afforded to private life for  the  purposes  of  the
             Article 8 proportionality balancing exercise. The more that an
             immigrant should be taken to have understood that his  or  her
             time in the host country would be comparatively short or would
             be liable to termination, the more the host State was able  to
             say that a fair balance between the rights of  the  individual
             and  the  general  public  interest  in  the  firm  and   fair
             enforcement of immigration controls should come down in favour
             of removal when  the  leave  expired  (paras  30  -  34).  The
             appellant argues that he had no expectation that his leave was
             precarious. It was argued that the respondent has a continuing
             policy that recipients of such discretionary  leave  leads  to
             settlement. I was referred to the Home  Office  Asylum  Policy
             Instruction - Discretionary Leave, version 7.0  of  18  August
             2015. None of these arguments appear to have been made  before
             the First-tier Tribunal judge  instead it is argued that  this
             information is all in the public domain and the  judge  should
             have inferred this as the reasons for refusal letter  set  out
             that the appellant had been granted DLR. The judge  cannot  be
             expected to have taken such issues into account in the absence
             of any evidence or submissions. This is not an  obvious  point
             in the 'Robinson' sense. Whilst, as is made clear in Rhuppiah,
             some immigrants with leave to  remain  falling  short  of  ILR
             could be regarded as being very settled indeed and  as  having
             an immigration status which is not properly to be described as
             'precarious' the appellant could not have had  any  legitimate
             expectation when he entered the UK that he would be allowed to
             settle here permanently. His asylum claim was refused  and  he
             withdrew his appeal against that decision. He was  granted  20
             months discretionary leave to remain.  He  knew  that  he  was
             required to apply for further leave which he did in  2012.  In
             Rhuppiah it was held that although courts should  have  regard
             to the consideration that little weight  should  be  given  to
             private  life  established   when   immigration   status   was
             precarious, it was  possible  to  override  such  guidance  in
             exceptional cases where the private life  had  a  special  and
             compelling character. As set out above there were  no  special
             factors identified in this case. There was no  material  error
             of law in the judge's application of the factors in s117B.

         29. There were no material error of law on the First-tier Tribunal
             decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the Secretary of State stands.





Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 17 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
















