
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07157/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th February 2019                          |On 14th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                Ms Poula [C]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M J Azmi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mathews, promulgated on 17th January 2018, following a hearing at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 20th December 2017.  In the determination, the judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, and  was  born  on  20th  March
    1981.  She is a female.  She has two children, both of them girls,  and
    they are aged 7 years and 4 years currently.  Both children  were  born
    in the UK.  There is also a third child, who is the stepdaughter of the
    Appellant, and she has reached the age of 18 already, having been  born
    on 4th June 1999.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant made an asylum claim on 14th January 2016.  However,  she
    then did not attend appointments  for  substantive  interviews.   These
    were offered on two separate days.   No  explanation  was  given.   The
    Respondent proceeded to refuse the application on 7th July  2016.   The
    background of the Appellant is that she  made  a  visa  application  to
    visit the UK in March 2004 from Zimbabwe, contending that she wanted to
    make a short visit whilst in transit within Europe.   She  returned  to
    Zimbabwe.  The Appellant then left Zimbabwe  on  her  own  passport  to
    enter the UK in July 2010.  She was granted an EEA  residence  card  on
    the basis of her husband's claimed Irish  nationality.   The  card  was
    valid until 9th June 2016.  The present asylum claim was then  made  on
    14th January 2016.

The Judge's Determination

 4. The judge heard the Appellant's evidence.  She  claimed  that  she  had
    worked as a journalist for a number of years in  Zimbabwe.   The  judge
    found there to be no evidence of this.  She claimed to have been  raped
    by her boss in 2009.  The judge was not satisfied  that  this  was  the
    case.  In the end, the judge was clear that the Appellant had not  been
    a journalist, not been raped, not been employed in Zimbabwe as claimed,
    and did not have a viable protection claim upon arrival as  she  stated
    (see paragraph 28).  A further feature of  this  appeal  was  that  the
    Appellant's husband was presently  serving  a  ten  year  sentence  for
    facilitating illegal immigration.   Her  two  daughters,  who  are  the
    natural daughters of the husband, made monthly visits in prison to  see
    their father.  The Appellant's own evidence was that she was  not  sure
    whether her own relationship was still viable with her  husband.   This
    is something that she will only know once he  had  been  released  from
    prison in 2020.

 5. In the end, the  judge  fell  back  on  a  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the children.  He observed that the younger  two  children
    were born in the UK.  They had lived their  entire  lives  here.   They
    were at primary school here.  They were doing well.  They  are  settled
    in a family unit  with  their  mother.   They  have  no  experience  of
    Zimbabwe.  They made regular visits to see their father in prison.  The
    judge observed that "it is clearly in their best  interests  that  they
    remain in the  care  of  their  mother".   He  found  that  their  best
    interests "would lie in them being able to continue  in  their  settled
    education and residence in the United Kingdom,  any  move  to  Zimbabwe
    would be a considerable upheaval ..." (paragraph 36).

 6. The judge also gave consideration to the older  child.   This  was  the
    stepchild.  The judge observed that she was now 18 years old.  She  had
    been in the UK for over seven years.  The conclusion of the  judge  was
    that she was "at a critical point, seeking to go on  to  university  to
    continue her studies" (paragraph 37).  She had lived in the UK  all  of
    her life except the first ten years of her  eighteen  years  (paragraph
    37).

 7. However, the two younger children  had  not  accumulated  seven  years'
    residence (paragraph 49).  In the end, the judge's  decision  was  that



         "To severe completely the contact between father and  children,  as
         would be the case if  the  Appellant  were  to  be  removed,  is  a
         disproportionate decision  in  the  unusual  circumstances  of  the
         present case.  It is the position of the children, and  their  best
         interests that I find tips the balance in this case, and I note  of
         course that their best interests are not a so called 'trump cards'"
         (paragraph 60).

 8. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  give  weight
    to the public interest on the facts of  this  case  when  allowing  the
    appeal on the basis of Article 8.  Whilst  it  was  necessary  to  have
    regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the   children   as   a   primary
    consideration, it was  also  important  to  bear  in  mind  the  public
    interest factors, which point away from granting a right to remain,  in
    the face of the fact that the children's father was facing a long  term
    in  prison  of  ten  years,  after  which  she  would  be  subject   to
    deportation.

10. On 21st February 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 7th February 2019.   Miss  Aboni  submitted
    that the judge was wrong to have allowed the appeal.  The children were
    only visiting their father in prison.  The Appellant was their  primary
    carer.  If the Appellant were to be removed so would the children  also
    be removed with her, and in time the father would be  deported  at  the
    end of his sentence in 2020 as well.  The  visits  in  themselves  were
    only twice a month.  The eldest child, the qualifying  child,  who  had
    reached 18 years of age, was his stepdaughter.  Second, however,  there
    had been a further development of recent.

12. This  was  that  the  Appellant  herself  had  now  been  sentenced  to
    imprisonment on account of having committed fraud.  On  21st  May  2018
    she was convicted and sentenced to three years.  There has not  as  yet
    been a deportation order.  However, it  is  plain  that  she  would  be
    subject to removal in due course as well.  Given the recent  change  in
    circumstance, the appropriate course of action was to make a finding of
    an error of law on the basis of Judge Mathews' decision,  and  then  to
    remit this matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal,  so  that  all  the
    facts could be considered again.

13. For his part, Mr Azmi submitted that this was a case  where  the  judge
    had himself recognised that there were "unusual circumstances"  to  the
    present case (paragraph 60).  The children had their natural father  in
    this country.  It was true he was in  prison.   However,  the  children
    visited him there.  They were entitled to retain this aspect of  family
    life with him.  They had been born in this country.  They did not  know
    Zimbabwe.  They could not be expected  to  go  there  themselves.   The
    judge had considered the case law very properly (at  paragraphs  52  to
    56).  Moreover, the children's particular circumstances have been noted
    in terms of their "settled family unit with their mother and  siblings"
    (paragraph 36).  Any move to Zimbabwe would be a considerable  upheaval
    for them.  The position of the older child, who  had  reached  18,  was
    such that she was at a "critical point" (paragraph 37)  and  the  judge
    had been mindful of this consideration as well.  Another judge may well
    have come to a different conclusion.  However, this judge had come to a
    conclusion that was properly made out on the basis of the reasons given
    and there could be no error of law.  In fact, the judge was  clear  (at
    paragraph 60) that the presence of children was not a "trump card".

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

15. First, this is a  case  where  the  Appellant  herself  is  subject  to
    removal.  There are children.  They are  aged  7  years  and  5  years.
    However, it is the Appellant who is the primary carer of the  children.
    The children's natural father is in prison.  He  is  being  visited  by
    them twice a month.  However, the father himself is subject to  removal
    as well.  In the end the entire family faces a removal to  Zimbabwe  on
    the  basis  of  the  position  "in  the  real  world"  as  the   latest
    jurisprudence now emphasises.  The children are expected  to  be  where
    the parents will  be.   Although  their  position  must  be  considered
    specifically as children, in an indirect  manner,  the  impact  of  the
    parents' situation will be felt by them in the eventual decision to  be
    reached.   The  judge's  conclusion,  on  the  basis  of  the  "unusual
    circumstances" where the visit by the two girls is to their  father  in
    prison is not sustainable  bearing  in  mind  the  public  interest  in
    immigration control and the Section 117B considerations.

16. Second, the fact that the Appellant herself has now been  convicted  of
    fraud, and sentenced  to  three  years'  imprisonment,  and  likely  to
    herself face removal, means that  the  position  of  these  very  young
    children cannot be determinative in terms  of  the  overall  bounds  of
    considerations.  The ultimate decision cannot be made without  all  the
    evidence being considered again and for this reason, although I make  a
    finding of an error of law in relation to the first reason that I  give
    above, the existence of the second reason by way of the development  of
    recent events, means that the appropriate course of action is for  this
    decision to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal and to be heard
    again, by a judge other than Judge Mathews.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.   This
    appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Mathews, pursuant to practice statement 7.2(b).

18. No anonymity direction is made.

19. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th March 2019

