
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07171/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 February 2020                           |On 12 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                   MISS EB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Benjamin Hawkin, Counsel - instructed by
                    Lillywhite Williams & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 25 May 1998.  She appeals
    with permission against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Carroll dismissing her appeal against a decision  dated  11  July  2019
    refusing her protection and human rights claim.  Permission  to  appeal
    to this Tribunal was granted on 20 December 2019 by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Osborne.

Background

 2. The appellant claimed asylum on 26 September 2016 on the basis that she
    was a victim of trafficking in Albania and that there would be  a  real
    risk of her being re-trafficked were she to return to  Albania  due  to
    her individual circumstances which included the fact that she  has  two
    illegitimate children and  is  vulnerable  due  to  her  mental  health
    problems.  She also claims to be at risk of domestic  violence.  On  23
    February 2017 the appellant  was  referred  to  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism.  A positive reasonable grounds decision was  made  in  March
    2017 and on 4 March 2019 it was  concluded  that  the  appellant  is  a
    victim of modern slavery.

First-tier Tribunal Decision

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll dismissed the appeal finding that the
    appellant was not credible and that there would be no risk  to  her  on
    return to Albania.

The Grounds of Challenge

 4. The appellant submits that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    flawed in the following material respects;

    Ground 1 - Failure to take into account  material  considerations  when
    assessing credibility.

    The Judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility is flawed because
    it fails to take into account the conclusive grounds decision  made  by
    the National Referral Mechanism on 4 March 2019  and  the  respondent's
    concession in the asylum  refusal  that  the  appellant  was  sexuality
    exploited in Albania; nor are there any specific findings  of  fact  in
    relation to her abuse  in  Albania.   There  are  additionally  factual
    errors in the assessment of credibility.

    Ground 2 - Internal flight.

    The Judge erred in failing to make  adequate  findings  in  respect  of
    whether an internal flight option was open to the appellant.

    Ground 3 - Sufficiency of protection

    The findings in  relation  to  sufficiency  of  protection  are  flawed
    because the Judge failed to take into consideration the acceptance that
    the appellant had been trafficked and there was no consideration of the
    expert evidence in relation to this issue.

    Ground 4 - Expert country and medical evidence.

    The Judge erred in  failing  to  assess  the  medical  evidence  of  Dr
    Korovilas and the expert report.  Further, the decision failed to  make
    adequate findings in respect of the medical  report  of  Dr  Singh,  in
    particular whether the appellant's mental health would deteriorate  and
    whether she would be at risk of suicide if returned to Albania.

    Ground 5 - Article 8 ECHR.

    Despite the skeleton argument making detailed submissions  in  relation
    to Article 8 ECHR and the best interests of  the  appellant's  children
    there are no findings or reasoning given in respect of Article 8 ECHR.

Reasons on error of law

 5. At the outset of the appeal Ms Everett for the respondent conceded that
    the grounds were made  out  in  respect  of  Ground  1  in  that,  when
    assessing credibility, the Judge failed to adequately take into account
    the conclusive National Referral Mechanism decision that the  appellant
    had been a victim of modern slavery.  She conceded  that  in  light  of
    this, the negative credibility findings were unsafe because they failed
    to deal with material issues.   I  am  in  agreement.  The  credibility
    assessment is flawed by the Judge's failure to take into  account  that
    the appellant has been found to be a victim of modern slavery and  that
    she had been previously trafficked and abused in Albania.  There  is  a
    complete lack of findings in relation to this material  issue,  without
    which the Judge is not able  to  adequately  assess  the  risk  to  the
    appellant on return to Albania as a previous victim of trafficking.

 6. I am also satisfied that there was a failure by  the  Judge  to  engage
    with Article 8 ECHR and a conspicuous lack of consideration of the best
    interests of the appellant's children.  Since Ground 1 and Ground 5 are
    made out, I do not go onto consider the remaining grounds.

 7. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of her asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  her  of   such
    consideration. Both parties were in agreement that it  was  appropriate
    to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of decision

 8. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.

 9. The decision is set aside in its entirety.

10. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a hearing de novo in front  of  a
    Judge other than FtT Judge Carroll.




    Signed  R J Owens                            Dated    9 March 2020

    Upper Tribunal Judge Owens




    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




