
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07934/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 November 2016                        |On 2 December 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           BERNADETTE BALLESTEROS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adekoya, Atlantic Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Bernadette Ballesteros, was born on 9 September 1976 and
    is a citizen of  the  Philippines.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Beg) against a decision of the respondent dated 27 July
    2016 to refuse to grant her asylum and  humanitarian  protection.   The
    First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on  21  September  2016,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant applied for a work permit visa in 2005 which was  granted
    to her.  That visa expired in 2006 but the appellant remained living in
    the United Kingdom.  She applied for leave to remain on  the  basis  of
    her family and private life in  July  2015  but  that  application  was
    refused.  She was arrested  in  May  2016  when  found  working  in  an
    oriental  supermarket.   On  1  June  2016,  the  appellant   requested
    voluntary departure to the Philippines.  However, on 2  June  2016  she
    submitted an application for an EEA residence card.   That  application
    was refused on 20 June 2016.  On 24 June 2016, on the day on which  she
    was served with removal directions, the appellant claimed asylum.  As a
    consequence, the removal directions were cancelled.

 3. The appellant's claim for asylum rests on her assertion that she  is  a
    lesbian.  Judge Beg found that she is not a lesbian and that she is not
    in a relationship with a Ms Amugod [24].  Because the appellant is  not
    a lesbian, the judge found that she was not at  risk  for  the  reasons
    that she claimed on return to the Philippines.

 4. The grounds of appeal challenged the judge's reasoning.  At  [19],  the
    judge found that,

         If the appellant was attracted to women she would have  known  that
         much before her meeting in 2012 with Ms Amugod.  I find that  prior
         to 2012 the appellant only had relationships with men.  She has two
         children from two separate relationships.  Her children  reside  in
         the Philippines and are cared for by her mother.

    The appellant asserts that there was no basis "in  law,  psychology  or
    medicine" for such a conclusion.  Further, at [21] the judge found that
    "Ms Amugod did not  notify  the  Home  Office  that  she  was  in  fact
    separated from  her  husband  and  that  the  marriage  was  no  longer
    subsisting.  I find that she continued to support the  EEA  application
    [of her husband]".  In the same paragraph, Judge Beg  records  that  Ms
    Amugod had claimed that her relationship with the appellant had started
    in 2012 at a time when she was still married to her husband.  She  also
    recorded that "[Ms Amugod's] former mother-in-law  begged  her  not  to
    divorce because her former husband ... had  an  ongoing  EEA  residence
    card application".  The judge found that Ms  Amugod's  behaviour  "cast
    doubt over her overall credibility".   The  grounds  of  appeal  simply
    assert that the judge's assessment of the facts is  "wrong".   Although
    the grounds are not entirely clear, it appears to be asserted that  the
    judge was wrong to find that any link existed between the failure of Ms
    Amugod to inform the Home Office of  her  marriage  breakdown  and  the
    beginning of a relationship she claimed to  have  with  the  appellant.
    The ground has no merit.  The clear point made by the judge is that  Ms
    Amugod's behaviour in connection with the  residence  card  application
    and her dealings with the Home Office diminished her credibility  as  a
    witness generally.  The judge has not found that, because she continued
    the  EEA  residence  card  application,  she  could  not  have  had   a
    relationship with the  appellant  but  simply  that  her  (not  exactly
    candid) behaviour indicated that she was not a reliable witness.

 5. At [23], the judge noted that the appellant had been arrested on 28 May
    2016 at 222A Kilburn High Road, London NW6.   This  was  not  the  same
    address at which she claimed to be living with  her  partner.   In  her
    witness statement, the appellant claimed to have been living  with  her
    partner from November 2014.  The appellant claimed  that,  because  she
    was shocked at having been encountered by the immigration  authorities,
    she gave a false address.  The judge did not  find  that  claim  to  be
    credible.  The judge  went  on  to  attach  very  little  weight  to  a
    supporting letter which the appellant claimed had been sent by Millwood
    Kane Limited indicating  that  the  appellant  and  her  partner  lived
    together.  The judge has given reasons for not attaching much weight to
    that letter and I find her reasons are sound.   The  appellant  asserts
    that she could not have provided a tenancy agreement  for  any  of  the
    properties at which she  was  living  because  she  did  not  have  any
    immigration status.  I consider the findings which the judge  had  made
    at [23] to be much more general in nature  than  the  grounds  suggest;
    where the judge has stated that no tenancy agreement has been provided,
    she has acknowledged that no evidence whatever, apart from that of  the
    appellant and her partner (both found by the  judge  to  be  unreliable
    witnesses) had been produced to show that they lived together.  In  any
    event, the grounds fail to explain why, if the appellant and Ms  Amugod
    were living together, any tenancy agreement or licence to occupy  could
    not have been provided in Ms Amugod's name.

 6. This leaves the first ground of appeal which I have  summarised  above.
    Had the judge found that the appellant was not a lesbian solely because
    she only had relationships with men prior to 2012, then there may  have
    been some force in the ground of appeal.  However, she did not  do  so.
    At [20], she found a discrepancy in the appellant's evidence as to  why
    she had returned her son to the Philippines.  The appellant's  evidence
    on this point was not consistent with that of Ms Amugod.  Further, as I
    have recorded above, at [21] the judge gives cogent and  clear  reasons
    for  rejecting  the  reliability   of   Ms   Amugod   as   a   witness.
    Significantly, at [22] the judge noted  that  when  the  appellant  was
    arrested in May 2016 for working illegally she made no mention whatever
    of being  in  a  gay  relationship  or  of  fearing  returning  to  the
    Philippines  as  a  result  of  being  gay.   Indeed,  throughout   the
    appellant's lengthy immigration history  (summarised  above),  she  had
    made no mention of her claimed lesbianism until she was faced with  the
    imminence of removal from the United Kingdom.  In addition,  the  judge
    has quite properly attached weight to the fact  that,  as  recently  as
    June 2016, the appellant had voluntarily  requested  departure  to  the
    Philippines.  The fact that she had done so  and  subsequently  changed
    her mind and claimed asylum has not been adequately  explained  by  the
    appellant.  In consequence, it was open to the judge to find  that  the
    appellant's conduct had diminished  her  credibility.  So  far  as  the
    appellant's claim to have only in recent years become  aware  that  she
    was attracted to women, that claim must be viewed in the context of all
    the evidence.  I find  that  the  judge  has  carried  out  a  holistic
    analysis of the evidence and, even if she was wrong to attach weight to
    the appellant's late awareness of  her  homosexuality,  the  judge  has
    given ample other reasons (which are no way undermined by the  findings
    challenged in the grounds of  appeal)  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    credibility.  The judge's conclusion, therefore, that the appellant  is
    not a lesbian as she  claims  was  plainly  available  to  her  on  the
    evidence. It is a conclusion supported by clear and cogent reasons. The
    grounds of appeal provide no justification for the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    interfere with those findings.

 7. Finally, though it is not in the grounds of appeal, Judge  Saffer  when
    granting permission stated that the judge had "not gone on to  consider
    whether, if the appellant is gay, she would be reasonably likely to  be
    persecuted in the Philippines  as  a  result".  However,  that  comment
    betrays a misunderstanding of  the  proper  application  of  HJ  (Iran)
    [2010] UKSC 31.  As HJ  urges  her  to  do  so,  the  judge  has  first
    determined whether or not the appellant is  homosexual.   Having  found
    that the appellant is not homosexual, there was no need for her  to  go
    on to consider whether homosexuals are at risk in the Philippines.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
