
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07370/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th January 2018                          |On 20th April 2018            |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   mr e s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Sirikanda (Solicitor from Ahmed Rahman Carr,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    R Cooper, promulgated on 21st June 2017 following a hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 23rd May 2017.  In the determination, the judge dismissed  the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before us.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Turkey, who was born on [ ] 1986.
     He appealed against the Respondent's decision  dated  5th  July  2017,
    refusing his application for refugee status and humanitarian protection
    under paragraph 339C of HC 395.  The essence of his claim is that he is
    a Kurd, who supports the Kurdish nationalist parties in Turkey, and  as
    such that he would be at risk from the Turkish authorities if  he  were
    to be removed, on account of his political opinion.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant claims that he has supported the Kurdish  Workers'  Party
    "and  other  pro-Kurdish  political  parties".   At   school   he   was
    discriminated against, because Kurdish was not spoken,  and  since  the
    age of 15 he has been actively  involved  in  politics,  after  leaving
    school.  He was  arrested  at  a  demonstration  outside  the  People's
    Democratic Party (HADEP)  building  in  around  April  2001.   On  this
    occasion  he  was  detained  for  24  hours   at   Gaziantep   Security
    Headquarters.  He was beaten and he was accused of supporting the  PKK.
    As a result of this arrest, he was expelled from his school  (paragraph
    7).  Since then, he has continued to be  politically  active  in  HADEP
    youth politics.  He has attended meetings, demonstrations,  leafleting,
    campaigning during elections.

 4. He joined the HADEP Party itself in 2004 and  in  2006  he  joined  the
    Democratic Society  Party  (DTP).   Thereafter  he  undertook  military
    service for fifteen months from 2006 until 2008, when he claimed he was
    given "dirty jobs" to do because he was  a  Kurd  and  because  of  his
    political opinion (see paragraph 9).  In January 2008 he  was  arrested
    and detained for two days when the DTP headquarters  were  raided.   He
    was accused of working for the PKK, was beaten, and subject to  falaka,
    but released because of insufficient evidence  against  him  (paragraph
    10).

 5.  From  Gaziantep  he  moved  to  Izmir  because   he   feared   further
    difficulties, and whilst continuing to be involved in  DTP  activities,
    he subsequently aligned himself with the Peace Democratic  Party  (BDP)
    when the DTP was banned in December 2009.  He was arrested on 1st  June
    2010 following a demonstration, detained for four  days,  interrogated,
    and ill-treated, but then released again because there was no  evidence
    against him (paragraph 11).

 6. He then decided to return to Gaziantep, but was arrested at his home on
    1st February 2011 during an anti-terrorist operation.  He  was  accused
    of being a member of the PKK, detained, interrogated,  and  ill-treated
    again over three days, after which he took  the  opportunity  to  leave
    Turkey (paragraph 12).

 7. Once in the UK, he did not claim asylum when he first arrived,  because
    he was told that he could not do so  as  a  visitor,  and  so  made  an
    application under the Ankara Agreement (paragraph 13).



The Respondent's Decision

 8. The Respondent accepted the Appellant's identity, nationality, and  his
    ethnicity as being Kurdish.  It was also accepted  that  "he  has  been
    consistent in his reasons  for  supporting  Kurdish  parties,  and  his
    account of the Kurdish People's Party  having  a  number  of  transient
    identities over the period from 2001 to 2010" (paragraph 14).  The rest
    of the Appellant's claim was not considered to be plausible.

The Respondent's Decision

 9. The judge accepted "that the Appellant has been largely  consistent  as
    to the core elements of his claim, namely that he had been  politically
    active since the age of 15, had  been  expelled  from  school  in  2001
    following his arrest at a demonstration, that he had been a  member  of
    various political parties, and had been arrested, detained and tortured
    on three further occasions (2008, 2010 and  2011)  before  leaving  the
    country" (paragraph 46).  Nevertheless,  it  was  determined  that  the
    Appellant,  having  "answered  most   questions   without   hesitation"
    (paragraph  48)  failed  to  provide  the  necessary  clarification  in
    relation to "highly probative matters" where  he  had  a  tendency  "to
    avoid answering directly" (paragraph 49).

10. The judge concluded that the Appellant "was repeating a well  rehearsed
    script rather than recounting a personally lived  experience".   As  an
    example, the judge  explained  that  "at  Q.86  when  asked  about  the
    discrepancy and his answers about  when  he  was  first  interested  in
    politics he responded, 'I am saying it slowly because  I  am  answering
    your questions so I don't mix it up'" (paragraph 50).  It was said that
    in relation  to  question  at  Q.101  the  Appellant  "gave  a  curious
    response",  because  initially  he  had  explained  directly  what  had
    happened to him in detention but  then  "the  Appellant  then  launched
    immediately into a description of Kurdish political parties, which  was
    not relevant to the question" (paragraph 51).

11. It was moreover determined by the judge that she found the  Appellant's
    evidence  "about  his  involvement  with  various   different   parties
    inconsistent" (paragraph 54).  It was  said  that  the  Appellant  "was
    inconsistent and vague in his answers in interview about his membership
    and activities for the DTP and BDP" (paragraph  55).   The  judge  then
    went on to make adverse findings of  fact  against  the  Appellant  (at
    paragraphs 58 to 59).

12. Having considered the Appellant's oral  evidence,  and  come  to  clear
    findings of fact in relation to the evidence, the judge then went on to
    consider the documentary evidence  that  the  Appellant  had  submitted
    (paragraph 62) and went on to evaluate the expert medical report of  Dr
    Hajioff, who was a consultant psychiatrist, and had  been  employed  by
    the Home Office as a visiting psychiatrist at  Pentonville  Prison  for
    fifteen years.   He  had  assessed  refugees  and  asylum  seekers  and
    provided medical reports for the court.  He had done so  in  compliance
    with the Istanbul Protocol (paragraph 63).

13. Dr Hajioff had made a diagnosis of PTSD, which is based in part on  the
    Appellant's own version of  events,  and  he  had  concluded  that  the
    Appellant  was  displaying  symptoms  of  re-experiencing  the  trauma,
    avoidant behaviour, and persistent symptoms of increased arousal.   The
    judge, however, found that, "I do not find Dr Hajioff's report  of  the
    Appellant's present state (at paragraphs  32  to  42)  to  support  his
    conclusions regarding the symptoms he found present under  the  various
    categories" (paragraph 64).

14. One reason for this was that, although Dr  Hajioff  recorded  that  the
    Appellant was having nightmares two or three times a week, "there is no
    indication the Appellant was asked by Dr Hajioff what these  nightmares
    were about, or that they related to the  traumas  he  claimed  to  have
    suffered", and "nor does Dr Hajioff provide any evidence to support his
    conclusion that the Appellant displays  avoidant  behaviour  or  making
    efforts  to  avoid  thoughts,  feelings,  conversations  or  activities
    associated with the trauma" (paragraph 64).  The report by  Dr  Hajioff
    was accordingly not considered to be persuasive.

15. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

16. The grounds of application state that the judge, having  accepted  that
    the questioning of the Appellant was difficult to understand, had  then
    gone on to unfairly criticise  the  Appellant's  responses.   She  also
    unfairly placed emphasis on  discrepancies  and  answers  to  interview
    questions without having put those concerns to the Appellant.

17. On 21st November 2017 permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that it was arguably axiomatic to credibility to put matters of concern
    to the Appellant, and a failure to do  this  "in  turn  influenced  the
    approach to the medical evidence" by the judge.

18. On 13th December 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that it was apparent at paragraphs  48
    and 49 that the judge confirmed the questions were clarified  and  that
    the Appellant's concerns were without merit.

Submissions

19. At the hearing before us Ms Sirikanda relied upon her detailed skeleton
    argument and made the following three broad submissions.

20. First, there was the  troubling  observation  by  the  judge  that  the
    Appellant's evidence was to be disbelieved, despite  appearing  to  the
    "largely consistent as to the core elements of  his  claim"  (paragraph
    46), because "his evidence to the Tribunal indicated he was repeating a
    well  rehearsed  script  rather  than  recounting  a  personally  lived
    experience"  (paragraph  50).   Ms  Sirikanda  submitted  that  it  was
    difficult to work out  the  difference  between  a  "pre-rehearsed  and
    unreliable script" and a "well-rehearsed script".   An  honest  witness
    could not  be  distinguished  from  a  "well-rehearsed"  witness.   The
    distinction that was being made was unsustainable in the absence of  an
    explanation as to how the Tribunal was possessed with the expertise  to
    discern such a distinction.

21. Furthermore, in purporting to provide an explanation for why this was a
    "well-rehearsed script" the judge referred to the Appellant's  apparent
    discrepancy at Q.87, explaining  how  he  first  became  interested  in
    politics, when he had responded with the remark, "I am saying it slowly
    because I am answering your questions so I don't mix it up"  (paragraph
    50).  Ms Sirikanda submitted that it was difficult  to  make  sense  of
    this answer without the benefit of knowing what it was  that  had  been
    put to the Appellant.

22. In the same way, when the Appellant is criticised in  relation  to  his
    answer to Q.101, it is difficult to know why his answer was lacking  in
    credibility  as  far  as  the  essence  of  his  protection  claim  was
    concerned.  These matters were important because it was not  clear  why
    the Appellant's consistent evidence was not being given the  importance
    that it deserved.

23. In fact, insofar as reasons were being given by the judge, they plainly
    appeared to be the wrong reasons designed to demonstrate  the  lack  of
    credibility in the Appellant.  It was also not insignificant  that  the
    refusal letter at no point referred to the Appellant's claim as  having
    been well-rehearsed.  On the contrary, the refusal letter accepted that
    the account was a consistent one.

24. Second, such ambiguities as there were in the  Appellant's  answers  to
    the questions put to him during the hearing, were in no small degree on
    account  of  the  cross-examination  by  Mr  Eaton,  the  Home   Office
    Presenting Officer.  As the judge has self-observed, the Appellant  "on
    a few occasions had difficulty understanding Mr Eaton's questions".  So
    much so, that the judge noted that, "I did not find this surprising  as
    I had to intervene a few times to clarify the  question  being  asked".
    The judge even agreed with the Appellant's legal representative at  the
    hearing, "that many of Mr Eaton's questions were  prefaced  by  a  long
    statement, making the question difficult to understand,  and  often  it
    only required one word answer" (paragraph 48).

25. This being so, Ms Sirikanda argued, the answers that the Appellant  was
    criticised for, during the course of the Tribunal hearing, as not being
    able to provide clarification "on highly probative  matters"  "not  all
    delayed at the Appellant's door.  Accordingly, the conclusions that the
    judge came  to  "when  looking  at  the  evidence  in  the  round"  and
    determining that the Appellant was not credible (at  paragraphs  58  to
    59) were unsustainable.

26. Ms Sirikanda returned to her primary concern, namely, that the  judge's
    preoccupation with the Appellant "repeating  a  well-rehearsed  script"
    was the result of her having adopted "a  hostile  theory"  and  to  the
    evidence, such that she overlooked  the  consistency  as  to  the  core
    elements of the Appellant's claim.

27. Third, there was a matter of the medical report of Dr Hajioff which had
    been viewed through the "prism of disbelief".  The report may well have
    been a concise one, but it did not stand  criticism,  when  Dr  Hajioff
    based his  diagnosis  on  the  Appellant  displaying  symptoms  of  re-
    experiencing the trauma, on the ground that "his report does  not  give
    any indication that the Appellant reported  persistent  re-experiencing
    of the traumatic  event".   However,  the  report  by  Dr  Hajioff  (at
    paragraphs 32 to 42) had a section entitled "Present State" and in this
    there was an account of the Appellant's ill-treatment  in  Turkey  (see
    paragraphs 18 to 31 of the MLR).

28. Furthermore, in the section on "Present State" the report had  gone  on
    to state (at paragraphs 36 to 41) that the Appellant "is uneasy in  the
    dark and tries to avoid being out late in the day".  Police and  public
    places make him feel anxious and he is wary  of  crowds.   Loud  noises
    make him jump.  He finds it takes a long time to get to  sleep  because
    his mind turns to memories of his experiences ...".

29. Ms Sirikanda submitted that it was  quite  clear  that  the  nightmares
    described by the  Appellant  to  Dr  Hajioff  related  to  his  adverse
    experiences in Turkey.  The criticism by the Tribunal (at paragraph 64)
    that, "nor  does  Dr  Hajioff  provide  any  evidence  to  support  his
    conclusion that the Appellant displays avoidant behaviour" was  equally
    untenable because the MLR does specifically state  that  the  Appellant
    felt "uneasy in the dark and tried to avoid being out late in the day";
    that "police in public places made him feel anxious"; that "loud noises
    make him jump"; and that "he does little most of the  time  other  than
    play with his sister's children".

30. For her part, Ms Everett submitted that the determination  by  Judge  R
    Cooper  was  sustainable.   This  was   because   there   plainly   was
    inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  evidence.   The  judge  had  given
    cogent reasons for refusing the appeal.  At  one  point  the  Appellant
    wished to avoid having to answer questions because he had "asked for  a
    break as his 'head was very mixed up' and he was feeling  unwell"  (see
    paragraph 53 of the determination".  Ms Everett submitted that  it  was
    not enough to avoid having  to  answer  questions  by  claiming  to  be
    unwell.

31. Secondly, insofar as the judge, having considered the evidence  in  the
    round, does find the Appellant not to be credible, she provides  cogent
    reasons for so doing.  For example the Appellant  was  asked  what  HDP
    stood for, and he was unable to say and the judge rightly  referred  to
    "his seeming lack of knowledge of the parties he claimed to belong  to"
    (paragraph 58).

32. Thirdly, a criticism of the medical report was not misplaced because it
    was not particularly long, and even if it had not  been  factored  into
    the body of the Appellant's evidence when given at the hearing, it  did
    not lead to a material error of law, given  that  the  refusal  by  the
    judge was largely based upon the oral  evidence  that  he  had  himself
    given.

33. In reply, Ms Sirikanda submitted that many of the questions asked by Mr
    Eaton,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  themselves  led  to   a
    difficulty in the Appellant having to answer, and given that  this  was
    openly accepted by the judge (paragraph 48), the Appellant could not be
    criticised for having providing vague answers, if that  was  the  case.
    Moreover, the adoption of an approach  that  looked  to  the  Appellant
    "repeating a well-rehearsed script rather than recounting a  personally
    lived experience" was a novel  idea  which  prevented  the  judge  from
    giving  credit  to  the  Appellant  for  having  given   his   evidence
    consistently all along".

Error of Law

34.  We are satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that we  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  Our reasons are as follows.

35. First, this is a case where the judge had found (at paragraph  46)  the
    Appellant to have "been largely consistent as to the core  elements  of
    his claim", and that this was so much so that consistency was  accepted
    across the entire gamut of events complained of,  from  being  expelled
    from school at the age of  15,  to  the  Appellant's  involvement  with
    "various political parties", and to his being arrested and detained  on
    three occasions in 2008, 2010 and 2011.  It had also been  accepted  by
    the Respondent in the  refusal  letter  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    consistent in his reasons for supporting Kurdish parties (paragraph  14
    of the determination).  Indeed, the Appellant's claim, set out  by  the
    judge in her determination was not inconsistent with what the judge had
    found on the lower standard (see paragraphs 7 to 13).  To  accept  that
    claim, as being consistent in the evidence given by the  Appellant,  on
    the basis that it had "indicated  he  was  repeating  a  well-rehearsed
    script rather than recounting a personally lived experience" (paragraph
    50) was not a serviceable distinction for an adjudicating body to make.
     This was not least given that the example that  the  judge  gives  (at
    question Q.87) that when asked about when the  Appellant  first  became
    interested in politics, he had replied, "I am saying it slowly  because
    I'm answering your questions so I don't mix it up" (paragraph 50) is no
    more  illuminating,  if  the  discrepancy  that  is  alleged   in   the
    Appellant's answer is not actually put to him.

36. Second, insofar as it is the case that the Appellant gave answers where
    the "tendency was to avoid answering directly" (paragraph 49) this  too
    is difficult to make out for two reasons.  First, such a conclusion  by
    the judge follows after the acceptance by the judge that the  Appellant
    "answered most questions without hesitation", and that insofar as there
    were any occasions of difficulty these were occasioned because "many of
    Mr Eaton's questions were prefaced by  a  long  statement,  making  the
    question  difficult  to  understand"  (paragraph  48).   As  the  judge
    explained often the questions  put  by  the  Presenting  Officer  "only
    required a one word answer" (paragraph  48).   Second,  notwithstanding
    the fact that the  questions  themselves  were  not  put  in  the  most
    felicitous of ways, if one looks at the answers to the questions  given
    by the Appellant, it  is  far  from  clear  that  they  are  indeed  as
    problematic as it is made out.  For example, given that it  had  always
    been the Appellant's case that he had been supporting various  parties,
    when the question was put to him whether his brother was  a  member  of
    any Kurdish party, he had responded by answering, "he is supporting all
    these parties".  It  is  difficult  to  see  why  this  answer  is  not
    acceptable.  In the same way when the  Appellant  stated  that  he  was
    under pressure from the Turkish authorities, the judge stated that  "he
    could not explain how he  was  being  pressured  by  the  authorities",
    whilst at the same time pointing out that he "gave  two  examples"  and
    then thereafter, "he only gave one further  example".   Similarly,  the
    fact that (at Q.93) the Appellant,  said  that  there  was  "a  lot  of
    people" at a protest, or that he had usually attended "all protests" in
    this country", without giving a specific figure, does not mean  to  say
    that he was answering the questions inaccurately  or  implausibly  (see
    question 49(i), (iii), (v), and (vi)).  There was criticism  at  length
    by the judge of the Appellant having failed to answer  Q.101  properly.
    This criticism does not bear closer scrutiny.

37. Although the judge referred to the Appellant as having given "a curious
    response" when asked what happened to him when he was detained  for  24
    hours in April 2001, the judge accepted that the  Appellant  "initially
    answered  the  question  directly  and  explained  what   happened   in
    detention", but then went on to state  that,  "however,  the  Appellant
    then launched immediately  into  a  description  of  Kurdish  political
    parties, which was not relevant to the question" (paragraph  51).   The
    fact that it was relevant or irrelevant  is  besides  the  point.   The
    Appellant may well have wanted to just talk about other things relating
    to Kurdish parties, which he regarded as being relevant, but that  does
    not mean to say that he had  not  answered  the  question  put  to  him
    specifically first.  It is not unknown for  witnesses  to  go  off  the
    track.  It is equally well understood that it  is  a  function  of  the
    Tribunal authorities, not to  mention  the  legal  representatives,  to
    bring the Appellant back onto track, so that the minds of all concerned
    are fully focused on the issues that have to be decided.

38. One final example may suffice to make the errors on  the  part  of  the
    judge clear in this respect.  It is  said  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    "seeming lack of knowledge of the parties  he  claimed  to  belong  to"
    (paragraph 58), and this was because when questioned about the aims  of
    the BDP, one answer he  had  given  was  that  it  was  "defending  the
    downtrodden people".  The answer that was referred to by the judge  was
    not an answer that the Appellant was giving in oral evidence before the
    Tribunal, but an answer that he gave during interview (see Qs.154-155).



39. Even so, however, it can by no means necessarily be concluded from this
    answer that the Appellant lacked knowledge of  the  parties.   He  had,
    after all, supported a  number  of  Kurdish  parties.   The  judge  had
    recognised at the outset of the determination  how  the  Appellant  had
    first been involved in DTP activities, and subsequently with the  Peace
    and Democracy Party (BDP) "when the DTP was banned  in  December  2009"
    (paragraph 11).  This was the Appellant's claim.

40. The Respondent's decision with respect to  this,  also  recognised  the
    indeterminate nature of the parties, because  the  judge  referred  to,
    "his account of the Kurdish People's Party having a number of transient
    identities of the period from 2001 to 2010" (paragraph 14).   On  their
    own, these matters may well have been rather more significant than they
    were made out to be, but when placed alongside the "largely consistent"
    account given by the Appellant as to the "core elements of  his  claim"
    (paragraph  46)  they  did  not  show  the  Appellant  as  lacking   in
    credibility on the lower standard.

41. Third, there is the matter of the medical report.  It is trite law that
    expert evidence cannot be accepted separated from and considered as  an
    adjunct to the oral evidence of the witnesses, but must  be  considered
    alongside and in conjunction with the evidence taken as a whole.   Yet,
    in this case the judge has first come to very firm findings of fact  in
    relation to the Appellant's claim, which has been found  to  have  been
    lacking in credibility, before dealing with the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Hajioff rather late in the determination  from  paragraph  63  onwards.
    That was bound to have led to a conclusion that deprived the  Appellant
    of the benefits of the medical report in  his  favour.   However,  even
    insofar as this is done, the criticism  by  the  judge  of  the  expert
    report is unwarranted and flies in the face of guidance given in Y (Sri
    Lanka) EWCA Civ 362 (at paragraph 12) and B [2002] EWHC 1469.

42. Dr Hajioff had concluded that the Appellant displayed symptoms  of  re-
    experiencing the trauma and persistent symptoms  of  increased  arousal
    and it is not the case, as Ms Sirikanda has explained, that Dr  Hajioff
    does not address the Appellant's present state because  he  claimed  he
    does under the heading "Present State" (at paragraphs 32 to  42)  in  a
    fairly significant manner.  Dr Hajioff  refers  to  how  the  Appellant
    "finds it a long time to  get  to  sleep  because  his  mind  turns  to
    memories of his experiences" and that he has nightmares "about  to  two
    or  three  times  a  week".   The  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    specifically asked what the nightmares related to, when he had suffered
    adverse experiences in Turkey, a matter referred to by Dr  Hajioff  (at
    paragraph 18 to 31), is not a criticism of Dr Hajioff's approach to the
    Appellant.

43. It is also not the case that the Appellant had not  displayed  avoidant
    behaviour because Dr Hajioff had in terms  stated  that  the  Appellant
    found it difficult to be in the dark, or to be out late in the day,  or
    to trust the police, or to be subjected to loud noise, and led a fairly
    reclusive life playing with the sister's children.

44. In fact, there is clear  evidence  that  the  judge  strayed  into  the
    professional terrain of Dr Hajioff in a manner that cannot be justified
    when observing  that,  contrary  to  what  Dr  Hajioff  had  stated  at
    paragraph 33, the Appellant "responded  quickly  to  my  questions  and
    allowed me to examine him", whereas Dr Hajioff reported  the  Appellant
    as exhibiting avoidant behaviour.  This  overlooks  the  fact  that  Dr
    Hajioff was operating in a clinical setting whereas the  Appellant  was
    required to give evidence before a judge in a Tribunal.

45. It is also not the case (at paragraph 65) that Dr Hajioff did not  give
    consideration to whether the Appellant's symptoms were  caused  by  any
    other event because the medical report records how the Appellant had no
    family history of mental illness,  had  no  emotional  problems  before
    being  arrested,  had  been  questioned  as  to   his   past   "adverse
    experiences" by Dr Hajioff himself, and other causes for  the  reported
    symptoms were not considered to be viable.

Re-Making the Decision

46. Our finding that the First-tier Tribunal has given unlawful reasons for
    disbelieving the evidence does not mean  that  the  Judge  should  have
    found that the Appellant was truthful. Regrettably the error  can  only
    be corrected by a rehearing. We are allowing this appeal to the  extent
    that it is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge R Cooper, pursuant to Practice Statement  7.2(b)
    because the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is  such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  Rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

47. An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19 April 2018

