
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/07677/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25 August 2017                      |      On 07 September 2017           |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Rahman, instructed by Edward Alam & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ian Howard promulgated on 20 February 2017 in which
    he dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 12 July 2016 to refuse his protection claim.



 2. The appellant's case is that he was at risk on return to Bangladesh  on
    account not that  he  had  actually  been  the  victim  of  politically
    motivated violence or harassment but that he  had  been  informed  that
    false charges had been brought against him  in  2015  albeit  that  the
    appellant has been present in the United Kingdom  since 2004.

 3.  The  appellant  also  states  that  in  2016  in  May  he  attended  a
    demonstration with fellow BNP  activists  who  had  travelled  down  to
    London from Coventry that being a demonstration and protest against the
    visit of the Bangladeshi Prime  Minister.   His  evidence  is  that  he
    appears  in  photographs  of  that  demonstration  which  are  publicly
    available on the internet.

 4. The judge did not believe the appellant and did not accept his  account
    of the false charges  being  brought  against  him.  He  dismissed  his
    appeal, finding that the documents produced in support of the claim are
    entirely self-serving and there was nothing to support  the  contention
    that appellant was at risk in Bangladesh.

 5. Turning to the sur place aspect of the case, that is, the participation
    in a demonstration, the judge found that it was  tainted  by  the  same
    documentation and said [30]:

         ...While I do not doubt he attended the demonstration in  2016I  do
         not accept he was motivated by any political interest.

         31. As a consequence, I do not, even to the lowest  standard,  find
         the appellant to be a credible witness.

 6.  The appellant sought permission to challenge the decision on two  main
    grounds.  First, that the findings of fact and capability with  respect
    to the false charges have been brought against him and second that  the
    judge failed properly to analyse the risk flowing from the fact that he
    accepted that the appellant had attended a  demonstration.   Permission
    was not granted on the first ground  but  was  granted  on  the  second
    ground.

 7. In submissions before me Mr Rahman accepted that there was no  evidence
    but that there was no direct evidence of  the  Bangladeshi  authorities
    maintaining surveillance to the extent of identifying those who  attend
    demonstrations in the United Kingdom.  He submitted that a  commonsense
    point of view should be taken on this issue given that it may  well  be
    the case that surveillance activities are carried out  albeit  covertly
    and may take time for such evidence to come out pointing  to  the  fact
    that it took some time for such information to come out in for  example
    cases such as the surveillance of dissidents from  Myanmar,  Sri  Lanka
    and Iran.

 8. Mr Rahman accepted that unlike  those  countries  there  is  no  direct
    evidence of for example people who  are  returning  to  Bangladesh  are
    stopped and identified and questions put to them about their attendance
    at demonstrations or involvement in opposition parties  in  the  United
    Kingdom or elsewhere.

 9. I accept that there is no direct evidence of surveillance.   I  do  not
    accept that it is permissible to take what Mr  Rahman  describes  as  a
    commonsense view that such activities may occur  by  reference  to  and
    analogy to what goes on in Bangladesh.

10. Mr Rahman helpfully took me through a number of passages from the  Home
    Office's Country Information Guidance Report on  Bangladesh  opposition
    to the government from February 2015.  Whilst I accept from  the  these
    that there is clear evidence of suppression of political expression and
    that there is  a  significant  degree  of  violence  towards  political
    activists it must be borne in mind that the applicant was found not  to
    be a political activist.

11. I accept that there is strong evidence of the harassment of journalists
    and also of opposition politicians, and  there  is  also  very  clearly
    suppression of freedom of the press and the use of laws  improperly  to
    detain activists and journalists  for  criticising  the  government  or
    offending the Prime Minister.  Equally, it  appears that critics of the
    government and oppositionists may be targeted and that  this  targeting
    described at [2.4.11] extends well beyond the activists themselves  and
    goes so far as attacks on the property of families of activists.

12. There is, however, nothing here that indicates any  degree  of  use  of
    surveillance of  a  type  that  would  be  necessary  to  identify  the
    appellant and to put a name to him.   That  is  an  entirely  different
    exercise from the usual exercise  of  policing  to  arrest  people,  to
    interrogate them and find out details from them.

13. There is no indication of a database of individuals being put  together
    or that sophisticated means such as identification of demonstrators  by
    looking at  photographs  and/or  asking  people  to  identify  them  is
    necessary.  There appears to be no indication either that, as Mr Rahman
    submitted, the demonstrators could be seen in this case as standing  on
    a platform in the way that journalists do in that they would be seen to
    openly to be critical of the Prime Minister in a public forum, in  this
    case a public visit abroad.

14. There is no evidential basis on which it can  be  said  that  that  the
    Bangladesh authorities seek to identify those who attend demonstrations
    abroad and accordingly I conclude that there is no basis  of  which  it
    could be argued that the judge's error in not addressing  any  risk  of
    attending the demonstration is material, given that there is  no  basis
    in which it could  properly  be  argued  that  there  is  any  relevant
    evidence that the applicant would be at risk  of  being  identified  as
    having attended the demonstration or that he would in consequence  face
    ill-treatment on return as a result given not least the finding that he
    was not a political activist.

15. For these reasons I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error of law capable of affecting  the
    outcome and I uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold it.

Signed                                  Date:  31 August 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
