
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07894/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 19th February 2018                   |On 16th March 2018                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD [A]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tariq, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 16th of  November  1990.
    He appeals against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Bennett sitting at Hatton Cross on 14th of September 2017 who dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent  dated  4th
    of August 2017. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's application
    for international protection.

 2. The Appellant last entered the United Kingdom  in  October  2014  on  a
    family visa which had been valid for five years from 2009 until 11th of
    November 2014. The Appellant overstayed thereafter  and  he  was  found
    working illegally in Slough on 13th of November 2016. He  was  detained
    pending removal but claimed asylum on 16th November 2016.  It  was  the
    refusal of this application on 4th of  August  2017  that  led  to  the
    present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The Appellant claimed that he was at risk of serious harm  upon  return
    because of his sexual orientation. Appearing in  person,  he  told  the
    Judge that he came from a very religious family. One of  his  brothers,
    MAA,  was  a  religious  scholar.  The  Appellant  discovered  his  own
    bisexuality in 2003 when he started a relationship with a friend called
    Faisal. He and Faisal would have sexual relations  in  the  Appellant's
    parents' house or in Faisal's house and would watch pornographic  films
    together. The relationship lasted  until  2004.  He  then  had  another
    relationship with Farook, which started in 2005 and ended in 2006  when
    the Appellant's parents moved.

 4. After the move the Appellant had a  relationship  with  a  male  called
    Taimur which lasted from 2006 until December 2013 when he was found  in
    bed with Taimur by MAA. The Appellant was locked in his room for 5 days
    after which his family told him he must not do that again and he had to
    start  wearing  Islamic  dress.  The  Appellant  was  attacked  on  two
    occasions in 2014 which were reported  to  the  police.  The  Appellant
    thought his brother MAA was responsible for these  attacks.  After  the
    2nd attack the Appellant's mother secretly arranged for  the  Appellant
    to leave Pakistan with help from another brother. Whilst in the  United
    Kingdom the Appellant visited a gay club  in  central  London  and  had
    physical relations with a man called Alex.  The  Appellant  produced  3
    first information reports (FIRs) to show that his life was  in  danger,
    the first was issued  in  Fabry  2009  before  the  Appellant's  family
    discovered the Appellant's sexuality.

The Decision at First Instance

 5. The Judge noted at [40] that the Appellant's sexuality was very much in
    issue in the appeal. The Appellant's way of life in the United  Kingdom
    was the logical starting point for considering  this  question  because
    the Appellant was free to live openly in  the  United  Kingdom  and  it
    should be easier for him to produce evidence about his life  here  than
    about his life in Pakistan. The Appellant had been living in the United
    Kingdom for almost three years by the time of the hearing yet there was
    very little evidence that the Appellant had lived as a gay person since
    coming here. The Appellant did  not  claim  to  have  had  any  lasting
    relationships in this country although he had claimed to have had  such
    in Pakistan. The Judge did not accept  that  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    status was the primary reason why the Appellant had been unable to have
    a stable relationship.

 6. There was very little documentary evidence to show that  the  Appellant
    had had any casual relationships. The available evidence related to the
    period after the Appellant claimed asylum and  therefore  to  a  period
    when the Appellant had an interest in generating evidence to  establish
    that he was sexually active. The Judge considered at [42] the  evidence
    produced by the Appellant to establish a relationship  with  Alex  (who
    was not called to give evidence at the hearing). The Appellant produced
    printouts of WhatsApp communications with Alex. Alex  had  returned  to
    Europe but it was unclear how  the  Appellant  knew  this  because  the
    printout produced  by  the  Appellant  did  not  record  any  effective
    communications between the two men after 9th of May 2017  and  gave  no
    reason to believe why Alex should intend to return to Europe.

 7. The Judge did not accept that the Appellant had brought the  FIRs  with
    him when he came to the United Kingdom in October  2014.  Each  of  the
    translations was stamped with an attestation stamp by a  notary  public
    in Pakistan on 24th of November 2014. The Appellant must  have  arrived
    before 11th of November 2014 because his  entry  clearance  expired  on
    that day. In any event the FIRs did not support the  Appellant's  claim
    that the Appellant's father and MAA had orchestrated the two attacks in
    2014 but ran counter to that  claim.  The  first  FIR  was  in  fact  a
    complaint by MAA that he, MAA, was being  threatened.  The  Appellant's
    evidence was that he had  gone  with  his  father  to  report  the  2nd
    incident which made little sense if the  Appellant's  claim,  that  his
    father had instigated the attack, was correct.

 8. The Appellant's  evidence  about  his  family's  political  involvement
    lacked credibility. The Judge noted at  [52]  that  the  Appellant  was
    "highly evasive" when asked whether he had any documents to  show  that
    his father and uncles were involved in politics in Pakistan.  The  late
    stage at which the Appellant claimed political asylum also damaged  his
    credibility.

 9. At [45] the Judge indicated he did not accept that  it  was  reasonably
    likely that the Appellant have been living in the United Kingdom  as  a
    bisexual or gay person. Although the Appellant  would  not  necessarily
    have any documentary evidence about a  one-night  stand,  it  was  very
    surprising  that  there  was  so   little   independent   evidence   to
    substantiate  what  the  Appellant  said  about  himself.  It  was  not
    reasonably likely that  the  Appellant  had  had  any  form  of  sexual
    encounter with Alex or with Alex's friend. Photographs produced by  the
    Appellant were probably  taken  for  the  purpose  of  the  Appellant's
    application and this probably explained why the Appellant had kept  the
    bills issued by the KU club. At [48] the Judge noted three areas in the
    Appellant's evidence where  the  Appellant  had  contradicted  himself.
    These involved where the Appellant had allegedly had sex  with  Taimur,
    how long he had worked for MAA and the dates  on  the  FIRs  themselves
    (see paragraph 7 above). The Judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

10. The Appellant appealed  against  this  decision  arguing  that  it  was
    unreasonable for the Judge to have sought extra evidence in support  of
    the claim to be gay just because the Appellant had been living  in  the
    United Kingdom for almost three years. The explanation  that  he  could
    not hold  on  to  a  lasting  relationship  because  of  his  uncertain
    immigration status was quite reasonable. There was  no  requirement  in
    law upon him to show that he was  sexually  active.  The  documentation
    relating to Alex was  not  provided  to  show  any  sort  of  long-term
    relationship but to prove that the Appellant was gay.  The  photographs
    taken whilst he was partying in gay clubs were genuine.  The  Appellant
    had evolved as a person since leaving Pakistan due to  the  freedom  he
    had witnessed in this country. Any assessment  of  his  behaviour  upon
    return should be assessed accordingly.

11. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 15th of December 2017.
    In granting permission to appeal he found it arguable  that  the  Judge
    had  overlooked  the  distinction  between  sexual  activity  and   the
    Appellant's sexuality being very much in issue in the  appeal.  It  was
    arguable that the Judge's approach to the available evidence  had  been
    affected if the Judge considered that the Appellant had an interest  in
    generating evidence. It was arguable that the Judge fell into error  in
    the approach taken to the availability or  otherwise  of  corroborative
    evidence. It was unclear whether the Judge had attached undue weight to
    the absence of corroborative evidence. The Judge did not refer  to  the
    totality of the available evidence.

12. Those conclusions inevitably affected the way in which the Judge viewed
    the Appellant's  evidence  about  relationships  in  Pakistan.  It  was
    arguable that the  Judge  had  fallen  into  error  in  the  sequential
    approach which the Judge had adopted  and  that  the  totality  of  the
    evidence had not been assessed in contradistinction to  severing  parts
    of the chronology. The Judge at [48] had referred to three areas in the
    Appellant's evidence where  the  Appellant  had  contradicted  himself.
    However, the Judge's  analysis  of  credibility  in  this  context  had
    arguably been affected by the introduction to [46] of the decision,  [I
    note here that this appears to be a reference to  the  Judge's  comment
    that the Appellant had obtained  evidence  for  the  purposes  of  this
    application which inevitably affected the way in which the Judge viewed
    the  Appellant's  evidence  about  relationships  in   Pakistan].   The
    Respondent did not reply to the grant of permission.

The Hearing Before Me

13. As a consequence of the grant of permission the matter came  before  me
    to determine in the first place where there was a material error of law
    in the determination such that it fell to be set  aside  and  the  case
    reheard. If there was not then the decision  at  first  instance  would
    stand.

14. For the Appellant it was argued that an error had occurred due  to  the
    treatment of the evidence. There were two  tests  to  be  applied.  The
    first was whether the Appellant was gay.  The  second  was  whether  he
    would be perceived as gay. The  determination  had  not  followed  that
    procedure. The Judge's focus was on the Appellant's activity commenting
    that there was little evidence that the Appellant had lived  as  a  gay
    person. However, the evidence produced by the Appellant showed that the
    Appellant was known to Alex and that the Appellant had visited the  gay
    club. Alex had confirmed in the correspondence that  he  knew  who  the
    Appellant was. That was in the context of a  gay  relationship  between
    the two men. The exchange between the two was a clear  indication  that
    the Appellant was trying to persuade Alex to  come  to  court  to  give
    evidence. The Appellant had explained why he could not do this.

15. There were incorrect procedures in the  substantive  asylum  interview.
    For example, at question twelve the Respondent had jumped to a question
    about the  involvement  of  the  Appellant's  father  in  politics.  At
    question ninety-five the Appellant had explained how it  felt  to  live
    openly in the United Kingdom but  the  refusal  letter  had  been  more
    concerned with the  Appellant's  sexual  activity.  The  Appellant  had
    produced background material of what happened to people in Pakistan who
    came out as gay. There  was  no  mention  in  the  determination  of  a
    keychain which had a photograph of someone other than Alex.  There  had
    been insufficient consideration of the evidence.

16. For the Respondent it was argued there was no material  error  of  law.
    There had been no mention of a keychain or indeed a stab wound  in  the
    Appellant's statement. Following the structure required by the case  of
    HJ Iran, the Tribunal must first satisfy itself that the Appellant  was
    gay. It was easier for the Appellant  to  provide  evidence  about  his
    sexual activity in the United Kingdom but there was no  such  evidence.
    All there was, was a WhatsApp print out that did not show anything. The
    grounds  of  onward  appeal  were  a   mere   disagreement   with   the
    determination. The Judge had gone through the Appellant's circumstances
    in the United Kingdom. It was open to the Judge to look at the case  in
    the way he had.

17. In conclusion it was argued that it was not just whether the  Appellant
    was gay but whether he would be perceived as gay. I  queried  with  the
    Appellant's representative [55] of the determination in which the Judge
    had said that there were no significant obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    integration into Pakistan upon return and he could return to the family
    home if he so wished. That suggested that the Judge did  not  find  the
    Appellant was likely to be perceived as gay. In reply  the  Appellant's
    representative submitted that the Appellant had been actively attending
    gay bars in United Kingdom and it needed to  be  analysed  whether  the
    Appellant would be forced to live discreetly upon return.

Findings

18. The issue in this case was whether the Appellant could establish to the
    lower standard that he was gay or would be perceived as gay upon return
    to Pakistan. The Judge did not find the  Appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness and gave detailed reasons (some  of  which  I  have  summarised
    above) for this conclusion. The Appellant's case was that  he  had  had
    lengthy relationships in Pakistan and had some sexual activity  in  the
    United Kingdom. The grounds  of  onward  appeal  and  oral  submissions
    criticised the Judge's emphasis  on  the  Appellant's  lack  of  sexual
    activity but in the absence of evidence that the Appellant had  engaged
    in relationships with other men, it is difficult to see how  the  Judge
    could have answered either of the two  questions  in  HJ  Iran  in  the
    affirmative. Without some evidence that the Appellant  had  engaged  in
    relations with other men, it was difficult to  see  how  the  Appellant
    could show that he was gay or would be perceived to be gay.

19. The problem for the Appellant was that the Judge  did  not  accept  the
    evidence which the Appellant put forward. There were inconsistencies in
    the  Appellant's  account  of  his  activities  in  Pakistan,  no  good
    explanation why the Appellant was unable to call any witnesses (such as
    Alex) to support his claim and the Appellant had made an  asylum  claim
    based on imputed political opinion which had no merit whatsoever.  That
    the  WhatsApp  correspondence  indicated  that  Alex   remembered   the
    Appellant added little to the case, since the  WhatsApp  exchanges  did
    not take the case significantly further for the cogent reasons given by
    the Judge at [42] and [43].

20. Taken cumulatively all of  these  factors  undermined  the  Appellant's
    credibility in the Judge's mind. Whilst it is the case that  supporting
    evidence is not a mandatory requirement  in  an  asylum  appeal,  where
    evidence could reasonably be expected  to  be  obtained  without  undue
    difficulty and yet that evidence has not been obtained it is open to  a
    Judge to take an adverse view of the credibility of the evidence before
    him or her. It did not assist the Appellant's  case  that  he  produced
    FIRs which contradicted the claim for asylum.

21. The grant of permission in this case is not entirely  easy  to  follow.
    The Judge of necessity had to set out his conclusions in some  form  of
    order. I do not read the determination as being the case that the Judge
    formed a conclusion and then looked for evidence afterwards to  support
    that conclusion. The Judge was required to consider the strength of the
    evidence being put forward and he did so. He came to the view that much
    of the evidence which the Appellant did  rely  on  had  been  generated
    solely for the purposes of the hearing and in consequence little or  no
    weight could be attached to it. This was not a sur  place  claim  where
    the Appellant's motives  for  his  actions  would  be  irrelevant.  The
    conclusion that the evidence had been generated for the purposes of the
    appeal was not a conclusion arrived at in a vacuum but was  the  result
    of a carful examination of that evidence itself.

22. The Appellant produced some evidence to  the  Judge  to  show  sexually
    related activities (for example his oral  testimony  that  he  had  had
    affairs in Pakistan). It was a matter for  the  Judge  looking  at  the
    evidence in a holistic way to decide whether  that  evidence  supported
    the Appellant's claim or whether it was of little value because of  the
    circumstances in which it  had  been  produced  namely  to  bolster  an
    otherwise weak claim. This is a perfectly  straightforward  way  for  a
    Judge to proceed and the references made in the grant of permission  to
    appeal to arguable errors in the determination do not in my view  carry
    weight. It is not clear to me for example what Judge Hollingworth meant
    at [5] of his decision to grant permission  in saying  that  the  Judge
    had not referred to the totality of  the  available  evidence.  Leaving
    aside the fact that it is not necessary for a Judge to set out each and
    every piece of evidence put before him or her, this was a very thorough
    determination in which the Judge analysed the relevant evidence in some
    detail. The Judge came to a very clear conclusion  that  the  Appellant
    was not gay. He gave adequate reasons for that decision and the grounds
    of onward appeal are a mere  disagreement  with  that  conclusion.  The
    Judge also explained why the Appellant would not be  perceived  as  gay
    and the argument that the Judge has overlooked the alternative tests in
    HJ Iran has no merit. Similarly without merit are the criticisms of the
    refusal letter. The Appellant was given a full opportunity to  put  his
    case across in interview, the difficulty was  that  the  case  was  not
    credible.

23. The Judge had not begun his  determination  with  a  finding  that  the
    evidence produced by the Appellant existed because the Appellant had an
    interest in generating evidence. When the Judge made  that  remark,  he
    had already at that point in the determination dealt with the  argument
    that the Appellant's immigration status prevented him from establishing
    gay relationships of any significant  duration  (he  had  rejected  the
    argument). When considering whether the Judge made a material error  of
    law in the determination it is necessary to read the determination as a
    whole and not take individual sentences from the determination  out  of
    context and place  undue  weight  on  their  position  in  the  overall
    structure of the determination. I do not consider that  there  are  any
    material errors of law in what was a  carefully  written  determination
    prepared by a very experienced Judge.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 15th of March 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 15th of March 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

