
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07812/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 February 2019                   |On 22 February 2019                |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant is Iranian.  He entered the UK in 2000 and made an asylum
    claim, which was refused.  Appeal proceedings were exhausted  in  2002.
    He did not leave the UK.  Following convictions which led  to  3  years
    imprisonment,  he  was  subject  to  deportation  proceedings.   Appeal
    proceedings were exhausted in 2013.

 3. In a decision dated 12 July 2016, the SSHD declined  to  recognise  the
    appellant's further asylum claim, based on his alleged conversion  from
    Islam to Christianity.

 4. FtT Judge Green heard the appellant's appeal on  4  August  2017.   The
    appellant accepted that  he  could  not  rebut  the  presumption  under
    section 72 of the 2002 Act.   In his decision, promulgated on 15 August
    2017, Judge Green found that  the  appellant  is  an  apostate  and  an
    evangelical Christian, and allowed the appeal on human  rights  grounds
    under article 3 of the ECHR.

 5. The SSHD applied to the FtT for permission to appeal to the UT, on  the
    grounds that the judge erred by failing  to  take  account  of  adverse
    findings in previous proceedings, in line with Devaseelan.

 6. FtT Judge O'Garro refused permission on 3 November 2017,  pointing  out
    that the fact an appellant had lied about one series of events did  not
    mean he might not be truthful on others, and taking the view  that  the
    guidance in Devaseelan had been correctly applied.

 7. The SSHD made an  application  for  permission  to  the  UT,  dated  28
    November 2017, relying again on the previous  grounds,  but  submitting
    also that even if the appellant is a convert  his  appeal  should  have
    been dismissed, under reference to country guidance, because there  was
    no evidence that he might come to attention of the authorities, such as
    through evangelical activities.

 8. UT Judge Kekic granted permission on 6 August 2018.

 9. On 13 September 2018 the appellant filed a  rule  24  response  to  the
    grant of permission.  This submits that it is incorrect to say that the
    appellant had not demonstrated  risk  in  terms  of  country  guidance,
    because the FtT found that he is evangelical.

10. The appellant's point about the finding of evangelism is  unanswerable.
    The SHD's grounds in that respect are inaccurate and misleading.

11. Mr Govan relied upon the Devaseelan point, which was  included  in  the
    grant of permission.  He submitted that the only reference to be  found
    in the decision was to the "previous unsuccessful asylum claim" at [2].

12. Mr Winter pointed to some further references.

13. Previous unsuccessful proceedings are mentioned again at [4  (i)],  [7]
    and [18].  The record of submissions for the  SSHD  at  [16]  is  quite
    detailed, and says nothing specific about earlier adverse findings.  At
    [21], the FtT weighs the fact that the appellant had not been  entirely
    candid about his criminal past in the assessment of his evidence and of
    the evidence of the pastor who spoke to his conversion.


14. The Devaseelan ground of appeal is only  insistence  that  because  the
    appellant had been found to be a dishonest witness about past  matters,
    he had to be found to be dishonest  on  later  matters.   Past  adverse
    findings were relevant, but they were not conclusive.   The  suggestion
    that those findings were ignored overlooks the specific  references  in
    the decision.  More significantly, the ground does not  fairly  reflect
    the decision as a whole, which is essentially  concerned  with  whether
    the appellant was genuinely a changed man.  It was open to the judge so
    to find, and his conclusion is not shown to have involved the making of
    any error on a point of law.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

16. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  Anonymity is preserved herein.


            [pic]

            Dated 19 February 2019
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




