
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07260/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30 November 2017                   |On 16 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     JLN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins (Counsel) instructed by Kilic & Kilic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by JLN against a determination of Judge M A  Khan  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.   His  determination  was  promulgated  on  10
    October 2017.

2.    The  appellant  had  applied  for  leave  to  remain   after   various
    applications on the basis of family and private life under Article 8 of
    the Convention and was granted this leave on  19  July  2013  until  19
    January 2016.  Unfortunately on 5 November  2014  at  Birmingham  Crown
    Court he was convicted of conspiracy to supply a  controlled  drug  for
    which he received a sentence of three years and eight months for a drug
    trafficking offence and a deportation order was made against him in May
    2015.  He also made an asylum and  protection  claim  which  were  also
    refused.  He appealed against this decision and that appeal  gave  rise
    to the determination to which we have just referred.

3.   The appeal was refused on all grounds and  permission  was  granted  to
    appeal against that, principally on the basis that the Judge applied an
    incorrect version of the Immigration Rules, an older  version,  and  he
    did not consider section  117C  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Neither did he make a full and proper  assessment  of
    the best interests of the appellant's children.   Before  us  today  Mr
    Collins and Mr Duffy agreed that that ground of appeal is made out  and
    we have no difficulty in upholding that that is the case.

4.   The determination is flawed in relation to the article 8 claim.   There
    is no flaw in the determination in relation to the asylum or protection
    claim but as far as the article 8 claim is concerned, there having been
    really no proper determination of the best interests of the children or
    the Article 8 claim generally, in terms of the proper rules,  it  seems
    to us that the best resort is to remit the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a proper assessment.

Notice of Decision

The decision will stand in relation to the protection and asylum  claim  but
the article 8 claim is unsustainable, and will be  remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for  a  proper  assessment  applying  the  correct  rules  and
statutory provisions.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure       Dated 15th January 2018



                                                             & LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

