
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07706/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th January 2020                          |On 14th January 2020          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     CA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs T Srindran, Counsel instructed by Waran & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. An anonymity direction  was  not  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       ("FtT").  As this a  protection  claim,  it  is  appropriate  that  a
       direction is made. Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  Court  directs
       otherwise, CA is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings
       shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of  his
       family.  This  direction  applies  amongst  others  to  all  parties.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
       proceedings.


    2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He arrived in  the  UK  in
       September 2012 and claimed asylum in  October  2012.  The  claim  was
       refused by the respondent for the reasons set out in a decision dated
       22 November 2012. An appeal against that decision  was  dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Osbourne for  the  reasons  set  out  in  a
       decision promulgated on 17 January 2013. The appellant  made  further
       submissions  to  the  respondent  and  the  respondent  refused   the
       appellants claim for international protection for the reasons set out
       in a further decision dated 5 August 2019.   The  appellant's  appeal
       against that decision was dismissed for the  reasons  set  out  in  a
       decision promulgated  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  on  3
       October 2010.


    3. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  summarises  the  claim  made  by  the
       appellant at paragraph [9] of his decision.  The judge heard evidence
       from the appellant  and  two  witnesses.  The  judge's  findings  and
       conclusions are set out at paragraphs [12] to [28] of  the  decision.
       The judge considered the decision and findings of First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Osbourne to be his starting point.  The judge noted that First-
       tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osbourne  had  found  there  to   be   several
       discrepancies as to the appellant's claimed involvement with the LTTE
       and in respect of his general credibility.   The judge refers to  the
       evidence of the first witness, [Mr SK],  at  paragraph  [14]  of  the
       decision.  The judge refers to the evidence of  the  second  witness,
       [Mr RR], at paragraph [15] of the decision.   The  judge  states,  at
       [15]:


             ".. He too claims to have known the appellant and confirms the
             appellant's claim of being involved  with  the  LTTE  and  was
             granted Asylum status following  a  successful  Asylum  appeal
             hearing. However crucially [Mr RR] submitted  a  copy  of  his
             asylum interview in which the appellant is  mentioned  as  the
             owner of a bus (used to transport  to  and  from  a  political
             event).  In addition the appellant has produced  a  photograph
             said to show the appellant and [Mr RR] together in  2011.  The
             appellant relies upon this as  corroborating  his  account  of
             events leading up to his detention and ill-treatment."

    4. The Judge found the evidence of [Mr RR] to be of no assistance to the
       appellant.  The judge noted, at [17], that [Mr RR] had  provided  his
       Home Office asylum interview record but had failed to provide a  copy
       of the decision of the Tribunal, in which his appeal was allowed.  At
       paragraph [18] of his decision, the judge stated:


             "[Mr RR's] account  of  events  in  his  interview  record  is
             unclear but he states in his witness statement  ...  that  the
             appellant and himself  were  arrested  at  the  same  time  on
             21.01.12. However, the appellant fails to mention [Mr  RR]  or
             anyone else being arrested with him at the same  time  in  his
             asylum interview. I also do not find the explanation as to how
             the appellant and [Mr RR] came to be reunited in the  UK.  The
             appellant lives in New Malden, Surrey and  [Mr  RR]  lives  in
             Clacton-on-Sea, Essex.  However, I  do  not  accept  both  met
             randomly at a Temple in East Ham, London. This is because both
             have more local Temples and no explanation was given as to why
             both attended this Temple, being several miles away,  in  East
             Ham on that particular day. There was  no  suggestion  of  any
             particular event or any specific feature of this  Temple  that
             drew both to this Temple in East Ham. Consequently I find that
             there  has  been  a  far  greater  co-ordination  between  the
             appellant  and  [Mr  RR]  than  suggested   to   bolster   the
             appellant's claim."

    5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to consider the medical  report
       of Dr Francis Arnold that was relied  upon  by  the  appellant.   The
       judge noted the report identifies numerous scars that are said to  be
       consistent with the account of ill-treatment given by the  appellant.
       At paragraph [23], the judge stated:


             "... I  do  not  accept  that  the  presence  of  these  scars
             necessarily leads to the conclusion that the appellant was ill
             treated as claimed. This is because the appellant has been  in
             the UK since 2012. On his own account he has been detained and
             mistreated prior to his last claimed detention on  21.01.2012.
             Indeed his account is that he was detained first time in  1990
             and then on a further four occasions, during which time he was
             mistreated each time. So whilst  I  accept  that  the  medical
             evidence demonstrates that the appellant has scars  consistent
             with being beaten they do not show  when  and  how  they  were
             sustained. In particular given that the  appellant  failed  to
             produce a medical report at the time  of  his  initial  asylum
             claim and appeal hearing the ability to identify  the  age  of
             the scars has been  greatly  diminished.   As  noted  by  FtTJ
             Osbourne there appeared to be no good reason for not producing
             a  medical  report  at  the  appeal  hearing   on   17.1.2013.
             Consequently I do not accept that the appellant  was  detained
             and mistreated as claimed and certainly not on 21.1.2012...."

    6. The judge rejected the appellant's claim that he suffers from PTSD or
       is at increased risk of suicide if he is returned to Sri  Lanka.  The
       judge noted that Dr Arnold relied heavily on the account given by the
       appellant himself and although the appellant is registered with a GP,
       he only receives treatment for physical musculoskeletal  problems  by
       way of course of  paracetamol.   The  appellant  seems  not  to  have
       complained  of  or  received  any  treatment  for  any  psychological
       problems.


    7. At paragraph [25], the judge concluded:


             "Even if I was to accept that  the  appellant  was  previously
             suspected of being a LTTE member or  supporter  as  claimed  I
             find the  appellant  does  not  come  within  the  profile  of
             individuals whom the Sri Lankan authorities have  an  on-going
             interest in (GJ and others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
             Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)"

The appeal before me


    8. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal. First, the judge failed
       to properly consider the medical report of Dr Arnold  and  failed  to
       give sufficient weight to  that  evidence.  Second,  the  judge  made
       insufficient findings in respect of the evidence  given  by  the  two
       witnesses. In particular, the judge failed to make any finding as  to
       whether the appellant is still wanted by  the  authorities,  and  the
       evidence of [Mr RR] was found to be of no assistance to the appellant
       because he had failed to provide a copy of the decision in respect of
       his appeal.


    9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Landes
       on 22nd November 2019.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
       whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge is tainted by a
       material error of law.


   10. At the outset of the hearing before me, Ms  Isherwood  accepted  that
       the First-tier Tribunal judge had been provided with a  copy  of  the
       SEF interview record for [Mr RR] and during that  interview  [Mr  RR]
       had made reference to the appellant.  He had claimed that  the  'army
       and CID' had attended the appellant's house. [Mr RR] said that he and
       the appellant had been blindfolded and taken in  a  van  to  an  army
       camp.  In his witness statement that was before the FtT, [Mr RR]  had
       confirmed that he was arrested on 21/01/2012 at the appellant's house
       and the appellant was also arrested at the same time.   Ms  Isherwood
       accepts the  judge  makes  limited  reference  to  that  evidence  in
       paragraph [18] of his decision, but without reasons, appears to  have
       rejected [Mr RR's] evidence simply because the appellant himself  had
       failed to mention [Mr RR] or anyone else being arrested with  him  at
       the same time in his asylum interview.  She accepts the judge did not
       make an adverse credibility finding against [Mr  RR]  or  indeed  {Mr
       SK], but appears to have concluded that the evidence of [Mr RR] is of
       no assistance to the appellant,  simply  because  he  had  failed  to
       provide a copy of the decision and reasons for his successful appeal.




   11. The focus of the decision of the FtT Judge in reaching  his  decision
       that the evidence of [Mr RR] is of no  assistance  to  the  appellant
       appears to have  been  upon  the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  AA
       (Somalia) -v- SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1040. The extract of the Court  of
       Appeal judgement that  is  referred  to  at  paragraph  [16]  of  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain is in fact part of  the
       dissenting judgment of Lord Justice Hooper.  In  fact,  at  paragraph
       [17] of the judgement of the Court of Appeal (from which the extracts
       at paragraph [16] of the FtT decision are taken), Lord Justice Hooper
       was referring to the decision of the Vice President in the AIT.  Lord
       Justice Hooper noted that the AIT, in the passages referred to by the
       First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  was  making  it  clear  that,  in  cases
       involving different parties, the earlier decision is not binding  and
       that "in the general interests of good  administration"  the  earlier
       decision should be taken as no more than  a  starting  point.    Lord
       Justice Hooper  found  the  reasoning  of  the  Vice  President  very
       persuasive.  Lord Justice  Carnwath,  with  whom  Lord  Justice  Ward
       agreed, held that the guidelines in the case  of  Devaseelan  v  SSHD
       [2003] Imm. A.R. 1, on the  weight  to  be  attached  in  immigration
       appeals to an earlier finding of fact, also applies  to  cases  where
       the earlier decision involved different parties but where there was a
       material overlap of evidence.


   12. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge for myself.  It is now well established that although there  is
       a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on  the
       central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
       not be extensive if the decision  as  a  whole  makes  sense,  having
       regard to the material accepted by the judge.  The  evidence  of  [Mr
       RR] regarding the arrest  and  detention  of  both  himself  and  the
       appellant in January 2012 was at least capable of  corroborating  the
       account given by the appellant.  The judge does not make any  finding
       as to the credibility of [Mr RR], but appears  to  proceed  upon  the
       premise that his evidence  is  of  no  assistance  to  the  appellant
       because of his failure to provide a copy of the decision and  reasons
       in his appeal.  It would no  doubt  have  been  preferable  for  that
       decision to have been before the FtT, but the First-tier Tribunal did
       have before it, the SEF interview in  which  [Mr  RR]  had  expressly
       referred to the appellant. The  judge  refers  to  that  evidence  at
       paragraph [15] of the decision, but fails to consider the  extent  to
       which that evidence  is  capable  of  corroborating  the  appellant's
       account in the absence of the Tribunal decision.


   13. As to the medical evidence, the First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to
       the appellant's failure to produce a medical report during his  claim
       for asylum and at the hearing of his appeal in 2013.  In fact, First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Osbourne had found that given the short timescale
       "... there may be an acceptable reason why no  medical  evidence  was
       adduced with respect to scarring  on  the  appellant's  body.".   FtT
       Judge Osbourne considered that as the appellant was not credible,  in
       the absence of corroborative medical evidence, his appeal  could  not
       succeed. In his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain,  at
       paragraph [25], appears to proceed upon  the  basis  that  FtT  Judge
       Osbourne had found there to be no good reason  for  not  producing  a
       medical report at the hearing of the appeal  in  January  2013.   The
       evidence of scarring, identified by Dr  Arnold  as  being  consistent
       with the account of ill-treatment given by the appellant,  was  again
       capable of corroborating the appellant's account of events when taken
       together with the other evidence before the  Tribunal.  Although  the
       weight attached to the evidence is a matter for the judge, the  judge
       appears  to  have  proceeded  upon  a  mistake  as  to  fact  in  his
       understanding that FtT judge Osbourne had  said  there  was  no  good
       reason for not producing a medical report at the  appeal  hearing  in
       January 2013.  A careful evaluation of all of the evidence before the
       Tribunal was required, but is not apparent from the decision.


   14. Having considered the  concession  made  by  Ms  Isherwood,  and  the
       decision for myself, I am satisfied that the decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Hussain is tainted by a  material  error  of  law  and
       should be set aside.


   15. As to disposal, the assessment of a claim for asylum such as this  is
       always a highly fact sensitive task.  In  all  the  circumstances,  I
       have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to  the
       FtT for hearing afresh, having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior
       President's Practice Statement of 25th September  2012.   The  nature
       and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be  extensive.
       The parties will be advised of the date of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing in due course.








Notice of Decision


   16. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge Hussain promulgated
       on 3rd October 2019 is set aside, and I  remit  the  matter  for  re-
       hearing  de  novo  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  no  findings
       preserved.

Signed                                  Date          7th January 2020


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and there can be no fee award


Signed                                  Date          7th January 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
