
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/07410/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 23 October 2017                     |       On 25 October 2017           |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     TCK
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, instructed by GM Immigration Aid
Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's his appeal against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Alty promulgated 4.4.17, dismissing on all  grounds  her
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 5.7.16, to
    refuse her protection claim.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 24.3.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson granted permission  to  appeal  on
    3.8.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 23.10.17 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.





Error of Law

 5. In the first instance, I have to determine whether or not there was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Alty should be set aside.

 6. The appellant's case was that she was raped by a Zanu PF  activist  and
    subsequently aborted the resulting pregnancy. She then fled to the  UK,
    became pregnant again as a single parent, and thus would  be  returning
    to Zimbabwe as a young single mother with a child born out of  wedlock.
    She claimed that she would have no family support as her mother  is  in
    Ireland and  whilst  her  father  had  supported  her  after  the  rape
    incident, he would not support her with a child freely conceived by her
    outside marriage.

 7. The judge  identified  the  main  issue  in  the  appeal  was  internal
    relocation.  She  concluded  at  [36]  that  the  appellant  failed  to
    demonstrate that she would be at risk on return by reason of an illegal
    termination of pregnancy. At [37] the judge also found that  she  would
    not be at risk from TM, as it had not been demonstrated that he  is  of
    sufficient power and influence to  be  able  to  pursue  the  appellant
    throughout Zimbabwe.

 8. The judge  applied  the  Januzi  test,  concluding  that  it  would  be
    reasonable and not unduly harsh for her to relocate, relying at [39] on
    the country background information to that  effect,  which  also  notes
    that  women  move  freely  throughout  Zimbabwe.  At  [40]  the   judge
    considered  the  appellant's  particular  circumstances  and  at   [42]
    accepted that there may be some discrimination  and  stigmatisation  of
    women  who  have  children  out  of  wedlock,  but  it  had  not   been
    demonstrated that it would be unduly harsh to expect her  to  relocate.
    The appeal was thus dismissed.

 9. In essence, the grounds argue that in dismissing the appeal, the First-
    tier Tribunal erred,  in  particular  between  [38]  and  [42]  of  the
    decision,  in  addressing  the  viability  of  internal  relocation  in
    Zimbabwe, with reference to what support the appellant might  have  and
    failing to consider the best interests of her unborn child.

10. In granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge  Hodgkinson  considered  it
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  "adequately  explore"
    the ability of the appellant to relocate to Bulawayo  in  circumstances
    where she would have the responsibility of looking after a young  child
    without day-to-day support. It is also said  that  the  judge  did  not
    refer to the best interests of the unborn child, or what  that  child's
    circumstances might be.

11. The Rule 24 response, dated 15.9.17, submits that between [38] and [42]
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made   properly   reasoned   findings
    concerning relocation of the appellant to Bulawayo, as a single  mother
    who is healthy and educated,  and  with  the  family  support  she  may
    receive from her father.

12. I notice that in his submissions before me, Mr Nicholson did not pursue
    the issue of the best interests of  the  unborn  child.  The  child  in
    question  had  not  been  born  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  or
    promulgation of the determination and thus the child's  best  interests
    did not fall to be addressed, as at that time the child had no separate
    existence, and no article 8 rights, consistent with the view  expressed
    by the Court of Appeal in CA v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1165. However, the
    judge took into account findings at [40] that she was pregnant but that
    the parents had been  supportive  previously  and  concluded  that  she
    failed to substantiate her claim to be without family support, and that
    her father would be able to visit her.

13. Mr Nicholson suggested that the judge failed to make a  finding  as  to
    whether  the  appellant  had  a  termination,  but  accepted   in   his
    submissions that it was not material to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.
    However, Mr Nicholson submitted that there was a "clear error"  in  the
    judge's failure to address the submissions made, and  failed  to  adopt
    the correct approach to the Januzi issue, and omitted reference to  the
    respondent's guidance on women in Zimbabwe.  He  said  his  submissions
    made at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing could not be seen in the
    decision and that it was an  error  of  law  if  the  judge  failed  to
    demonstrate that they had been considered.

14. For the reasons set out I find no merit in any of the submissions made.

15. First, in AS (Iran) [2017] EWCA Civ 1539 The Court  of  Appeal  stated,
    "In approaching criticism of reasons given by  a  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the  Respondent  correctly  reminds  us  to  avoid  a  requirement   of
    perfection. As Brooke LJ observed in the course of his  decision  in R
    (Iran) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ
    982, "unjustified complaints" as to an alleged failure to give adequate
    reasons are all too frequent. The obligation on a Tribunal is  to  give
    reasons in sufficient detail  to  show  the  principles  on  which  the
    Tribunal has acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.  Such
    reasons need not be  elaborate,  and  do  not  need  to  address  every
    argument or every factor which weighed in the decision. If  a  Tribunal
    has not expressly addressed an argument, but if there  are  grounds  on
    which the argument could properly have  been  rejected,  it  should  be
    assumed that the Tribunal acted on such grounds. It is sufficient  that
    the critical reasons to the decision are recorded. In respect  of  each
    of these grounds of complaint, the  Secretary  of  State  submits  that
    perfectly acceptable reasoning was set out in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision."

16. It is clear that the judge gave anxious consideration  to  whether  the
    appellant  would  be  able  to  relocate  within  Zimbabwe.  The  judge
    addressed her mind to whether the appellant would be at risk on  return
    as a result of an illegal termination, and whether she was at risk from
    TM, a non-state actor. Cogent reasons were  given  for  rejecting  both
    those claims, the latter was addressed by the assessment  of  viability
    of relocation, where the  judge  made  clear  that  she  was  making  a
    holistic assessment of all the appellant's  circumstances,  determining
    the impact on her of relocating, and considering whether she  could  do
    so without undue hardship.  In  so  doing,  the  judge  adequately  and
    properly addressed the relevant test. I do not  accept  the  submission
    that the judge over-simplified Januzi. It is clear that the  judge  was
    conscious  of  the  need   to   consider   the   appellant's   personal
    circumstances and did so.

17. It was  submitted  that  at  [40]  the  judge  failed  to  address  the
    "critical" submission that  the  father  had  been  supportive  of  her
    following rape and the termination of pregnancy brought about by an act
    forced upon her, but would not support his daughter  becoming  pregnant
    in a consensual relationship. However, that was directly  addressed  by
    the judge at [40] where the appellant's belief that  her  family  would
    not support this second pregnancy, expressed in evidence, is  recorded.
    The judge was entitled to reject that claim and indeed  the  submission
    Mr Nicholson complains was ignored, for the cogent reasons set  out  in
    the decision. The judge considered that the father had previously  been
    supportive  and  reached  the  view  that  the  appellant's  fear   was
    speculative. The finding was open to the judge on the evidence. I  fail
    to see how there is any material error of law in not acknowledging that
    the same point was made in oral submissions by  Mr  Nicholson,  as  the
    issue was properly addressed and resolved by the judge. The finding and
    conclusion was open to the judge.

18. Nor do I accept that there is any error in the judge's assessment  that
    the mother's support from Ireland amounted to  occasional  visits,  and
    thus the support limited. The judge concluded  that  her  father  could
    visit her in Zimbabwe. Mr Nicholson's submissions on these  points  are
    little more than a disagreement with the judge's findings.  I  find  no
    material error of law and do not accept  that  the  findings  could  be
    regarded as perverse or irrational; they were  certainly  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence.

19. Mr Nicholson also submitted that the judge  failed  apply  the  correct
    lower standard of proof. In relation to the standard  of  proof  it  is
    quite clear that the judge identified and applied the correct  standard
    of 'reasonable degree of likelihood,' set out at [23] of the  decision.
    Having carefully read the decision,  I  do  not  see  where  the  judge
    purportedly applied any higher standard of proof. It is  a  matter  for
    the judge to assess the evidence and decide on  its  weight.  There  is
    nothing in this decision which  could  be  regarded  as  irrational  or
    perverse. All of the findings were open to the judge  on  the  evidence
    before her and for which cogent reasons have been given.

Conclusion & Decision

20. For the reasons set out, I find that the making of the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a  point
    of law such that the decision should be set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  of  the
                    First-tier  Tribunal  stands  and  the  appeal   remains
                    dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



