
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07142/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 May 2019                                 |On 13 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                    [B S]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms E Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

    1. The appellant appeals with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal
       against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  I  D  Boyes
       dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent, dated 21
       May 2018, refusing his protection claim.


    2. The appellant is a citizen of India. He arrived in the UK in October
       2009 in order to study. He was refused an extension  of  stay  as  a
       student in 2011 and, having failed in a further  attempt  to  obtain
       leave, on 6 October 2017 was arrested and detained by the police  on
       the basis he was considered to be an overstayer. In  due  course  he
       claimed asylum.


    3. The appellant claimed that his father had borrowed a  large  sum  of
       money from a Mr [ST], who was now a minister. In around October 2007
       he demanded the deeds to the appellant's father's land on the  basis
       that, when the debt was repaid, he would return them. The  appellant
       claimed he was attacked in December  2007  by  people  demanding  he
       should transfer the land into their names.  The  appellant's  father
       transferred the land to the appellant in 2008.


    4. Additionally, the appellant claimed that, in 2006, he  was  arrested
       and tortured by the police while demonstrating in Amritsar.  He  was
       detained for three  days.  During  that  time,  he  claimed  he  was
       tortured.


    5. The respondent refused the appellant's protection claim because  the
       appellant's account was not considered credible. The lateness of the
       claim  was  prominent  in  the   respondent's   consideration.   The
       appellant's appeal was heard by the judge at Newport on 5 July  2018
       and dismissed in a decision promulgated on 11 July 2018.

    6. In a brief decision, the  judge  found  he  was  not  satisfied  the
       appellant was at any risk in relation to the land  dispute  with  Mr
       [T]. There was no evidence of the transaction, of  Mr  [T],  of  the
       land being seized or of threats being made to the appellant. In  any
       event, even if the matter were true, the appellant could obtain help
       from the police and/or relocate to another part of India.  Regarding
       the political claim, the judge agreed with the respondent  that  the
       appellant's decision to join a party in  February  2018,  which  was
       after his  arrest  and  asylum  claim,  did  not  evince  a  genuine
       political  belief.  The   appellant   had   seemingly   joined   the
       organisation to bolster his claim. In any event, the party  was  not
       one which was outlawed or banned and there was no evidence that mere
       membership of the party in the UK or indeed India would put a person
       in peril. The judge rejected the claim that the appellant  had  been
       arrested and tortured for his political beliefs. There was a rule 35
       report highlighting a number of injuries but these could  have  been
       incurred in a variety of ways. He found the lateness  of  the  claim
       hugely undermined the appellant's credibility.


    7. The judge considered separately whether removing the appellant would
       breach his human rights on account of his mental health problems. He
       found it would not because there  would  be  proper  and  sufficient
       treatment available for him in India. Finally, the judge found there
       were no significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  in
       India.


    8. Very brief ground  seeking  permission  to  appeal  were  submitted.
       Permission  to  appeal  was  nonetheless  granted  because  it   was
       considered arguable  that  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  medical
       evidence was superficial. It was considered arguable the  judge  had
       not considered humanitarian  protection  and  had  given  inadequate
       consideration to articles 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention. It
       was considered arguable the judge's  approach  to  the  fact-finding
       exercise was inadequate.


    9. The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response.

   10. The appellant is not legally represented and he did not  attend  the
       hearing. I checked that a notice of hearing had  been  sent  to  his
       last known address in Birmingham. This gave the appellant sufficient
       notice of the hearing. The notice has not been returned  undelivered
       and I can safely assume it was received. The procedure rules  permit
       the hearing to go ahead in the appellant's absence if I am satisfied
       that reasonable steps have been taken  to  notify  a  party  of  the
       hearing and it is in the interests of justice to  proceed  with  the
       hearing. I was satisfied on both points.  There  was  no  reason  to
       adjourn. There is mention in the papers of the  appellant  suffering
       from ill-health but there was no evidence before me to show  he  was
       unfit to attend the hearing.

   11. Ms Everett submitted the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does
       not contain any material error of law. I agree  and  I  dismiss  the
       appellant's appeal. My reasons are as follows.

   12. The judge was plainly right to note that the land  dispute  did  not
       provide the appellant with a Refugee Convention reason.

   13. The judge considered the evidence that the appellant had  been  able
       to provide in support of his claim and he was entitled  to  find  it
       lacking such that the burden of proof was not discharged even to the
       lower standard applicable.

   14. When, in paragraph 19, the judge expressed himself in terms that "no
       evidence" had been provided in respect of various matters,  he  must
       be understood as meaning no supporting or documentary  evidence  had
       been provided. His  decision  that  the  appellant  could  seek  the
       protection of the police does not address the claim by the appellant
       that Mr [T] is a minister. However, it is clear that no evidence was
       submitted supporting that claim and the decision is best  understood
       as meaning the judge was not  prepared  to  accept  the  appellant's
       assertion without more.

   15. I find no material error of law in the judge's consideration of  the
       land dispute claim.

   16. Regarding the  other  limb  of  the  appellant's  protection  claim,
       concerning his political activities, the judge  considered  the  two
       highpoints of the evidence, which were his joining a political party
       in the UK and the rule 35 report. He was entitled to find that  none
       of this was capable of overcoming the doubts sewn by the lateness of
       the claim, which the appellant only made after his  arrest,  or  his
       failure to mention being arrested  and  tortured  in  the  screening
       interview.

   17. The judge was entitled to find that the appellant's decision to join
       the party in February 2018 was to bolster the claim made in November
       2017, some eight years after he arrived in  the  UK  and  six  years
       after his last period of leave expired. The  judge  also  noted,  in
       paragraph 22, that the appellant had not established that membership
       of the party he joined would place him at risk on return.

   18. The medical evidence consisted  of  nothing  more  than  a  rule  35
       report, which is not independent evidence of torture. As  the  judge
       noted, if the use of the term "consistent" were  to  be  interpreted
       according to the  Istanbul  Protocol  categorisation,  at  best  the
       report showed the appellant's injuries could have been caused  in  a
       number of ways.

   19. The medical evidence did not entitle the judge to find a  breach  of
       article 3 as a consequence of removing the appellant to India  where
       treatment would be available for his mental health problems.  I  see
       no material error in the decision.

   20. I do not see on what other basis this appellant might be entitled to
       a grant of humanitarian protection.

   21. Finally, with regard  to  article  8,  as  with  all  parts  of  the
       decision, the judge's reasoning extremely concise. However, I cannot
       see any material error given there seems to have  been  no  reliable
       basis put forward on which the appellant could have met the rules on
       private or family life  grounds  and  there  would  seem  to  be  no
       exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of  leave  outside  the
       rules.


NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and his decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction which I continue.



Signed                                  Date 7 May 2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
