
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/07026/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 4 January 2018                          |On 8 January 2018              |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    P K I
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    and Dyer    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Fowell promulgated on 6 September 2017 dismissing her  appeal
         for protection against the respondent's decision of 11 July 2017 on
         asylum grounds but allowing it on humanitarian  protection  grounds
         and under articles 2, 3 and 8.   The appellant is a national of the
         DRC, born on 1 June 1999. She previously had discretionary leave as
         an unaccompanied minor.


      2. Judge Fowell rejected the asylum aspect of the  appeal  because  he
         found that the appellant was not a member of  a  particular  social
         group (PSG). He found that there would have  to  be  some  form  of
         targeting of the group or a deliberate failure to protect them from
         attackers in order for women in the DRC to form such a group.


      3. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Birrell on the basis that the judge arguably misdirected himself as
         to established principles of refugee law, misinterpreted aspects of
         Shah and Islam [1992] 2AC 629 and erred by failing to  address  the
         issue of whether women formed a particular social group in the  DRC
         given that the respondent in her decision letter conceded that they
         did.


      4. The respondent, in  her  Rule  24  response,  did  not  oppose  the
         application for permission and invited the Tribunal to consider the
         appeal at a continuance hearing. The matter then came before me.


      5. The Hearing


      6. The appellant attended the hearing.


      7. Mr Avery  confirmed  the  contents  of  the  respondent's  Rule  24
         response.


      8. Mr Palmer then made his submissions. He submitted that there was no
         need for a further hearing as the judge had made  factual  findings
         in his determination. He submitted that  on  the  strength  of  the
         findings at paragraphs 39-44 and given the respondent's  concession
         in the decision letter, policy document  and  country  report  that
         women in the DRC formed  a  PSG,  the  appellant  was  entitled  to
         refugee status and the appeal should be allowed.


      9. Mr Avery asked that I take the findings of the judge  into  account
         and reach a decision accordingly.


     10. Mr Palmer had nothing further to add in response.


     11. At the conclusion of the  hearing  I  indicated  that  I  would  be
         allowing the appeal. I now give my reasons.


     12. Conclusions


     13. The respondent has conceded that Judge Fowell made an error of  law
         when he found that women in the DRC did  not  constitute  a  social
         group. It is plain from the evidence before him that the respondent
         had always taken the view that they did; this is expressed  in  the
         decision letter, in the respondent's  country  reports  and  policy
         documents. In the circumstances, the judge erred in his approach to
         the Refugee Convention, his decision is consequently flawed in that
         respect and is set aside. The  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on
         humanitarian protection grounds and  under  articles  2,  3  and  8
         stands.


     14. No issue has been taken with the judge's findings of fact. They are
         sound. The judge found that the appellant would be returning to the
         DRC as a lone female with no family support or  contact.  He  found
         that  there  was  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in   the
         appellant's home area, that there were very real risks of rape  and
         violence at the hands of militia and that the  appellant  would  be
         targeted with a view to prostitution or trafficking. He found  that
         there was a real risk she  would  suffer  serious  harm,  that  the
         police  were  ill  disciplined  and  corrupt  and  that  there  was
         insufficient protection against rape and  violence.  He  considered
         whether internal relocation was an option but found it would not be
         viable.


     15. Given that the respondent has already taken the view that women  in
         the DRC form a PSG, Mr Palmer is right  to  say  that  the  judge's
         findings (as summarized above) entitle the appellant to  protection
         under the Refugee Convention.


     16. Decision


     17. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law such that  the  decision
         under the Refugee Convention is set aside. I re-make  the  decision
         and allow the appeal on asylum grounds.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's decision to allow the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
         grounds and under articles 2, 3 and 8 stands.


     18. Anonymity


     19. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.



    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge                                         Date: 4
January 2018
