
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07236/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th November 2019                |On 25th November 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwinycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Greer of Counsel, instructed by Ison Harrison
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Bircher made following a hearing at North Shields on 4th January 2019.

Background

 2. The claimant is a national of Albania born on  8th  October  1996.   He
    arrived in the UK illegally on  24th  July  2014  and  claimed  asylum.
    There then followed lengthy judicial review proceedings  following  the
    refusal and certification of his asylum claim. An  appealable  decision
    to refuse him was made on 13th July 2017.

 3. His appeal was subsequently dismissed but that decision was  set  aside
    and ordered to be  reheard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge
    allowed the appeal and her decision was challenged by the Secretary  of
    State.

 4. In a decision made by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 16th May 2019  it
    was decided that the FtT decision contained an error of law and it  was
    set aside.

 5. It was agreed by all parties that a  number  of  the  judge's  positive
    findings of fact should be preserved, namely that the claimant's family
    was involved in a feud with his paternal uncle, his father  sought  the
    protection of  local  elders  and  the  police,  but  they  refused  to
    intervene, and the uncle then set fire  to  the  claimant's  home.  The
    family sought to avoid the uncle by hiding in a barn in  the  mountains
    away from the family home but were found by the uncle who  fired  shots
    at them.  The claimant is not  now  in  contact  with  his  father  and
    brother.

 6. Whilst it was accepted that the claimant would be at risk on return  to
    his home area the Upper Tribunal Judge concluded that the FtT  had  not
    properly addressed the issue  of  internal  relocation  nor  had  given
    adequate reasons for deciding that it would not  be  possible  for  the
    claimant to relocate in this case.

The Hearing

 7. Prior to the hearing both parties produced skeleton arguments.

 8. Mr Diwinycz submitted that the claimant could  reasonably  relocate  to
    the city of Tirana.  In his skeleton argument he said that no  evidence
    had been led or produced to show that any of the claimant's family have
    been harmed or killed.  His uncle would  not  know  that  he  had  left
    Albania nor  whether  he  had  returned,  since  the  claimant  himself
    asserted that the uncle would not know if his father and  brother  were
    still there.

 9. There was no evidence  to  show  that  the  uncle  was  well-connected,
    influential or otherwise able to trace the claimant throughout Albania.
     He had shown little interest in seeking out the family.  It took him a
    year to encounter them in the barn and there was no evidence whatsoever
    of any interest in him since.  Tirana is only 24 miles  away  from  the
    claimant's home village as the crow flies but 72 miles by road and  two
    and a half hours away.

10. Mr Greer submitted that it had been accepted that the claimant would be
    at risk in his own village.  In order to lead any  kind  of  relatively
    normal life in Albania he would have to return there in order to obtain
    an identity card, which would put him at risk.  There was  a  question,
    given his accepted fear, whether he would choose to do so  but  in  any
    event, should his uncle become aware of his return to Albania, he could
    by simple payment of a bribe gain access to personal  information  held
    in the civil register.  BF (Tirana - gay men) Albania CG [2019] UKUT 93
    recognised that it is plausible that  a  person  might  be  traced  via
    family or other connections being made on  enquiry  in  Tirana.   Given
    that the claimant's uncle had made earnest attempts to  pursue  him  in
    the past it was reasonable to assume that he would be likely to  do  so
    again in the future.

11. Furthermore the claimant would run the risk of destitution  on  return.
    He would be unable to obtain social housing until  he  secured  regular
    employment and youth unemployment in Albania is almost 70%.   His  work
    experience is extremely limited and he ceased his education after  year
    nine.

Findings and Conclusions

12. I conclude that the claimant could reasonably relocate  to  Tirana  for
    the following reasons.

13. The claimant came to the UK in 2014.  There is no  evidence  whatsoever
    that his uncle has shown any interest in him since that  date.   Whilst
    the claimant says that he is not in touch with his family  it  is  most
    unlikely that if any of them had been harmed by his uncle that he would
    not have known of it.

14. Second, even if his uncle was still interested in pursuing  him,  there
    is absolutely no evidence that his reach extends further than the local
    area.  There is a great deal of difference between a brief visit to the
    local town to obtain an identity card and settling in the area  but  in
    any event the claimant and his family remained in the  locality  for  a
    year after the original dispute before the events of July  2014.   This
    would suggest that a brief return to obtain  identity  documents  would
    not pose any real risk to him.

15. The chance of bumping into someone who might recognise him,  some  five
    years later and that person seeking out the claimant's uncle who  might
    then decide to bribe an official to find out more about his whereabouts
    is so remote as not to pose any realistic threat.

16. So far as the risk of destitution  is  concerned,  the  claimant  is  a
    healthy young man.  It seems, from the expert report, that  he  may  be
    able to receive social assistance  subject  to  passing  an  asset  and
    income based means test.  Whilst that  may  be  minimal  the  claimant,
    having spent  five  years  in  the  UK,  ought  to  have  reached  some
    proficiency in English which would assist him in gaining employment.

17. For these reasons the claimant could  reasonably  relocate  to  another
    area of Albania, in particular Tirana, where he would  be  at  no  real
    risk of harm or of any treatment contrary to the ECHR.



Notice of Decision

The original judge erred in law.  Her decision has been set  aside.   It  is
remade as follows.  The claimant's appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 25 November 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

