
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07425/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 November 2020 via Skype for Business |On 19 November 2020             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                BR (Pakistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z. McCullum, Counsel, instructed by the Joint
                    Council for the Welfare of Immigrants
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell. Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was V (video). A face to  face  hearing
was not held because it  was  not  practicable,  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to are the trial bundle  from  the  First-
tier Tribunal, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and the  grounds  of
appeal, the contents of which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: they were content that the  hearing
was conducted fairly in its remote form.

 1. The appellant, BR, is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1989. He claims  to
    be a gay man who will face being persecuted in Pakistan on  account  of
    his sexual orientation if he is forced to  return  there.  He  made  an
    asylum claim to the Secretary of State on that basis.  The Secretary of
    State refused the claim on 24 July 2019. He appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and his appeal was heard by Tribunal Judge Hussain who, in  a
    decision promulgated  on  9  April  2020,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals against the decision of Judge Hussain,  with  the
    permission of Upper Tribunal Judge Owens.

Factual background

 2. The appellant arrived in June 2012 as a student. His visa was curtailed
    in November 2012, with no right of appeal,  as  his  college's  sponsor
    licence had been revoked. The appellant remained in the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully. He was encountered by  the  police  in  February  2016  and
    detained. It was at that point he claimed asylum, and he  was  released
    from detention.

 3. The appellant's  case  was  that  he  began  to  realise  that  he  was
    interested in sexual activity with other men when he was around  17  to
    18 years of age, having had an initial sexual  experience  with  a  man
    named S, which evolved into a relationship lasting three to four years.
    It was not until he was 24 years old that he realised what it meant  to
    be gay. He was in the United Kingdom at this stage. He met a man  in  a
    park, and the two returned to the appellant's accommodation and engaged
    in sexual activity. They were caught and photographed while having  sex
    by a man staying with the appellant who had not been expected to return
    until later in the day. The visitor was a friend  of  the  family  from
    Pakistan. He told the appellant's family what  had  happened,  and  the
    appellant's family disowned him and made  threats  against  him.  Since
    then, the appellant has  embedded  himself  in  LGBT  culture  in  this
    country. He attends gay bars and clubs and has  had  a  number  of  gay
    relationships, he claimed.

 4. Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  relied  on  witness
    evidence from two gay Pakistani men, each of whom have been  recognised
    as refugees on account of their sexual orientation, Mr B and Mr N. Mr B
    provided the tribunal with names of men he thought had had sex with the
    appellant. In the words of Ms McCallum, Mr N was a "drag queen". He met
    the appellant through a social media application.  They had sex.  Mr  N
    has seen the appellant kissing another man and attending events in  the
    LGBT community.  The  appellant  also  gave  evidence,  describing  his
    experience of "cruising", which he describes as (to quote  the  judge's
    unchallenged verbatim summary in the decision below)  "where  gays  get
    together and have sex in the bush."

 5. The appellant's evidence also summarised how he played with  girls  and
    dolls in his youth.  He was beaten by his father upon being  discovered
    kissing another boy. His family are strict Muslims, he said.

 6. The appellant relied on a medical report of Professor Fox, which stated
    that the appellant has depressive symptoms and severe anxiety symptoms.
    The professor opined that the presentation of the  appellant,  and  the
    narrative that he had given during  the  consultation,  was  consistent
    with what he claimed to have happened to him in Pakistan.  He had lived
    in fear of his sexual orientation being discovered by his family, which
    was compounded by the actual discovery of his sexual orientation in the
    United Kingdom, and the severing of all  contact  with  his  family  in
    2015. The past  concealment,  opined  the  professor,  has  caused  him
    distress as he  was  in  constant  fear  of  discovery.  The  appellant
    presented a significant suicide risk.  He had self-harmed in the past.

 7. The judge noted at [47] that the appellant's case was not  inconsistent
    with the background materials concerning the experience of gay  men  in
    Pakistan.  He summarised the appellant's  case  and  his  narrative  in
    detail. At [66], the judge said he had taken into account the  totality
    of the evidence,  including  the  appellant's  written  statement.  The
    appellant had not given a truthful account of his experiences, said the
    judge, and had not proved to the requisite standard that he is gay.

 8. The operative analysis of the judge commenced at  [67];  the  appellant
    had delayed claiming asylum for many years after coming here, and  only
    did so after being notified of the decision to remove. The  judge  said
    that he did not accept the appellant's explanations for the delay,  all
    of which related to the appellant either not being aware that he  could
    claim asylum, or him being afraid all of being detained and removed  to
    Pakistan.  This  engaged  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 ("the  2004  Act"),  found  the
    judge.

 9.  At  [68]  the  judge  gave  reasons  for  rejecting  the   appellant's
    explanation for the delay. These included the  fact  that,  by  October
    2013, the appellant's case was that he had accepted his  sexuality  and
    knew that he was unable to go back to Pakistan as he was living a  lie.
    His sexuality had been revealed to his family in 2015. It  was  "simply
    unbelievable" for the appellant to suggest that he  did  not  know  gay
    people had rights and acceptance in society in this country, given  the
    extent to which the appellant, on his own case, had  had  a  number  of
    sexual encounters with other  men  of  Pakistani  origin.  One  of  the
    individuals with whom the client had had a sexual relationship,  Mr  N,
    met the appellant through a social media application in 2015, and later
    went on to claim asylum himself. The  judge  said  that  he  could  not
    imagine that between them, they  had  not  discussed  their  respective
    precarious immigration statuses, and the possibility of seeking  asylum
    on account of their sexual orientation.

10. The judge highlighted disparities between the account given by Mr N and
    the appellant as to when they had had sex: see [69]. One  said  it  was
    the summer of 2015, whereas the other said it was in early 2015.  Under
    cross-examination, Mr N accepted that he had moved to Luton, whereas in
    his statement provided to the respondent, had said that he had moved to
    Essex. The judge said that his impression was that Mr  N  had  attended
    court "simply to support the appellant's assertion  that  he  is  gay",
    noting that he had done so on three  separate  occasions  in  different
    appeals. At [70], the judge drew together that analysis,  stating  that
    the appellant had, "not given a reasonable explanation as to why he did
    not apply for asylum until being notified of his proposed removal... As
    a result, I find his credibility to be deemed damaged."

11. The judge proceeded to direct himself that a finding of "deemed damage"
    to credibility is not determinative of overall credibility, as  it  was
    necessary to assess whether the overall account was credible.

12. At [73], the judge outlined what he considered to be inconsistencies in
    the way the appellant had described meeting S and his relationship with
    him, by references to differences between the  answers  in  his  asylum
    interview, on the one hand, and his statement for the  appeal,  on  the
    other.  The judge rejected as implausible the  appellant's  account  of
    having been photographed while having sex with the man he  met  in  the
    park, in part because  of  the  inconsistency  between  the  risks  the
    appellant took in engaging in such activity without locking  the  door,
    and his claimed reticence and reluctance to express his sexuality.  The
    judge did not accept that photographs would have been taken before  the
    door could have been shut, or the visitor somehow  otherwise  prevented
    from capturing the images.

13. The judge did not accept Mr B and Mr N to be witnesses  of  truth:  see
    [79].  He found that there had been collusion  between  the  witnesses,
    partly on account of identical passages that featured in each of  their
    statements.

14. Towards the end of this analysis, the judge engaged with the report  of
    Professor Fox. He noted the diagnosis of the  appellant's  anxiety  and
    depressive disorder, and the link between the appellant's struggle with
    his sexuality, and his suppression of  it  in  Pakistan.  However,  the
    judge was concerned that the medical report highlighted a suicide  risk
    on the part of the appellant, whereas the appellant himself  had  never
    mentioned that he experienced suicidal ideation.

15. The most significant aspect of the judge's analysis  of  Professor  Fox
    may be found at [82]:

         "The professor's observations are in my view remarkable in light of
         the appellant's silence on the issue. Whilst I do not wish to  take
         issue with the diagnosis made by professional, the absence  of  any
         medical  history  of  the  appellant  reporting  himself  or  being
         reported by others of either self-harm or depressive illness, in my
         view, diminishes the value of the opinions expressed by the  expert
         in his report. It could be that  the  appellant  has  a  depressive
         order [sic], but in my  view,  that  would  not  be  sufficient  to
         warrant the grant the [sic] protection will leave under  the  Human
         Rights Convention. The absence of any previous history  other  than
         attending Talking Therapy coupled with his ability to give as  much
         details as he has given to prepare his very  long  statement,  does
         not suggest that the appellant's conditions are severe."  (Emphasis
         added)



Grounds of appeal

16.  Judge Owens granted permission on all four grounds of appeal:

      a. Ground 1: the tribunal erred in its approach of the evidence of the
         appellant's witnesses of fact, both  homosexual  men  of  Pakistani
         origin, by rejecting it based on peripheral matters and failing  to
         have regard to material matters.

      b. Ground 2:  the  tribunal  erred  in  its  approach  to  the  expert
         psychological evidence, by (a) failing to have  regard  to  it  and
         making an assessment of the appellant's credibility, (b)  rejecting
         the  expert  report's  conclusions  solely  on  the  basis  of  the
         tribunal's (prior) conclusions as to  the  appellant's  credibility
         and (c) attaching "diminished weight" to it based on a  mistake  of
         fact.

      c. Ground 3: the tribunal erred  in  its  approach  to  assessing  the
         appellant's  evidence  by  failing  to  apply   established   legal
         principles relevant to the assessment of  claims  based  on  sexual
         orientation.

      d. Ground 4: the tribunal erred more generally  and  failing  to  make
         clear findings upon which its conclusion was based.

17. There was no rule 24 response.

Submissions

18. Ms McCallum submits that the judge made a  mistake  of  fact  when,  at
    [82], he stated that there was no  medical  history  of  the  appellant
    reporting a depressive illness.  He had been referred  to  NHS  Talking
    Therapies for high intensity CBT therapy in 2019 for trauma, low  mood,
    and anger.  See the NHS letter dated 17 June 2019 at  page  94  of  the
    respondent's bundle.  In addition, he had been  prescribed  citalopram,
    and by the time of Professor Fox's report, had been using the drug  for
    around four to six months.

19. It was a mistake of fact, therefore, for  the  judge  to  diminish  the
    weight attracted by the expert's report on the basis the appellant  had
    not previously reported any depressive illnesses.

20. Ms  McCallum's  remaining  submissions  were  focussed  on  the  weight
    ascribed by the judge to  different  aspects  of  the  evidence.   This
    included his rejection the evidence of Mr N and B, and the  absence  of
    any analysis of the photographs and social  media  screenshots  in  the
    bundle.  The only references to those materials featured in the judge's
    summary of the evidence and the  hearing,  rather  than  his  operative
    analysis, Ms McCallum submits.

21. Ms McCallum also attacks the judge's analysis of section 8 of the  2004
    Act. It was not clear,  she  submitted,  why  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's  explanation  for  the  delay  in  claiming   asylum.   The
    paragraphs apparently devoted to that issue in the decision did not, in
    fact, provide any sufficient reasons at all, she submitted.

22. In addition, when considering the issue of delay  in  this  context  in
    particular, it was incumbent upon the  judge  to  have  regard  to  the
    difficulties experienced by those from conservative cultures seeking to
    claim asylum on the basis of their sexual orientation.  The  judge  did
    not consider the approach of the Court of Justice of the European Union
    in A, B and C v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie C-148/13 to
    C-150/13, nor other guiding principles applicable to determining asylum
    claims based on sexual orientation, she submits.

23. As for the evidence of Mr B and Mr N, the judge rejected their evidence
    without clear or sufficient reasons for  finding  that  they  had  been
    dishonest.  The reasons  given  by  the  judge  related  to  peripheral
    matters, rather than those which could rationally lead to a finding  of
    the gravity reached by the judge, submitted Ms McCallum. The fact  that
    the witnesses had given evidence in support of other asylum appeals was
    not a factor which admitted of a finding of dishonesty in  the  present
    appeal.

24. Finally, in making assumptions about what was plausible  or  inherently
    likely in the appellant's sexual relationships,  the  judge  failed  to
    provide sufficient reasons.

25. In response, Mr Whitwell submitted that the appellant sought to  attack
    individual strands of the judge's analysis, rather than  stepping  back
    and considering it in the round. Mr Whitwell did appear to accept  that
    the judge fell into error concerning his analysis  of  Professor  Fox's
    report, in light of the appellant's prior  reports  of  depression  and
    anxiety, and was neutral as to the impact of that mistake, leaving  the
    matter in my hands. He accepted in relation to the remaining grounds of
    appeal that, while another judge may have come to a different  outcome,
    the conclusions reached by the judge were not irrational, and  nor  did
    they fall into any of the established categories for mistakes  of  fact
    to amount to an error of law.

Discussion

26. It is important to recall that an appeal to the Upper Tribunal lies  on
    a point of law, not a point of fact.  Findings of fact are  not  immune
    from being infected by errors of law.  In R (Iran) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    outlined the following categories of errors of fact which may amount to
    errors of law:

         i)   Making perverse or irrational findings on a matter or  matters
         that were material to the outcome ("material matters");

         ii)  Failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons  for  findings
         on material matters;

         iii) Failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of  fact
         or opinion on material matters;

         iv)  Giving weight to immaterial matters;

         v)   Making a material misdirection of law on any material matter;

         vi)  Committing or permitting a procedural  or  other  irregularity
         capable of making a material  difference  to  the  outcome  or  the
         fairness of the proceedings;

         vii) Making a  mistake  as  to  a  material  fact  which  could  be
         established by objective  and  uncontentious  evidence,  where  the
         appellant and/or his advisers were not responsible for the mistake,
         and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a  mistake  was
         made.

27. It is clear the judge made a mistake of  fact  concerning  the  factual
    matrix of the appellant's medical history when analysing the report  of
    Professor Fox. The excerpt from the judge's decision  at  [82],  quoted
    above, incorrectly states that the reports of low feelings, anxiety and
    depression made by the appellant to Professor Fox were the  first  such
    medical complaints of those conditions. That was simply incorrect.  The
    appellant had received medication for depression.  He  had  attended  a
    course of Talking Therapy, provided by the NHS.  The  judge  overlooked
    these factors, leading to his incorrect statement that there  had  been
    no prior medical history concerning the appellant's depressive illness.



28. The judge's analysis continues to falter in relation to the appellant's
    medical history. In the final sentence of [82], the judge  acknowledges
    that the appellant had attended Talking Therapy in the past, albeit  in
    the context of seeking to minimise the significance of him having  done
    so. This flatly  contradicts  his  earlier  observations  in  the  same
    paragraph that the appellant had not reported such  conditions  in  the
    past, with the effect that, on the judge's  analysis,  Professor  Fox's
    conclusions were called into question by the diagnosis of a  depressive
    disorder against a background of no prior relevant medical history.

29. The question then arises as to whether  this  was  an  error  that  was
    material. Professor Fox's report states that the  medical  presentation
    of the appellant was consistent with his reported adolescence and  life
    in Pakistan,  seeking  to  suppress  his  homosexuality.  It  was  also
    consistent with the experience of being disowned and threatened by  his
    family. See, for example,  paragraphs  4.1,  4.5,  and  4.7.  This  was
    medical evidence which should have been considered in  the  round  with
    the judge's remaining analysis. That is not to  say  that  the  medical
    evidence meant that the judge was  bound  to  find  in  favour  of  the
    appellant, but it was important evidence which the judge had understood
    incorrectly due to an error of fact, and which was not  considered,  in
    the round, with the remaining evidence.

30. In addition, the judge did not address the analysis  of  Professor  Fox
    until the end of his decision, having already reached adverse  findings
    against the appellant.  While this tribunal should be slow to interfere
    with findings of fact, and should not seek to micromanage the structure
    of First-tier  Tribunal  decisions,  it  does  appear  that  the  judge
    relegated the importance of Professor Fox's report to the periphery  of
    his analysis, perhaps due to the mistaken factual  premise  upon  which
    the judge approached the report.  Had the  judge  correctly  understood
    the appellant's prior  medical  history,  he  may  well  have  ascribed
    greater significance to the report of Professor Fox, in particular  the
    medical corroboration it provided to  the  appellant's  narrative.   Of
    course, it does not necessarily follow that the judge would  have  been
    bound to find in favour of the appellant had he considered  the  report
    in its correct factual light, but it would have been incumbent upon the
    judge  to  provide  factually  accurate  reasons  for   rejecting   the
    appellant's narrative as supported by Professor Fox's report.  This the
    judge did not do.

31. As Ms McCallum submits, this error alone is  sufficient  to  taint  the
    judge's entire credibility assessment.  Mr Whitwell was neutral on this
    issue, leaving the matter in my hands. He was quite right to do so,  as
    this aspect of  Ms  McCallum's  submissions  was  compelling,  and  has
    considerable force.

32. Considering the above analysis, it is not necessary for me to engage in
    depth with the remaining grounds of appeal advanced by  the  appellant.
    The remainder of the judge's credibility analysis took place against  a
    background of a factual mistake and was tainted.

33. It is with considerable  reluctance  that  an  appellate  judge  should
    overturn the findings of fact reached by the primary  factfinder.   The
    remaining submissions advanced by Ms McCallum were primarily complaints
    due to the weight attracted by different aspects of the case.  Much  of
    her case was characterised by "island hopping" of the  sort  deprecated
    by the Court of Appeal in Fage UK Ltd v Chobani UK Ltd [2014] EWCA  Civ
    5, which observed at [114.iv] that trial judges have the benefit of the
    whole sea of the evidence, in contrast to the position of an  appellate
    tribunal, which by  definition  cannot  enjoy  the  same  comprehensive
    overview of the evidence.  Whereas Ms McCallum's submissions sought  to
    hold the judge to a counsel of perfection, the Court of Appeal  has  in
    the past required only that decisions be "tolerably  clear";  see,  for
    example, UT (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 at [32].

34. What is not clear, not even tolerably so, however, is whether the judge
    would have reached those same findings had he correctly understood  the
    medical evidence.  On that basis alone,  therefore,  this  appeal  must
    succeed.

35. I set the decision of Judge Hussain aside  with  no  findings  of  fact
    preserved.

36. Given an extensive credibility  assessment  is  required,  pursuant  to
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice  Statements  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal dated
    13 November 2014, and the overriding objective, it will be  appropriate
    to remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Anonymity

37. I maintain the anonymity order already in force.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed.

The decision of Judge Hussain involved the making of an error of law and  is
set aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  a  different
judge.

I maintain the anonymity order already in force.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 16 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

