


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/07432/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 March 2019          |On 29 March 2019                      |
|                          |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. H.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, entered the UK  illegally,  in
           November 2017 and made a protection claim.  That was refused  on
           30 May 2018, and the Appellant's appeal  against  that  decision
           was then heard  and  dismissed  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Gumsley in a decision promulgated on 23 July 2018.
        2. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted
           by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 19 November 2018.
        3. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      The challenge
        4. When the appeal was called on,  both  representatives  confirmed
           that they considered that  the  terms  in  which  the  grant  of
           permission had been cast did not reflect the challenge  advanced
           in the grounds. Ms Cleghorn confirmed that she did not adopt the
           terms of the grant of permission, and indeed she disowned it. In
           the circumstances I invited her to make  her  submissions  based
           upon the grounds themselves.
        5. Ms Cleghorn (who was not their author) confirmed  that  although
           the grounds were drafted in such  a  way  as  to  suggest  three
           complaints, in her view, and in reality, they offered  a  single
           challenge; namely that the Judge erred in his  approach  to  the
           record of the screening interview, and had thus placed too  much
           weight  upon  the  content  of  the  record  of  the   screening
           interview, when he should have placed no weight upon it.
        6. The grounds complain about paragraphs 36-8, 41-2 and 50  of  the
           decision, and go so far as to complain that the Judge's approach
           to the evidence was irrational and unjust. I take that to  be  a
           perversity challenge, which as noted in Miftari imports  a  high
           threshold.
        7. The grounds assert that the Appellant never had the  opportunity
           to verify the  content  of  the  interview  record  because  his
           answers were never  read  back  to  him.  The  grounds  are  not
           supported by any further evidence  from  the  Appellant  on  the
           matter, and there has been no application  from  him  to  adduce
           evidence before me in support of his challenge  to  the  Judge's
           decision. However the Appellant did make this claim when he  was
           subject to  full  interview.  He  did  not  then  challenge  the
           accuracy of the content of the record of the screening interview
           - he simply denied that he had ever been given a copy of it, but
           when offered the opportunity to read through it to identify  any
           issues, declined [Q3-5].
        8. As the interviewing officer put to him, he had  in  fact  signed
           the record of the screening interview to  confirm  that  he  had
           answered the questions truthfully, that he had understood all of
           the questions he had been asked, and, that he had been  given  a
           copy of the interview record.
        9. When he gave evidence to the Judge, the Appellant made claims in
           relation to the screening interview that he had not made at  his
           full interview. Thus he claimed to have been  interviewed  in  a
           different language to that which was  recorded  as  having  been
           used, and, claimed that discrepancies between the record and his
           current  evidence  must  result  from  mistakes  made   by   the
           interpreter.  The  Judge  rejected  those  claims,  and  in   my
           judgement he gave sound and adequate reasons for doing  so  [35-
           38].
       10. Although Ms Cleghorn complained that the Judge erred  by  taking
           the s8 issues first when considering the  Appellant's  evidence,
           there is in my judgement no  merit  in  that  complaint.  In  my
           judgement the Judge had no option but to do so, because  of  the
           way in which the Appellant's appeal was advanced before him.
       11. When the decision is read as a whole (as it should be), then  it
           is in my judgement plain that the Judge did not form a view upon
           the s8 issues, and then, as a result,  dismiss  the  Appellant's
           evidence as incredible. What the Judge did do (which is  not  at
           all the same thing) was deal with the Appellant's evidence about
           the way in which the screening interview was conducted, in order
           to ascertain whether he could place no weight, or  some  weight,
           upon the record of that interview.  He  was  obliged  to  do  so
           because of the way in which the appeal was advanced. Having done
           so the Judge then turned to look  at  the  Appellant's  evidence
           concerning his experiences in Iran [43-50], before standing back
           to look at the evidence in the round [51-2]. I can see no  error
           of law in that approach, indeed  it  is  the  approach  I  would
           expect to be adopted.
       12. That disposes of the complaint that was advanced in the grounds.


       13. Before me Ms Cleghorn sought  additionally  to  argue  that  the
           finding of fact made  by  the  Judge  in  paragraph  46  of  his
           decision  was  "unsustainable".  When  I  queried  how  such   a
           proposition could be advanced, given this paragraph was only  an
           assessment of the weight that could be given  to  the  evidence,
           and not a finding of fact, the challenge was dropped, and  focus
           was switched to paragraph 47  of  the  decision.  However,  even
           then, there was no merit in the complaint advanced.  The  points
           the Judge was taking in  relation  to  the  credibility  of  the
           Appellant's account were obvious and logical, and ought to  have
           occurred to anyone listening  to  it;  it  was  the  Appellant's
           evidence that made no sense. In any event, as with paragraph 46,
           this passage was only an assessment of the weight that could  be
           given to the evidence, and not a finding of fact.  The  findings
           of fact are to be found in paragraphs 51 and 52. In my judgement
           they were well open to the Judge on the evidence and  they  were
           more than adequately reasoned; there is no proper  basis  for  a
           complaint that the Judge's findings were perverse.


      Conclusion
       14. Accordingly, notwithstanding the terms in  which  permission  to
           appeal was granted, the grounds fail to  disclose  any  material
           error of law in the approach taken by the Judge  to  the  appeal
           that requires his decision to be set aside and remade.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 23
   July 2018 contained no material error of law in the decision to  dismiss
   the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside  and
   remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 22 March 2019






