
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07465/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 August 2019                    |On 8 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     ES
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne, Counsel instructed by Ineyab Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before me following a hearing before  Knowles  J
    and me on 7 February 2019 at which we found that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  ("FtT")  promulgated  on  14  November   2018  was
    vitiated by error of law requiring its decision to be set aside, with a
    re-making of the decision to take place in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In order to put this decision on the re-making  into  context,  and  to
    explain the background to the appeal, I quote from certain passages  of
    the earlier (error of law) decision as follows:

         "1.  This is an appeal with the permission of  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge Lambert against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             (FtT)  promulgated  on  14  November   2018   dismissing   the
             Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
             to deport him pursuant to s 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007.
             On 21 July 2017 a decision was taken to refuse the Appellant's
             protection and  human  rights  claims.   The  Appellant  is  a
             national of Jamaica born in 1973.

         ...

         4.   The Appellant entered the UK as a visitor on 29 December 1999.
              He made further applications for leave to remain all of which
             were refused until he was served with a notice of  removal  on
             28 October 2008.  An appeal was lodged against a  decision  to
             refuse an unmarried partner application.  This was allowed and
             the Appellant was granted leave to remain until 29 April 2012.
               Further leave was granted because of the birth of a  British
             child to the Appellant.  That expired on 14 August  2016.   He
             was subsequently detained pending a criminal prosecution which
             led to deportation action being taken. On 23 November  2015  a
             deportation order  was  signed  against  the  appellant  under
             another name but also including his real  name.  An  emergency
             travel document was issued on 1 April 2016.  In the  meanwhile
             on  21  March  2016  further  representations  were   received
             requesting  reconsideration.  These   were   treated   as   an
             application to revoke the deportation order and  was  refused.
             Removal directions were made but subsequently deferred because
             a  judicial  review  application  was  lodged,   and   further
             submissions were made. Judicial Review  was  refused.  Further
             directions were set. Further  removal  directions  were  again
             deferred because of a judicial review  application  which  was
             refused in due course. Further removal  directions  were  set,
             whereupon the Appellant claimed asylum, leading once again  to
             cancellation of the removal directions. The asylum  claim  was
             refused and certified. Finally, on 21 July 2017  the  decision
             under appeal was made.  It can be summarised as follows.

         5.   A notice of  decision  set  out  the  Appellant's  immigration
             history and gave as a reason for making the deportation order,
             the Appellant's conviction at the Crown Court sitting at  Wood
             Green on 5 May 2015  for  assault  occasioning  actual  bodily
             harm, for which he was sentenced to two years and nine months'
             imprisonment. The assault was a sustained attack on his former
             partner and included kicks to the face whilst she was  on  the
             ground.  The  decision  refers  to  earlier  convictions.    A
             certificate was issued under s72 of the 2002 Act (the 'serious
             criminal' provisions  which  apply  for  the  purpose  of  the
             construction and application of Article 33(2) of  the  Refugee
             Convention).

         6.   The Appellant's asylum claim was based on his alleged fear  of
             return to Jamaica because of threats from  gang  members.  The
             claim was refused. Even if the Appellant's claim was taken  at
             face value, the Secretary of State was  of  the  opinion  that
             there would be sufficiency of protection for the Appellant  in
             Jamaica and also the option of internal relocation.

         7.   As regards the Article 8 claim based on family life in the UK,
             the Appellant's three children (including one step-child) were
             taken into account. The best interests of the  three  children
             were considered by the Respondent  to  be  outweighed  by  the
             public interest in removing the Appellant from the UK in order
             to protect the public. It was not accepted that the  Appellant
             had a genuine parental relationship with one of the  children,
             [T2], and in respect of the Appellant's youngest child, it was
             not considered unreasonable for  the  child  and  the  child's
             mother to relocate to Jamaica.

         8.   The Secretary of State also did not accept that the  Appellant
             had a genuine, subsisting parental relationship with the child
             [T1].  It was not accepted that it would be unduly  harsh  for
             [T1] to remain in the UK if the Appellant were to be  deported
             because she would remain in her  mother's  care,  who  is  her
             primary carer.

         9.   It was also not accepted that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine
             parental relationship with his step-child Taija.  It  was  not
             considered unduly harsh for Taija to remain in the UK with her
             mother if the Appellant were to be deported.

         10.  The Appellant also claimed to have a family  life  in  the  UK
             with his partner, AC. The Respondent accepted that  she  is  a
             British citizen, naturalised on 4 September 2009, but  it  was
             not accepted that the Appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with her. It was  further  not  accepted  however
             that it would be unduly harsh for AC to live in  Jamaica  with
             the Appellant should she choose to do  so,  nor  would  it  be
             unduly harsh for her to remain in the UK if the Appellant were
             to be deported. As to private life, it was not  accepted  that
             the Appellant was socially and culturally integrated in the UK
             and, moreover, the Appellant presented a serious risk of  harm
             to the public because of his previous offending. The Appellant
             also has a poor immigration history. It was not accepted there
             would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the   Appellant's
             reintegration  in  Jamaica.   Overall,  there  were  no   very
             compelling circumstances outweighing the  public  interest  in
             having the Appellant deported."

 3. Certain aspects of the FtT's decision are also set out in the error  of
    law decision. Again, I quote as follows:

         "13. At [32] the judge said that there was  no  dispute  about  the
             Appellant's liability to  deportation  on  the  basis  of  his
             criminal record. His  convictions  include:  possession  of  a
             bladed article; supplying Class A drugs for which he  received
             a  sentence  of  three   years   imprisonment;   and   assault
             occasioning actual bodily harm for which he received 33 months
             and was made subject to a restraining order.  The victim was a
             partner of the Appellant, a Ms L.  Among other things, she was
             kicked in the face whilst on the floor and suffered  cuts  and
             bruises.

         14.  At [33] the judge referred to evidence of violence towards AC.
              He had been assessed as  showing  a  high  risk  of  violence
             towards intimate partners. At [34] the judge  found  that  the
             Appellant was not remorseful, despite his proclamations to the
             contrary.  He found these were a means to attempt to  stay  in
             the UK and avoid deportation. He found that there  is  a  very
             strong public interest in removing the Appellant in  order  to
             protect others with whom the Appellant forms relationships.

         15.  At [36] the judge said that  a  certificate  had  been  issued
             under s 72 of the 2002 Act and the Appellant was  presumed  to
             have been convicted of a particularly  serious  crime  and  to
             constitute a danger to  the  community  because  he  had  been
             sentenced to imprisonment for more than two years.    He  said
             that the Appellant had failed to adduce sufficient evidence to
             rebut the presumption. He found that the Appellant constituted
             a danger to the public or that section  of  it  with  whom  he
             forms  a  relationship.   The  judge  therefore   upheld   the
             certificate.  At [44] the judge reiterated  his  finding  that
             the Appellant is capable of using violence to get his way.

         16.  At [37] the judge found  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
             establish any real risk of persecution.

         17.  At [38] and [39]  the  judge  said  that  the  thrust  of  the
             Appellant's case was Article 8 and the effect on his  children
             and that [399] of the Rules applied because of the  length  of
             the Appellant's sentence.

         18.  At [40] the judge found that none of the Appellant's  children
             would accompany him to Jamaica and so the issue was whether he
             had a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
             child under the age of 18 in the UK who is  either  a  British
             citizen or who has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least
             seven years, and whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             child to remain the UK without the Appellant.

         19.  At [42] the judge referred to  s  117C(4)  of  the  2014  Act.
             Section 117 provides that the deportation of foreign criminals
             is in the public interest, and that public  interest  requires
             deportation  unless  an  exception  applies.    One  of  those
             exceptions  is  where  there  is  a  genuine  and   subsisting
             relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  the  effect  of
             deportation on the child would be unduly harsh.

         20.  At [43] the judge said that the Appellant came to  the  UK  in
             1999 aged 26.  He said that he had not been lawfully  resident
             in the UK for most of his life and so s 117C(4) did not apply.



         21.  Between [45]  and  [56]  the  judge  considered  the  evidence
             concerning the Appellant's children.  At [49] he  referred  to
             the evidence concerning [T1], his daughter (born in 2008)  and
             [T2], his son (born in 2015).  The  Appellant's  evidence  was
             that he had a close, genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             his children.  His daughter suffers from sickle cell  disease.
             She is also currently seeing an NHS psychologist.  He said  he
             took her to school and to medical appointments.  He also  said
             that he took his son to nursery and he sees his children every
             other weekend.

         22.  At [50] the judge referred to medical evidence from the  North
             Middlesex   University   Hospital   and   [T1]'s    consultant
             haematologist.  She wrote on 2 October  2018  to  support  the
             Appellant's application to stay in the UK on the basis that he
             provides care and  support  for  his  daughter,  whose  health
             worsened when he was previously removed.

         23.  At [51] he referred to evidence from a  child  and  adolescent
             psychologist, who reported her understanding that it  was  the
             medical team's opinion that it would be  'highly  detrimental'
             to [T1] if the Appellant were to be deported,  though  it  was
             too early to  make  any  assessment.   The  psychologist  said
             [T1]'s additional symptoms could be caused by anxiety  related
             to her worry that her father would be removed from the family.
              As to that, the judge noted that although the  Appellant  had
             contact and played a part in his children's lives, he was  not
             part of the same nuclear family and was not living  under  the
             same roof.

         24.  At [54]-[56] and [58] the judge said this:

                  '54. The children remain in the full-time  care  of  their
                  mother, they are in education and have  access  to  health
                  care. All of that will continue.

                  55.  The extent to which the appellant's deportation  will
                  have a detrimental effect on [T1] is hard to gauge. It  is
                  obvious that it is contrary to her wishes that her  father
                  be deported, and there may be some  deterioration  in  her
                  health as regards anxiety and other symptoms,  though  the
                  sickle cell disease  will  continue  whether  or  not  the
                  appellant is in the country.

                  56.  Given the circumstances of the assault in  2015,  one
                  cannot help but wonder  whether  the  appellant  has  much
                  genuine concern for his children or whether he  is  merely
                  using them as a means of  enhancing  his  case.  I  remain
                  cautious about that. I take account of the submission made
                  by Ms Ferguson that the best interests of the children are
                  not merely to be protected but also to be  promoted.  They
                  are entitled to a relationship going  forward  which  will
                  not happen if the appellant is deported.

                  ...

                  58. The welfare of the children is a  primary  but  not  a
                  paramount consideration. I conclude  that  notwithstanding
                  the  distress  caused  to  the  appellant's  daughter   in
                  particular, the public  interest  in  this  case  requires
                  deportation.  The public interest outweighs the impact  on
                  the children.'"

 4. The following are the reasons for our having  found  an  error  of  law
    requiring the FtT's decision to be set aside:

         "31. We agree that the FtT's decision is vitiated by  an  error  of
             law.  The judge failed to grapple with, or make  any  findings
             in relation  to,  the  relevant  factual  questions  under  ss
             117C(5) and [399(a)], namely,  whether  the  Appellant  had  a
             genuine and subsisting relationship with [T1]  in  particular,
             and whether the impact of the Appellant's deportation  on  his
             children and [T1] especially would be  unduly  harsh.    There
             was undisputed medical evidence about her physical and  mental
             health and there was evidence that the Appellant's deportation
             would cause a deterioration in her health.  Assuming the judge
             was satisfied as to the first question, there was then a  need
             for the  judge  to  carefully  evaluate  that  evidence;  make
             appropriate findings of fact; and then assess by reference  to
             the relevant case law whether the test  of  'undue  harshness'
             was met. As to the test, in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State
             for the Home Department (Equality and Human Rights  Commission
             intervening) [2018] 1 WLR 5273, [23], Lord Carnwath (with whom
             the other justices agreed) said:

                  "23. On the other hand the expression 'unduly harsh' seems
                  clearly intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of
                  'reasonableness' under section 117B(6), taking account  of
                  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation   of   foreign
                  criminals. Further the word 'unduly' implies an element of
                  comparison. It assumes that there  is  a  'due'  level  of
                  'harshness', that is a level which may  be  acceptable  or
                  justifiable in  the  relevant  context.  'Unduly'  implies
                  something going beyond that level. The relevant context is
                  that set by section 117C(1), that is the  public  interest
                  in the deportation of foreign criminals.  One  is  looking
                  for  a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what   would
                  necessarily be involved  for  any  child  faced  with  the
                  deportation of a parent."

         32.  Because the FtT did not carry out this exercise, its  decision
             is vitiated by error of law and cannot stand.

         33.  Accordingly, we set aside the decision of the FtT. We  do  not
             consider that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier
             Tribunal for re-hearing, having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the
             Senior President's Practice Statement.  The decision  will  be
             re-made in the Upper Tribunal after  a  further  hearing.   To
             that end, the parties are to note the directions below.

         34.  As regards preserved findings, our provisional  view,  subject
             to the submissions of the parties, is that those  findings  of
             fact that  are  not  vitiated  by  error  of  law  are  to  be
             preserved."

 5. The scope of the re-making is therefore clear from [31] of the error of
    law decision as set out above.

    Submissions

 6. The parties agreed that all findings of  fact  made  by  the  FtT  were
    preserved.

 7. Ms Isherwood  submitted  that  the  appeal  should  be  dismissed.  The
    appellant did not live with his children, as was clear  from  [14]-[16]
    of the FtT's decision. It is a preserved finding that he has no income,
    but contrary to  that  the  evidence  from  the  school  was  that  the
    appellant pays for lunches and trips for [T1]. Therefore,  it  must  be
    someone else who is paying for those things. The children do  not  need
    him financially.

 8. There was no additional evidence with reference to the other  children.
    All the evidence in relation to the appeal therefore focuses on [T1].

 9. It was accepted that [T1] has a disability. However,  even  should  she
    have a health 'crisis', the fact is that he is not  with  her  all  the
    time. They obviously manage without him. The evidence from the hospital
    shows that her mother is her primary carer.

10. The hospital letter dated 2 October 2018 states that she has been  kept
    away from school (because of headaches due to  her  illness),  yet  the
    evidence from the school (in the letter dated 28 November 2017) is that
    she has 100 per cent attendance. What is said  in  the  medical  report
    would have come from the appellant. Likewise, in terms of the  evidence
    that her headaches started when the appellant was remanded in  custody.
    The letter from the hospital dated 12 October 2018 to the  effect  that
    the appellant is "seemingly involved in her  care"  is  unsupported  by
    other evidence. In addition, the letter dated 14 February 2019 from the
    hospital is not a full assessment. It does not show what the up-to-date
    position is. Her mother did not attend the assessment process  and  the
    evidence does not establish that they are not able to  cope  if  he  is
    deported. [T1] would continue to have the support of the hospital.

11. Ms Isherwood accepted however, that the appellant does have  a  genuine
    parental relationship with [T1], but such was not accepted in  relation
    to the other children. There were, nevertheless, only four  photographs
    of the appellant and [T1], and those were all taken  at  the  hospital.
    There  was  no  evidence  from  [T1]'s  mother  about  her   particular
    circumstances.

12.  Ms  Isherwood  relied  on  RA  (s.117C:   "unduly   harsh";   offence:
    seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC), in particular at [17] in terms
    of the meaning of unduly harsh. It was submitted that the evidence fell
    short of establishing undue harshness in relation  to  the  appellant's
    daughter [T1].

13. Mr Layne relied on the skeleton argument. It was submitted on behalf of
    the appellant that the test of undue harshness was met in  relation  to
    [T1]. It was specifically said that she was the focus for the  argument
    on behalf of the appellant and that the  appeal  was  not  advanced  in
    terms of his relationship with the other children.

14. As to the meaning of 'unduly harsh', Mr Layne relied on KO (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] 1 WLR 5273, accepting
    that the phrase means more than 'severe'.

15. [T1] has a serious medical condition and needs long term hospital care.
    I was referred to reports  from  North  Middlesex  University  hospital
    dated 1 and 12 October 2018. Those letters  refer  to  the  appellant's
    involvement in her life. The most recent evidence is in the letter from
    the hospital dated 14 February 2019. It shows  his  attendance  at  her
    hospital appointments.

16. The evidence is that stress has an  effect  on  her  condition.  It  is
    likely that there would be another crisis if he is removed. That  would
    mean that the burden would all fall on her mother, AC, who has two jobs
    as revealed in the evidence recorded in the FtT's decision at [15].

    Assessment and Conclusions

17. The legislative framework is set out in the error of law decision but I
    repeat it here.

18. Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") provides:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and

         ...

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; ..."

19. Paragraph 399 provides:

         "399.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to  be  deported;
                      or

             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                  remain  in  the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                  deported."

20. Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the
    2002 Act") provides:

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted."

21. The only basis upon which the appeal is advanced is  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's relationship with one of his  children,  [T1].  It  is  not
    argued that he is able to succeed in his appeal in terms  of  paragraph
    399A of the Rules/Exception 1 of s. 117C  of  the  2002  Act  (lawfully
    resident in the UK for  most  of  his  life;  socially  and  culturally
    integrated; very significant obstacles to integration  on  return).  No
    submissions were advanced in terms of  the  cumulative  effect  of  the
    appellant meeting, in part, any provisions of the  Rules  or  the  2002
    Act, either in relation to him personally  or  with  reference  to  any
    other relationships with a child or partner.

22. That the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  [T1]
    is accepted on behalf of the respondent. She is a British  citizen,  as
    is acknowledged in the respondent's decision dated 21  July  2017.  She
    was born on 26 March 2008 and is now, therefore, 11 years of age.

23. On behalf of the appellant it was specifically said that the appeal was
    advanced only in terms of the appellant's relationship  with  [T1],  as
    distinct from any other of his children (or step-child). That  was  the
    position as stated at the hearing before me, which I take to be the up-
    to-date basis of the appeal notwithstanding that the skeleton  argument
    (not drafted by Mr Layne) suggests that the  appellant  relies  on  his
    relationship with his children. The skeleton argument  makes  it  clear
    that he does not rely on his relationship with [T1]'s mother,  AC,  who
    did not provide any evidence to the FtT and no evidence  from  her  was
    adduced before me.

24. It is not said on behalf of the respondent that [T1] could be  expected
    to leave the UK and return to Jamaica  with  the  appellant.  For  many
    obvious reasons that would not be appropriate in this case.

25. Although the decision of the FtT has been set aside, the evidence  that
    was before it is nevertheless part of the background  and  I  therefore
    refer to certain aspects of it.

26. Before the FtT the appellant gave evidence that he lived with an  aunt.
    He was not allowed to be bailed to AC's address, because  of  a  letter
    from social services saying that the appellant had thrown  a  stone  at
    AC's house, which he denied.

27. The appellant gave evidence before the FtT of his taking  the  children
    to school and of how often he sees them. He said that AC had two  jobs,
    the details of which he provided. The appellant gave  evidence  of  his
    remorse for his offending.

28. His evidence was that AC cannot look after the children alone  and  has
    no one she can rely on, although she  has  brothers,  sisters  and  her
    mother living in the UK. However, she gets depressed  and  drinks.  The
    appellant's aunt also has a young child but she would  not  assist  the
    appellant. His aunts and uncles would be willing to assist him  but  he
    has not asked whether or not they  would  help  AC  if  he  returns  to
    Jamaica.

29. [T1] was said by the appellant to be seeing a psychiatrist because  she
    was afraid that she would not see him again and was  becoming  stressed
    about it. He said that she would be sick again if he is deported.

30. The parties agreed that the findings of fact made by the  FtT  were  to
    stand. The most significant of those  findings  can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

       . Although the appellant had expressed remorse for his offending, the
         FtJ did not accept that he feels any remorse.

       . The appellant had failed to rebut the presumptions under section 72
         of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002
         Act") (conviction for particularly serious crime, and danger to the
         community).

       . The appellant came to the UK in 1999 at the age of 26. He  has  not
         been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life.

       . [T1] suffers from sickle cell disease.

       . The children remain in the full-time care of their mother,  are  in
         education and have  access  to  health  care.  All  of  that  would
         continue.

31. There is no dispute but  that  [T1]  suffers  from  a  serious  medical
    condition. The most recent medical evidence put before  me  comes  from
    letters from North Middlesex University Hospital dated 10  January,  18
    March, 8  July  and  14  February  2019.  The  first  three  deal  with
    appointment dates and  are  from  the  Child  &  Adolescent  Psychiatry
    Paediatric Liaison Team at the hospital.

32. The authors of the letter/report dated 14 February 2019 are Rachel Bull
    (Child and Adolescent Psychotherapist) and  Dr  Lucy  Parkin  (Clinical
    Psychologist). The letter  refers  to  her  diagnosis  of  Sickle  Cell
    Disease  and  states  that  she  also  suffers  from  pica  (an  eating
    disorder), enuresis and headaches. It also  states  that  Dr  Yardumian
    (Consultant Haematologist) felt that her symptoms could be  exacerbated
    due to worry that the appellant may soon be deported.

33. The letter goes on to state that Rachel Bull initially  met  with  [T1]
    and the appellant for an assessment. There were nine appointments, four
    with [T1] alone, three with the appellant alone, and two  for  both  of
    them. AC was also invited to attend but did not do so. It  then  states
    that due to the complex nature of the family situation  and  presenting
    difficulties, the team decision was to  have  two  clinicians;  one  to
    support [T1] and one to support the appellant.

34. After setting out the proposed care plan  the  letter  says  that  [T1]
    "seems to be very close to her father who is very involved in  her  day
    to day care, as her mother is currently working long  hours."  It  says
    that the team have not met AC as she is unable to attend and wishes  to
    leave responsibility for [T1]'s hospital appointments to the appellant.
    The letter states that since the beginning of their work with [T1]  the
    appellant has accompanied her to  all  her  appointments,  that  he  is
    committed to the work and that they are excellent attenders. It goes on
    to state that he is keen for any support that is available for [T1] and
    is willing to engage in the parent work.

35. In relation to the  appellant's  proposed  deportation,  it  says  that
    understandably there is anxiety in  the  family  in  relation  to  that
    issue. The appellant seems to have told the team that he fears for  his
    life if returned to Jamaica (although the FtT rejected that claim).  He
    also told the team that he does his  best  to  protect  [T1]  from  his
    concerns but "it is well  known  that  children  are  attuned  to  such
    worries within a family and are inevitably affected by them." It states
    that [T1] has also been affected by the times when  the  appellant  has
    been away from the family (such as when detained) and that she has real
    anxiety about him being away again. Given that he is currently spending
    a lot of time with her and providing a  lot  of  her  daily  care,  the
    prospect of his leaving again is understandably distressing to her.

36. The letter further states that, as is common in  children  with  Sickle
    Cell Disease, [T1] has complex feelings about having the  condition  to
    manage, including fears about her health and life expectancy, and  that
    stress can have an impact on physical  health.  She  required  hospital
    admission for a Sickle Cell Disease related crisis (severe pain  caused
    by  Sickle  Cell  Disease)  immediately  following  a  recent  negative
    decision by the court, suggesting that her levels of stress  and  worry
    are interacting with her physical health condition.

37. Finally, it states that her worries about the appellant's situation are
    extremely hard for  her  to  manage  on  top  of  her  physical  health
    condition  with  its  own  psychological  impact.  She  needs  on-going
    psychological support to help her to manage all  of  those  issues.  It
    concludes by stating that it is in [T1]'s best  interests  to  have  as
    much consistency of care as possible and for the appellant to remain in
    her life.

38. A letter from [T1]'s Head of School dated 13  March  2019,  apart  from
    speaking very highly of [T1], states that before she started in year  6
    the appellant brought her to school and collected  her,  and  has  been
    paying for dinners and school trips. It goes on to state that the whole
    family attends school events (plays, concerts and fayres)  and  make  a
    good contribution to the school community. Finally, it states that  the
    author of the letter, and  [T1]'s  teachers,  feel  that  it  would  be
    "unduly harsh" on her if the appellant had to leave the  UK,  and  that
    [T1] had expressed concern about that  and  has  been  more  distracted
    "recently". It is something that worries her and is beginning to impact
    on her education.

39. The error of law decision quotes from KO (Nigeria) as to the meaning of
    "unduly harsh".  It is also worth emphasising that at [23] in terms  of
    an assessment of undue harshness it states that:

         "What it does not require in my view (and subject to the discussion
         of the cases in the next section) is a balancing of relative levels
         of severity of the parent's offence, other than is inherent in  the
         distinction drawn by the section itself by reference to  length  of
         sentence."

40. Further, the Supreme Court approved the guidance  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the meaning of unduly harsh. Thus  at  [27]  there  is  the
    following:

         "27. Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh"  in
         this context was given by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J President
         and UT Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015]  INLR  563,  para
         46, a decision given  on  15  April  2015.  They  referred  to  the
         "evaluative assessment" required of the tribunal:

             "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly  harsh'
             does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,  undesirable
             or merely difficult. Rather,  it  poses  a  considerably  more
             elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this context, denotes something
             severe,  or  bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or
             comfortable. Furthermore, the addition of the adverb  'unduly'
             raises an already elevated standard still higher.""

41. As is clear from the Supreme Court's reasoning overall, undue harshness
    in relation to separation of parent and child in  a  deportation  case,
    does not involve an assessment of  the  seriousness  of  the  offending
    (except to the limited extent explained). It relates only to the effect
    on the child in question.

42. Although on behalf of the  respondent  it  was  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant does not live with [T1], it was nevertheless accepted that he
    has a genuine parental relationship with her. So much is in  any  event
    clear from the evidence from the hospital, and to a lesser extent  from
    the school.

43. It was said on behalf of the respondent in submissions that the  school
    letter(s) states that the appellant pays for school dinners and  trips.
    However, he has no income and therefore someone  else  must  be  making
    those payments, it is said. That submission is probably correct but the
    fact of the subsisting relationship is nevertheless evident.

44. The letter from [T1], which was before the FtT, is undated.  It  states
    that she was sickly every time he was taken away and was not doing well
    at school. It states that she is happier now that he is  back,  not  so
    sickly, and that he takes her to school and to  the  doctor.  She  says
    that she does not want him to be taken away again.

45. That it is a close  relationship  is  also  evident  from  the  medical
    evidence.  The  appellant  is  clearly  closely  involved  with  [T1]'s
    treatment. Her worries  about  his  being  deported  are  also  clearly
    evidenced. The medical evidence is to the effect  that  those  worries,
    quite apart from [T1]'s very  understandable  concerns  about  her  own
    health, affect her health adversely.

46. I am satisfied that [T1]'s best interests lie in  her  maintaining  the
    relationship that she presently has with  the  appellant  in  terms  of
    their contact and the support he provides in relation to  her  hospital
    treatment. In other words, her best interests lie in his  remaining  in
    the UK, because of the close contact she presently  has  with  him  and
    because of the  emotional  and  practical  support  that  he  presently
    provides.

47. However, it is clear from  authority,  that  the  finding  of  where  a
    child's best interests lie is not determinative of an appeal,  although
    it is a primary consideration.

48. In terms of the effect on [T1] of the appellant's removal, on  the  one
    hand he does not live with her. The evidence does not demonstrate  that
    he even sees her on a daily basis. In that context I note that the most
    recent letter from the school dated 13 March 2019, states  that  before
    she started in year 6 "this September" he brought  her  to  school  and
    collected her. That is also  what  is  said  in  the  letter  dated  26
    September 2018 that was before the FtT,  so  there  appears  to  be  an
    element of 'cut and paste' in the recent letter.  The  letter  dated  1
    December 2017 states that the appellant brings his daughter to and from
    school every day, but it does not say which daughter,  and  the  letter
    dated 28 November  2017 refers to his bringing his daughter  Kelise  to
    and from school (although also speaks  about  his  interest  in  [T1]'s
    progress).

49. On the other  hand,  that  he  has  a  close  involvement  with  [T1]'s
    treatment so far as hospital appointments are concerned is, as  already
    indicated, apparent. Although the school evidence is not  clear  as  to
    how closely he is involved with her in terms of her education, it  does
    suggest that he has some involvement in that context.

50. Thus, it is reasonable to conclude that the  effect  that  his  removal
    would have on [T1] would be less than in the case of a parent who lives
    with a child and sees them every day, but more than in the  case  of  a
    child who does not have the health conditions to contend with that [T1]
    does. In addition, the evidence suggests  that  it  is  the  appellant,
    rather than [T1]'s mother, who takes responsibility for her  treatment,
    vis-�-vis the hospital.

51. I accept that the appellant's removal is likely to have  a  detrimental
    effect on [T1], not only emotionally, which one would expect, but  more
    significantly in terms of her health. The evidence does  tend  to  show
    that previously when separated because of  the  appellant's  offending,
    that has resulted in deterioration in her health, related to her Sickle
    Cell Disease.

52. However, the evidence does not establish  that  without  the  appellant
    [T1] would not be able to receive the treatment that she needs,  or  is
    likely to need if they are separated, or with regard to  attendance  at
    hospital appointments. There is no evidence from  AC  to  that  effect,
    albeit that relatively recently historically  she  has  relied  on  the
    appellant in relation to hospital appointments. There is evidence  from
    the appellant about AC having to look after her other children and  her
    own  personal  difficulties,  but  no  evidence  from  her  about   her
    situation.

53. I note that the evidence before the FtT was that AC has  two  jobs  but
    that does not mean, in the absence of evidence, that she would  not  be
    able to take [T1] to her hospital appointments or that she would not be
    able to enlist the support of someone else to help her in this respect.
    It has not been suggested on behalf of the appellant  that  [T1]  would
    not be able to receive  appropriate  treatment  if  the  appellant  was
    removed. I also bear in mind the evidence from the school to the effect
    that the whole family are involved in school events. That suggests very
    clearly that AC would make appropriate arrangements for [T1] to be able
    to attend her appointments.

54. In addition, it is  important  to  take  into  account  that  the  s.72
    certificate (that the appellant constitutes a danger to  the  community
    of the UK) was upheld by the FtT. That is a preserved finding. He has a
    record of serious criminal offending and  the  upholding  of  the  s.72
    certificate necessarily means that there is a risk of reoffending.

55. Quite apart from the s.72 certificate, as the FtT  pointed  out,  there
    are emails from social workers at Children and Young People's  Services
    dated July 2016, at AQ1 and AQ2 of the respondent's bundle, in relation
    to the risk of domestic violence that the appellant was  said  at  that
    time to pose. The risks  were  said  to  involve  not  only  women  but
    children (with the OASys report at 6.10 relating  the  latter  risk  in
    terms of children to their witnessing physical or  emotional  abuse  of
    their mothers by the appellant).

56. At [13]-[15] of the error of law decision (quoted above at  [3])  there
    is reference to aspects of  the  FtT's  decision  which  summarise  the
    appellant's offending and the risk that he poses. The OASys  report  is
    dated 22 September 2016 but it relates to an assessment completed on  8
    May 2015. It states that the appellant represented  a  medium  risk  of
    serious harm to children in the community and a high  risk  of  serious
    harm to known adults.

57. The risk of reoffending is said in the OASys report to be low (19% with
    regard to violent offending in year 2 after release),  and  I  bear  in
    mind that there is no evidence that the  appellant  has  committed  any
    offences since his release  from  detention  which,  according  to  the
    appellant's witness statement dated 12 October 2018, was on  5  October
    2017.

58. Therefore, it is not as if the evidence  points  unequivocally  to  the
    appellant remaining a 'constant' in [T1]'s life  during  her  childhood
    without any reason to think that she might again be separated from  him
    because of his offending. He has been found  to  represent  a  risk  of
    serious harm, and the potential for him to reoffend is  evident.  Those
    are matters that are relevant to a consideration of whether it would be
    unduly harsh for [T1] to be separated from him, even accepting  that  a
    period of separation  if  he  were  to  be  imprisoned  would  be  very
    different  in  nature  and  extent   to   separation   resulting   from
    deportation.

59. It is inevitable, in the light of the  evidence,  that  [T1]  would  be
    emotionally affected by the appellant's deportation. There is also  the
    risk, to which I have already referred, that her health would  also  be
    adversely  affected.   However,  considering  all  the   circumstances,
    applying the guidance in MK (Sierra Leone) as approved in KO (Nigeria),
    I am not satisfied that the effect of the appellant's deportation would
    be unduly harsh. [T1] would be able to receive the treatment  that  she
    needs without the appellant being in the UK.   She  would  continue  to
    live with her mother who would be able to provide  her  with  emotional
    support, and who would ensure that she receives appropriate  treatment,
    including in the event of  a  Sickle  Cell  Crisis  should  that  occur
    because of separation from the appellant. Her education would continue.

60. The conclusion that it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  her  to  be
    separated from the appellant by reason of his deportation is  the  same
    in terms of paragraph 399 of the Rules and s.117C(5).

61. In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662 at [25]-[27] it was decided that what was described as the
    "fall back protection" of "very compelling circumstances" should  apply
    equally to those sentenced to periods of imprisonment of less than four
    years as it does to those sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at
    least four years. Thus, s.117C must be read in that way.

62. Accordingly, I  have  considered  whether  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above  those  described  in  Exception  2  (the
    'unduly harsh' provision). None have been put before me. No submissions
    in that  respect  were  advanced,  and  I  cannot  see  that  within  a
    consideration of very compelling circumstances there is any matter that
    is not already taken into account in my consideration of the  issue  of
    undue harshness in this case.

63. In all these circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

    Decision

64. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision having been set aside,  I  re-make  the
    decision by dismissing the appeal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because this appeal involves children, unless and until a Tribunal or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant  or  any
member of his family,  or  the  mother  of  his  children.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  4/10/19
