
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07257/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd October 2018                           |On 25th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                     FK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Radford, Counsel; instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Grimmett promulgated on 18th July 2018 dismissing her appeal on the basis
of her asylum and human rights claims.  The Appellant appealed against that
decision and was granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Beach in the following terms:

"2.  The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to make
clear and properly reasoned findings on material issues.  The grounds state
that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has misunderstood the Appellant's
evidence and that she had relied on inconsistencies which did not exist.
The grounds further state that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not seek
to clarify an issue with regard to the gender of the person who gave the
books to the Appellant and that had she done so the Farsi interpreter would
have been able to explain that the third person singular 'ou' is gender
free.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge outlines a number of inconsistencies in
her findings.  Some of these remain despite the Appellant's explanations
within the grounds of appeal.  However, it is unclear whether some of the
inconsistencies were, in fact, inconsistencies.  For example, the First-
tier Tribunal Judge makes reference to the Appellant stating variously that
the person with whom she found the book or who gave her book was male or
female.  The Appellant states that had the First-tier Tribunal put this
issue to her at the hearing it could have been explained that the word
being used at the hearing was gender neutral.  It is arguable that the
point should have been put to the Appellant.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge
states [9] that the Appellant stated at interview that she did not know how
to use the book yet the asylum interview discloses explanations by the
Appellant as to how the book was used (Questions 47, 52, 55 of the AIR).
It is arguable that this may have affected the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
assessment of the Appellant's credibility.

4.   Permission to appeal is granted."

I was not provided with a Rule 24 response by the Respondent's
representative but was given the indication that the appeal was resisted.

Error of Law

In terms of the Grounds of Appeal, which were not drafted by present
Counsel, Miss Radford helpfully crystallised the grounds and quantified
them in the following way.  Miss Radford characterised the grounds as a
challenge to the procedural fairness of the judge's decision combined with
inconsistencies in the judge's findings which resulted in material mistakes
of fact such that the decision should be set aside.  Mr Avery, in fairness,
did not seek to persuade me otherwise once he had heard Miss Radford's
extensive submissions, which I also accept and will set out briefly within
my reasons.

It is fair to note that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is
extremely concise and robust.  That in and of itself is not a basis for any
error, however, the danger is that it being so concise, it can lead to an
inadequacy of reasoning if the reasons are unclear, and in this particular
instance it is unfortunate that the decision does not carry a section
setting out the history or factual summary of the Appellant's protection
claim which would have helped set out the judge's view of the facts and
evidence.  This does not always need to be done, but in this instance, as
it was not, it was left to the parties and myself to decipher the judge's
understanding of the evidence she was presented with against the Decision
and Reasons which are set out from paragraphs 5 to 9 of the decision and
which form the only reasoning given for the refusal of the protection
claim, based primarily upon a finding that the Appellant's account is not
to be accepted.  Thus, this challenge was brought on the basis that the
decision taken by the judge was not open to her to reach based upon a
correct understanding of the facts and evidence before the Tribunal.

The first criticism noted of the judge's decision in paragraphs 5 through
to 7 is that the judge has conflated the evidence given by the Appellant in
interview with that given in her witness statement and oral evidence.  The
essence of this complaint is that the judge has criticised the Appellant's
account as shifting from the alleged black magic or illegal texts being
obtained by a third unnamed person - who is said to be male in the asylum
interview - but who was then said to be female in the Appellant's witness
statement and oral evidence.  Miss Radford helpfully produced an excerpt
from the University of Texas' Persian Online Resources, which sets out that
the Persian language is not as complicated as other languages in that it
does not have a gender as might French or Arabic, for example.  The
excerpts further set out that the pronouns in the Persian language are
gender-neutral in that he or she will be pronounced with the sound "u"
(oo).  With that in mind, the Appellant submits, and I accept, that given
that the Appellant in interview specified that she obtained these illegal
texts from an unnamed "person", the later references at questions 55 and 62
to that person being a "him" or being a male, cannot have originated from
the Appellant as her use of the 'third person' or describing this 'third
person' would have been gender-neutral because the Persian language carries
a gender-neutral pronoun.  Consequently, Miss Radford submitted that the
references to "him" must have emanated from the interpreter.  Mr Avery did
not seek to disagree with this analysis or assessment or the evidence on
the Persian language and in my view, looking at the judge's findings, it is
plain at paragraphs 5 through to 7 that the judge has placed a great deal
of weight upon the shift in the Appellant's account in that the unnamed
person whom she names shifted gender, from a man in the asylum interview,
to a woman when she appeared before the First-tier Tribunal in her appeal.


The next criticism made (which is one which is repeated in several
paragraphs) is that the judge has conflated the source of various
information, in other words, the judge has confused evidence that arose
from the interview, with evidence that arose from the witness statement.
This would not normally be fatal in and of itself, however, the conflation
combined with the context in which the judge has deployed it in her
findings has led to an implied view that the judge has confused the
chronology of the events as they took place in the Appellant's account.
For example, in paragraph 6 it is said that the Appellant found the ancient
texts herself, whereas in paragraph 7 the judge notes that the witness
statement states that she did not find them on her own.  Whereas according
to the Asylum Interview Record, the Appellant never said that she had found
the books by herself and therefore there is no consistency between this
perceived account and what was actually said by her in the interview
against her witness statement.  They were actually consistent with one
another.

In terms of paragraph 7 a further factual error arises in that the
Appellant did not say at any point that the texts were in Arabic and
English alone, whereas one can see from the Asylum Interview Record that at
question 51 she answered that the texts were in Arabic and Abbas.  In
further contrast, at page C32 of the Respondent's bundle further evidence
she previously gave were that the texts were in Hebrew, Arabic and English.
 Therefore, the assessment of the Appellant's evidence has not been taken
in the chronological order in which it developed and it is plain that in
the interview the Appellant described the texts as being in Arabic and
Abbas and then later clarified they were in Arabic, Hebrew and English and
as such, given that the further answers given at Annex C of the
Respondent's bundle were given in response to an email from the Secretary
of State, it would be improper to not take that evidence into account as
being the natural clarification of what was said in her Asylum Interview
Record.

Turning to paragraph 8, the judge notes that the Appellant states in her
witness statement that she asked a teacher to photocopy the text whereas in
her oral evidence she said that she had asked a friend with whom she had
originally stolen the book to give her a copy instead.  This highlights a
further mistake of fact in the judge's decision in that the Appellant's
account is that she was given a copy of the extracts from the book ten
years ago, whereas the further copies were made by a friend who was a
teacher on a much later occasion.  Therefore, this is not an inconsistency
in respect of the copies originally given to her but a conflation as to
whether the copies were originally given by the friend or by a teacher.

Finally, turning to paragraph 9, it is true that the Appellant said she did
not know how to use the books but later discovered how.  Questions 52 and
54 of the Asylum Interview Record, however, show that there were drawings
in the text which she copied and she was also shown by a third person ("Mr
T"), who showed her how to use the easier spells in the text.  Thus, it is
claimed that the judge has not taken a comprehensive account of her answers
and her evidence before assessing whether there were any inconsistencies on
this point.

Thus, given the fact that the judge found the appellant to be not credible
based upon the "numerous inconsistencies" in paragraphs 5 to 9, which were
said to go to the core of her account, and given that Miss Radford has
pointed at length to errors in all of those numbered paragraphs, I am just
persuaded that the decision does contain inconsistencies and mistakes of
fact that are material to the judge's assessment such that it should be set
aside.

That is not to say that doubts still remain over the Appellant's claim in
Mr Avery's view.  Although it is not a matter for this Tribunal, Mr Avery
did point out that the Appellant's account was that these ancient texts
were either found by her, or they were given to her by a friend which
requires explanation.  Mr Avery was also keen to highlight that at
questions 56 and 62 the Appellant gave a different account in that she said
that the books were given to her and that she would not reveal the identity
of who gave them to her as she was afraid for their safety which again is
quite different from her account that she and a friend found them in a
shrine.  Thus, several inconsistencies do still remain which require
explanation upon re-hearing, however, given the material nature of the
inconsistencies in the judge's findings in paragraphs 5 to 9, I see no
option but to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its
entirety.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The matter is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a
differently constituted bench.

Before I conclude, I pause to remark that, notwithstanding the above errors
that Miss Radford has identified and which took a great deal of time to
explain, much of the Appellant's case can be fairly described as confusing
at best.  As such, it is difficult to not sympathise with the First-tier
Tribunal and it having to decipher and piece together the Appellant's
account, disjointed as it is.  The evidence as presented is unhelpful to
the parties and the Tribunal, and in my view, an extremely detailed
chronology of events and an extremely detailed witness statement that
unifies the Appellant's evidence in totality should be provided to the
Tribunal if the Appellant wishes her case to be properly understood upon re-
hearing.  If this is not done, I could quite understand if such errors
arose once more, particularly if counsel is not retained to assist the
Tribunal in navigating the minefield of evidence as currently presented.

Directions

The appeal is to be remitted to IAC Birmingham.

A Farsi interpreter is to be provided.

The Appellant is presumed to be the only person who shall give evidence.

The time estimate given is 2-3 hours.

No special directions are given.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 20 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
