

                                    [pic]





Upper Tribunal


(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07449/2019 (P)





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS





|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2020                      |On 14th July 2020                    |



                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH





                                   Between


                                  M.K.N.A.


                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)


                                                                   Appellant


                                    -and-


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent





                            DECISION AND REASONS


BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant was born in Sri Lanka and claimed asylum  on  10  October
    2012, but this application was refused and she had exhausted her appeal
    rights by 21 October 2013. She lodged further  submissions  on  5  June
    2019, which the Respondent accepted  amounted  to  a  fresh  claim  for
    asylum, but her application was refused on 5 August 2019.

2.   She appealed  against  this  decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Garro dismissed her appeal in a decision promulgated  on  10  January
    2020. She appealed against this decision and First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Chohan granted her permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  19
    February 2020. She found that it was arguable that First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Garro relied on adverse findings of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Thornton in his decision promulgated on 26 February 2013 but failed  to
    take into account the subsequent findings made by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Hanson in his decision promulgated on 18 August 2013.  She  also  found
    that First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro had given very few  reasons  for
    rejecting the country expert report on which the  Appellant  relied  at
    the hearing before her.

3.   An error of law hearing had been set down for 12 May 2020  but  had  to
    be vacated in the light of the Covid-19 Pandemic.  Directions  made  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington were then sent  to  the  parties  on  24
    April 2020. She said that she was minded to decide  the  error  of  law
    hearing on the papers and also decide whether the  decision  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro should be set aside.

4.   She gave the parties 21 days to object to this course  of  action.  The
    Appellant lodged her skeleton argument in response to the directions on
    11 May 2020 and did not object to decisions being made on  the  papers.
    The Respondent replied on 15 May 2020. She said that she did not oppose
    the Appellant's grounds and also acknowledged the frailty of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro's decision. She also stated that in her  opinion
    the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo
    hearing. Therefore, I have proceeded to decide  whether  there  was  an
    error of law on the papers, as it is in the interests  of  justice  for
    there to be no further unnecessary delay in this appeal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   The basis upon which the Appellant made her fresh claim for asylum  was
    different to her previous claim and  she  relied  on  a  very  detailed
    expert report by Dr. Rachel Seoighe, a lecturer in criminology  at  the
    University of Kent.  Her PhD addressed the subject of the civil war  in
    Sri Lanka, human rights and collective memory. Her  CV  also  confirmed
    that she had visited Sri Lanka and keeps in  close  touch  with  events
    there.  In a very detailed report covering 62  pages  she  addressed  a
    number of questions put to her by the Appellant's solicitors about  the
    persecution the Appellant said that she suffered in the  past  and  her
    future risk of persecution, including the risk which would occur if she
    returned as the single female head of a household.  First-tier Tribunal
    Judge  O'Garro  only  mentioned  this  expert  report  in  passing   in
    paragraphs 29 and 30  of  her  decision.  She  did  not  apply  anxious
    scrutiny to it or consider her fresh claim in the light of it.  It  was
    not sufficient just to  refer  in  general  to  reasons  given  by  the
    Respondent in her decision letter.

6.   In paragraph 25 of her decision she treated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Thornton's decision, promulgated on 26 February 2013  as  her  starting
    point. In doing so she erred in law, as in his decision promulgated  on
    18 August 2018 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  reached  very  different
    findings of fact in relation to the Appellant's  past  persecution.  In
    particular, at paragraph 10 he said:

          "I accept that the appellant's account is plausible  in  light  of
         the country information and that if she  was  detained  during  the
         final stages of the conflict and suspected of LTTE membership or of
         being an LTTE fighter, she may have been subjected to ill-treatment
         by the Sri Lankan authorities which could include  torture  in  the
         manner described by her in evidence".

7.   The fact that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro  did  not  take  into
    account Upper Tribunal Judge  Hanson's  decision  also  undermined  her
    findings of fact in relation to the report by Dr. O'Grady in  paragraph
    31 of her decision and Dr. Jensen in paragraph 33 of her decision.

8.   For all of these reasons, First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro's  decision
    contained material errors of law.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro, Chohan or Thornton.




    Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 27 June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


