
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/07019/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |                  Decision & Reasons  |
|On 11 January 2018                  |Promulgated                           |
|                                    |On 8 February 2018                    |
|                                    |                                      |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     rai
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


There will be an anonymity direction.  That is  because  the  Appellant  has
sought asylum.  The Appellant will be known as RAI.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The Appellant appeals with permission against  a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Oliver sitting at Hatton Cross on 23rd August  2017.   By
    way of a decision and reasons promulgated on 19th  September  2017  the
    judge dismissed the Appellant's protection claim.  Permission to appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler by way  of  a  decision
    dated 16th October 2017.

2.    The matter has come  for  hearing  before  me  this  morning  and  the
    parties have presented a joint position.  Ms Solanki and Mr Wilding say
    they have had the opportunity to consider the matter before the hearing
    commenced and that they  both  agree  that  the  judge's  determination
    cannot stand but there should be a remittal of the matter to the First-
    tier Tribunal to enable there to a complete re-hearing.

3.    In my judgment, the concession made by the Respondent in this case  is
    entirely appropriate and indeed when I look  at  paragraph  20  of  the
    judge's decision, (which comprises about 16 lines), one is to find  the
    complete decision making and findings.   I have to say in view  of  the
    relative complexity of the Appellant's case, those findings  do  indeed
    appear to be inadequate.  Therefore I am not surprised by the  approach
    which is taken by the Secretary of State in this case.

4.    In the circumstances and especially in view of the agreed position  of
    the parties, I conclude that there is a material error of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is therefore set aside.  There shall be a  re-hearing  on  all
    issues at the First-tier Tribunal at the Hatton Cross  Hearing  Centre.
    None of the current findings shall stand.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.

There shall be a re-hearing on all issues at the First-tier  Tribunal.  None
of the current findings shall stand.



Signed      A. Mahmood                  Date: 11 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

