

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/07502/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard by Skype for Business                   |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on 24 March 2021                              |On 8 July 2019               |
|and by Microsoft Teams                        |                             |
|on 23 June 2021                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 HAWKAR [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr D Cox, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of  Iraq.   The  respondent  firstly
    refused his asylum claim by a decision dated 27 January 2016.  Judge  P
    G Grant-Hutchison dismissed his appeal by a decision promulgated on  13
    December 2016, reference PA/01295/16.

 2. The respondent refused further submissions by a decision dated 19  July
    2019.  FtT Judge Shand  dismissed  his  second  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 February 2020.

 3. By a decision dated 8 September  2020,  UT  Judge  Kekic,  following  a
    concession by the respondent, set aside the decision of Judge Shand.

 4. The UT made a transfer order to enable decision-making to be  completed
    by another UT Judge.

 5. The decision of Judge Shand was set aside principally for the error  of
    applying  country  guidance,  published  after  the  hearing,   without
    inviting parties to make submissions thereon; but parties did not  seek
    to restrict  the  process  of  remaking,  and  the  appellant,  without
    objection, has introduced further evidence.

 6. On 24 March 2021, the  respondent  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that
    following proceedings in the Court of Appeal, further country  guidance
    is pending.  Mr Cox, having  taken  instructions,  explained  that  the
    appellant did not seek adjournment, and wished his case to  be  decided
    according to the facts as they might  be  found,  guidance  so  far  as
    extant and relevant, and background evidence.  Oral evidence was  heard
    from  the  appellant  and  another  witness.   Due  to  delays  through
    technical difficulties, and shortage  of  time,  the  hearing  was  not
    completed.

 7. The appellant filed submissions on  19  April  2021.   Although  headed
    "skeleton argument", these are detailed and thorough.

 8. On 23 June 2021, Mr Diwyncz made oral submissions, and Mr Cox  expanded
    briefly upon the written submissions.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. The appellant says, and the respondent does not  dispute,  that  he  is
    from the village of Kharabaroot (or Kharababaroot), in the province and
    near the city of Kirkuk. The appellant further says that he  fled  from
    his village during an ISIS attack on 11 June  2014,  and  lost  contact
    with his parents.  He later learned that both died in the attack.

11. At [14 -22] the first refusal decision rejected the appellant's account
    of the attack on the village and  the  death  of  his  parents  (i)  on
    grounds of contradictions and inconsistencies and (ii) under  reference
    to section 8 of the 2004 Act, for not claiming in another country;  and
    even if he came from a "contested area", the respondent considered that
    he could relocate to the IKR.

12. Mr Diwyncz did not refer to the reasons in  that  decision.  It  founds
    upon the appellant stating the walking time between  two  houses  as  5
    minutes, but at another point as 10 - 15 minutes.   Nothing  turned  on
    the timing, or on the appellant's accuracy.  The decision  also  founds
    upon a less than crystal clear description of fleeing on a  truck.  The
    alleged "contradictions and inconsistencies" are not  striking.   There
    is nothing in them which indicates to me that the appellant is unlikely
    to have been attempting to describe a  real  rather  than  an  invented
    incident.

13. The section  8  point  is  adverse  to  the  appellant,  but  far  from
    determinative.

14. Before Judge Grant-Hutchison, the appellant's representative  submitted
    that his claim was credible, and that his appeal should succeed because
    it was for the respondent to prove what documentation could be used  to
    return him, and no such proof was offered.  The judge noted that he did
    not give evidence; declined, by reference to the respondent's decision,
    to find him credible; and found nothing  to  show  that  he  could  not
    relocate.

15. In the refusal of the further  submissions,  at  [22],  the  respondent
    referred to the appellant's statement  at  interview  that  he  had  an
    identification card in his house in Iraq  and  said  that  he  had  not
    established any efforts to contact or trace family  members  to  obtain
    documentation.  It was noted that the judge "had found that you  cannot
    confirm that your parents are dead".  At [29], the respondent concluded
    that the appellant could return to Kirkuk or relocate to  the  IKR  and
    could "expect assistance from male family members or government offices
    in obtaining your ID documents".

16. In her decision, Judge  Shand  applied  the  principles  of  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKIAT to the appellant's evidence.  At [56] she found nothing in
    the appellant's evidence of a visit to the Iraqi  Embassy  to  lead  to
    conclusions different from those reached by Judge  Grant-Hutchison  and
    at [57] she concluded similarly on registration of his details with the
    Red Cross.

17. The appellant's submissions at [13 - 17] acknowledge the  relevance  of
    Devaseelan but ask for new evidence to be assessed on its  own  merits,
    without preconception, under reference to TF & MA [2018] CSIH at [50].

18. There was oral evidence before me which was not before  the  respondent
    or before the two judges who have dealt with  the  claim.   Mr  Diwyncz
    tested that evidence in cross-examination, but having done so, he  said
    that he could  make  "no  great  attack"  on  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant and of his supporting witness, Mr Mohammed Ali Amin.  Nor did
    he suggest that I should reject the written evidence.

19. The appellant makes the same substantive claim as  he  did  before  the
    first and second judges, but he supports it now by evidence  which  was
    not before either of those judges.  The most significant part  of  that
    evidence was not available to the appellant previously,  as  Mr  Amin's
    visit to Kirkuk took place later.  It does not fall to be "treated with
    the greatest circumspection", in terms of Devaseelan.

20. There is another reason why the Devaseelan approach does not operate at
    this stage against the appellant.  The respondent's original  challenge
    to credibility was rather  weak.   Judge  Grant-Hutchison  declined  to
    reach any more favourable findings, but did not  add  to  the  reasons,
    apart from the absence  of  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant.   The
    appellant in his statement says vaguely that was  on  advice  from  his
    legal adviser at the time.   It appears  from  the  decision  that  the
    strategy of that representative was to rely  on  the  burden  of  proof
    being  on  the  SSHD,  which  was  a  common  misconception  in   Iraqi
    "identification" cases.  Accordingly, the absence  of  the  appellant's
    oral evidence before Grant-Hutchison is not  significantly  adverse  to
    his credibility now.

21. Mr Diwyncz brought out in evidence, and touched  upon  in  submissions,
    that Mr Amin, who has not had his  main  residence  in  Iraq  for  many
    years, had no problem in obtaining Iraqi documentation.  When asked, Mr
    Amin seemed surprised at the  suggestion  there  might  have  been  any
    difficulty.  However, Mr  Diwyncz  did  not  argue  that  this  was  an
    indication that the appellant would have no difficulty.   Mr  Amin  had
    the assistance of close family in  Iraq,  whereas  the  evidence  tends
    towards the appellant not being in a similar situation.

22. The appellant and Mr Amin both struck me as straightforward  witnesses,
    giving clear and unexaggerated answers.  Thorough cross-examination did
    not result in any significant challenge to their  evidence.    Mr  Amin
    has been in the area and has made indirect enquiries,  the  results  of
    which tend to confirm the appellant's claims  about  the  fate  of  his
    parents.

23. The proximity and distribution of ethnic and religious groups is at the
    heart of Iraq's problems.  It is undisputed that conflict  has  reduced
    Kharabaroot to ruins.

24. The appellant's evidence that his parents died in  or  soon  after  the
    attack on Kharabaroot  is  plausible  and  consistent  with  background
    evidence of events around that time.

25. Either the appellant's evidence is true, or he has fabricated  loss  of
    family contacts and ability to document himself to establish  residence
    in  the  UK  and  enlisted  Mr  Amin,  and  others,  to  back  him  up.
    Fabrication cannot be entirely excluded, but the  respondent  makes  no
    strong contention.

26. Drawing the threads together, I find a reasonable likelihood  that  the
    appellant's account is true.

27. It is common ground that on current guidance, the  appellant  might  be
    able to re-document himself through the Iraqi Embassy; but as argued in
    the appellant's submissions at [26 - 28],  there  are  strong  grounds,
    supported by cogent evidence,  for  departing  from  guidance  on  that
    issue.

28. Mr Diwyncz accepted, under reference to the respondent's Country Policy
    and Information Note Iraq: Internal relocation, civil documentation and
    returns, version  11.0,  June  2020,  at  2.6.15  -  17,  that  if  the
    appellant's position is as he claims, it  is  unlikely  that  he  could
    obtain fresh documents, or at least not  without  exposing  himself  to
    real risk along the way.

29. There is a reasonable likelihood that the appellant on return would  be
    at risk as a Sunni Kurd.  Given his difficulties over documentation, he
    cannot reasonably be expected to avoid that risk by relocation.

30. The decision of the FtT has, of consent, been set aside.  Based on  the
    evidence led in process  of  remaking  the  decision,  the  appeal,  as
    originally brought to the FtT, is  allowed  on  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant's removal would breach the UK's obligations under the Refugee
    Convention.

31. I am obliged to both representatives for their assistance.

32.  The  appellant  does  not  ask  for  the  anonymity  direction  to  be
    maintained.


        Hugh Macleman

      25 June 2021
      UT Judge Macleman


