
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08218/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14 July 2017                       |On 1 August 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               A--- k--- a---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran of Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because of the need  for  extreme  care  in  cases  involving  international
protection lest publicity creates a risk for the applicant  that  would  not
otherwise exist.

This is an appeal by a citizen of Somalia against the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal Judge dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
respondent that he is not a refugee.  It is a slightly unusual, and in  some
senses irrelevant, feature of the case that the appellant has  leave  to  be
in the United Kingdom.  He was given discretionary leave  because  he  is  a
married man with three children.   His  wife  and  three  children  are  all
British citizens and the Secretary of State was satisfied  that  there  were
very significant difficulties in the way of the family  establishing  itself
in Mogadishu.  Nevertheless, the appellant is entitled to assert  his  claim
to refugee status and entitled to complain if he says it  has  been  refused
wrongly.

The First-tier Tribunal accepted parts of  his  case.   The  judge  accepted
that the appellant has been a teacher, that he  was  targeted  by  Al-Shebab
who captured him in his school, but decided that he was no  longer  at  risk
because Al-Shebab were no longer powerful in the home area.  As anyone  with
any familiarity with the situation in Somalia knows,  the  threat  from  Al-
Shebab has risen and fallen and is subject to change so and it is  essential
to the  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeal  that  the  finding  that  the
appellant is safe in his home area is based on a thoroughly  sound  premise.


Regrettably, it is not.

It has always been the appellant's case, about which  no  finding  has  been
made, that his home area is  in  the  most  southerly  province  of  Somalia
called Juba Hoose and he lived in an area not very far away  from  Kismaayo.
For reasons that are frankly unfathomable, the First-tier  Tribunal  decided
that the appellant's home area was a part of Somalia that the  judge  called
"Lower Shabelle".  Although the judge referred in his Decision  and  Reasons
to a map of Somalia in the papers, there is no area on  that  map  known  as
Lower Shabelle. Ms Loughran, Mr Deller and I are inclined to assume,  we  do
not actually know, that the judge meant Shabelle Hoose  which  is  the  most
southerly of the two provinces with the name Shabelle,  the  more  northerly
one being Shabelle Dhexe.  It is quite impossible  to  have  any  confidence
that the judge has applied his mind to the correct area of Somalia and  that
means that his decision that the appellant would be safe in  his  home  area
cannot possibly be sound.  That part of the decision must be set aside.

It was the judge's finding that the appellant would have some difficulty  in
establishing himself in Mogadishu.  The judge recognised that the  appellant
was from a  minority  clan.   He  accepted  the  evidence  that  he  had  no
experience of living in Mogadishu.  The appellant's wife lived  there  as  a
child but that is of limited relevance.  No  extended  family  members  have
been identified.   His  wife  would  not  be  in  a  position  to  give  him
significant financial support to help him, but the  judge  decided  that  he
would be able to get some support from other members of  the  minority  clan
in Mogadishu in the event of his return there.

The judge then decided that the appellant  was  not  a  refugee  because  he
could reasonably be expected to return to Mogadishu.   The  difficulty  with
that finding is there is no clear justification for the  judge's  conclusion
that the limited support he would have from other members  of  the  minority
clan would be sufficient.  That is not to  say  the  judge  was  wrong.  The
point is that the explanation is so inadequate that I have to  say  that  it
amounts to an error of law.

It follows therefore the judge has made two very significant  mistakes.   He
has decided on a wrong basis that the appellant would be safe  in  his  home
area because he has not  identified  properly  the  home  area  and  he  has
decided that the appellant would be safe in Mogadishu but does  not  explain
where the support would come from  other  than  alluding  to  minority  clan
support.  These errors cumulatively, and  probably  individually,  make  the
determination unsound.

Mr Deller was not able to argue against these propositions which I find  are
made out.

Ms Loughran wishes to  be  able  to  prepare  fully  the  case  showing  the
difficulties on return and expects to do that by calling  further  evidence.
It is therefore appropriate that the decision  that  I  must  set  aside  is
accompanied by a decision that  the  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal where it can be decided again on fresh evidence, if  that  is  what
the appellant chooses to do.

As has been apparent in what I have said so  far,  the  judge  made  certain
findings of fact which I have identified.  They  cannot  be  criticised  and
they stand as the starting point in any reconsideration of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons given I find the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law.   I  set
aside its decision and I direct the case be decided again in the  First-tier
Tribunal with the findings of fact indicated preserved.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 31 July 2017                   |

