
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08355/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31st May 2017                       |On 13th June 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    M M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Razzaq-Siddiq (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malone, promulgated on 27th March 2017, following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 7th  March  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on  [  ]
    1986.  He appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 27th July
    2016,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for   humanitarian
    protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he came to  the  UK  as  a  student  from
    Bangladesh, after having applied for entry clearance on 30th  September
    2009, obtained  an  extension  of  his  student  visa,  and  after  his
    subsequent application to  remain  in  this  country  was  refused,  he
    claimed asylum on 4th January 2016.  The basis of his claim is that  he
    has been involved in student activities  with  the  Bangladeshi  Islami
    Chattrashibir ("BIC"), the student wing  of  the  Bangladesh  Jamaat-e-
    Islami ("BJI").  This was in March 2000.  In December  2008  a  general
    election took place in Bangladesh.  When it became  apparent  that  the
    BJI would lose, the scene turned ugly  and  the  student  wing  of  BAL
    attacked supporters of the BIC, and the Appellant was assaulted.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  held  the  position  of  the
    president of the BIC  for  Madaripur  Town  Unit  (paragraph  35).   He
    accepted that on 29th December 2008, the election night, the  Appellant
    was assaulted by representatives of the student wing of  BAL,  who  had
    become  overexcited  at  witnessing  their  party  in  the  process  of
    achieving a landslide victory.  The judge concluded that, "I found  the
    assault he experienced on election night arose from nothing other  than
    over exuberance and ill  judgment"  (paragraph  38).   He  went  on  to
    consider the  Appellant's  wider  circumstances  whereby  when  he  was
    notified on 7th December 2014,  that  his  leave  to  remain  had  been
    curtailed, due to his educational institution losing its licence, he on
    7th February 2014 made a human  rights  application  under  Article  8,
    relying on his private life in the United Kingdom, and this was refused
    on 1st April 2015 (see paragraph 40).  When the Respondent refused  the
    application on  human  rights  grounds,  it  was  stated  that  if  the
    Appellant had a fear of returning to Bangladesh he should claim  asylum
    and it was at that stage that  the  Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  4th
    January 2016 (paragraph 40).  The judge also observed  the  Appellant's
    claimed fear that his younger brother had also been arrested on a false
    case and that false cases had been lodged against the Appellant.

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge had accepted  that  the
    Appellant's presence in social  media  was  such  that,  "the  material
    purportedly posted is inflammatory and would  antagonise  BAL  and  the
    authorities in Bangladesh" (paragraph 72).  He had also accepted  that,
    "the government is becoming less tolerant of the criticism"  (paragraph
    75).  In  these  circumstances,  it  was  against  the  weight  of  the
    background material  to  conclude  that  there  would  be  no  risk  of
    persecution.  The grounds also state that the judge  wrongly  expressed
    his conclusion about the openness of the Appellant's  Facebook  account
    (at paragraph 71) which had never been disputed by the Respondent.   He
    also was wrong  to  say  that  only  one  conviction  had  occurred  in
    Bangladesh for Facebook postings since June 2013.  On 21st April  2017,
    permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 31st May 2017, Mr Razzaq-Siddiq, took me to
    the grounds of application and emphasised these.  He  then  said  that,
    given what the judge had found to be the case, as stated in the grounds
    of application, it was simply not tenable for the judge to conclude, in
    the light of the  objective  evidence  that  was  available,  that  the
    Appellant would not face a  real  risk  of  persecution  on  the  lower
    standard.  He drew to my attention page 336 of the  Appellant's  bundle
    which refers to the COIR Report  at  paragraphs  2.1.4  to  2.1.5  that
    journalists and other human rights activists are being targeted by  the
    Information and Communication Technology Act 2006.  Lecturers have been
    targeted.  The grant of permission also  recognises  (at  paragraph  2)
    that if the Appellant's Facebook account was an  open  one  then  other
    people would have access to it and this would place him at risk  if  he
    returned to Bangladesh.  The acting editor of the Daily Amar  Desh  has
    been in jail for twenty  months.   Meetings  and  assemblies  had  been
    prohibited.  Mr Razzaq-Siddiq expressly took me to page 419,  456,  526
    and 546, and given that the Appellant's Facebook account  had  referred
    to the prime minister of Bangladesh as acting as a  "lady  Hitler",  he
    would definitely be at risk upon return.  The consequences  for  people
    who criticise the government are set out at page  546  of  the  bundle.
    Even  a  former  army  officer  was  arrested  for  making  provocative
    statements (at page 547).  In addition, the  supplementary  bundle  (at
    page 7) shows how Bangladeshi practices do not sit well with Article 19
    of the ICCPR.

 8. Second, if one has regard to the  "policy  summary"  of  the  COIR  (at
    paragraph 1.4), it is clear that it is unnecessary to be a member of an
    organisation in order to attract the government's  wrath  the  risk  is
    widespread.  Third, the judge was wrong (at paragraph 80)  to  conclude
    that, given that the atmosphere in Bangladesh "is politically  charged,
    is volatile, and is unpleasant" and given that "the Appellant may  well
    experience harassment on return there" that this would  not  amount  to
    his being "persecuted or subjected to inhuman or  degrading  treatment"
    (paragraph 80).  This is because such  a  conclusion  ran  against  the
    weight of the objective evidence that Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq  had  drawn  to
    this Tribunal's attention.

 9. For his part, Mr Melvin referred to his Rule 24 response.  He submitted
    that the judge had taken all these matters into account, and  that  the
    issue here was that, even if the Facebook account was an open  one,  it
    was simply not credible that the  Bangladesh  authorities  would  trawl
    through millions  of  Facebook  entries,  in  order  to  seek  out  the
    Appellant, because if this was the case then any returnee from the  UK,
    who had criticised the Bangladesh  government,  however  mildly,  could
    claim asylum in this country.  Second, the fact here was, as  found  by
    the judge, that the Appellant was making a last ditch attempt  to  stay
    in this country after all his previous applications to remain here as a
    student had failed.  Simply to compare the prime minister of Bangladesh
    as a "lady Hitler" was not to suggest that the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk of ill-treatment.  The plain fact was that he was not an activist.
     He could not even remember the venue where he attended  demonstrations
    in the UK, apart from one such venue.  He was  not  a  blogger.   There
    would be absolutely no risk to him upon return to Bangladesh.

10. In reply, Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submitted that the judge had  accepted  that
    the Appellant had held the position of president of the BIC in his town
    unit (paragraph 35).  Second, the objective evidence was clear that  if
    one was a supporter of such an organisation one was  at  risk  of  ill-
    treatment.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the decision by  the  judge  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of  TCEA  2007)
    such that I should set the decision aside.  My reasons are as  follows.



12. First, the judge applies the correct standard of  proof  (at  paragraph
    49).

13. Second, the refusal letter recognises that  the  Appellant  is  a  "low
    level supporter of BIC before  leaving  Bangladesh"  and  that  he  had
    "attended some anti-Bangladesh  government  demonstrations  in  London"
    (paragraph 25).  However, the refusal letter observed that  "there  was
    no  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  low   level   support   for   the
    organisations he identified in this country had or would  come  to  the
    attention of the Bangladesh authorities" (paragraph 30).

14. Third, the circumstances of the Appellant's  application  are  that  he
    only applied for asylum, after licence was withdrawn from his  college,
    and his human rights application  was  withdrawn,  with  his  expressly
    being then alerted to the fact that he should make a claim  for  asylum
    if he felt that there was a risk  of  ill-treatment  to  him,  and  the
    judge's conclusion on this  matter  was  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    credible.  Indeed, the judge concluded that "the Appellant's  narrative
    to have been carefully crafted invention".  In  this  case,  the  Judge
    observed the  Appellant.   He  saw  him  give  evidence.   He  saw  the
    weaknesses in that  evidence.   He  was  not  prepared  to  accept  the
    Appellant's contention that he was not even in touch  with  his  family
    because "there is no reason for him not to be in touch and every reason
    why he should be" (paragraph 78).  Indeed, the Appellant came  in  2009
    and "he intended to return when things in Bangladesh  had  reverted  to
    normal, and that his credibility had been damaged  by  his  failure  to
    claim asylum earlier" (paragraph 79).

15.  Fourth,  the  judge  is  not  oblivious  to  the  wider  situation  in
    Bangladesh.   Indeed,  he  expressly  refers  to  the  Information  and
    Communication Technology Act 2006, which prescribed harsh sentences for
    ill-defined  categories  of  online  anti-government  expression,   and
    exactly that which  Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq  read  out  to  me  in  his  oral
    submissions,  is  set  out  by  the  judge  at  paragraph  72  of   the
    determination.  It is in no way the case that the judge has  overlooked
    any aspect of the objective evidence.  He even recognises that  at  its
    lowest  the  Appellant  has  been  "disrespectful  to  the   Bangladesh
    government" (paragraph 74).  It remained the case,  nevertheless,  that
    "no action has been  taken  against  the  Appellant,  in  absentia,  in
    respect  of"  his  posts  of  2012  and  2013,  and  this  is  even  in
    circumstances  where  the  government  is  becoming  less  tolerant  of
    criticism (paragraph 75).

16. As for the Appellant having been subjected to attack on election night,
    the judge deals with this by stating  that  this  arose  "from  nothing
    other than over exuberance and ill judgment" (paragraph 38).  It was  a
    conclusion which, on the facts of the case before him,  the  judge  was
    entitled to come to.

17. All in all, therefore, on the lower standard, the judge was correct  to
    conclude that the Appellant would not be at risk of  ill-treatment  and
    the claim for asylum and protection properly  failed  for  the  reasons
    that are comprehensively and carefully set out in  this  determination.



Notice of Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

19. An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th June 2017

