
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08112/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2019                            |On 12 February 2019           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     A R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Ms G Brown of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr I Jarvis Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Craft (the judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 7 September 2018.

 2. The appellant is a national of Kosovo who  made  an  asylum  and  human
    rights claim in the UK. The application was refused on 10 May 2018  and
    the appeal heard by the FTT on 2 August 2018.

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    It was contended, in summary, that the judge had erred  by  failing  to
    take into account and/or resolve conflicts of fact  and/or  opinion  on
    material matters, and had  made  perverse  or  irrational  findings  on
    material matters, and failed to provide adequate reasoning.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  who
    found it arguable that the  judge  had  erred  when  considering  court
    documents produced by the appellant, and had also failed to  take  into
    account relevant evidence.

 6. Following the grant of permission  the  respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the 2008 Procedure Rules, contending in summary,
    that the judge had not materially erred in law and had produced a  well
    reasoned decision and engaged with the evidence.

 7. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

My Consideration and Conclusions

 8. At the oral hearing Mr Jarvis indicated that he did not rely  upon  the
    rule 24 response and conceded that the judge had  materially  erred  in
    law as contended in the grounds upon which  permission  to  appeal  had
    been granted by Judge Rintoul. It was accepted that the decision of the
    FTT must be set aside and remade.

 9. I found the concession to be rightly made. The judge erred in assessing
    the credibility of the appellant. By way of example the judge found  at
    paragraph 40  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  able  to  offer  an
    explanation as to how court documents were obtained by his mother,  but
    that explanation was provided by the appellant in his witness statement
    dated 26 July 2018 which he relied upon before the FTT.

10. The judge also accepted  a  point  made  in  the  respondent's  refusal
    decision that the appellant  had  failed  to  provide  details  of  the
    official translators of  the  court  documents,  whereas  the  official
    translators' details were included.

11. The judge failed to consider  evidence  from  the  appellant's  brother
    which was relevant to the blood feud. This letter was dated 29 May 2018
    and contained within the appellant's bundle. The judge also  failed  to
    consider an explanation given by the appellant's  sister  in  a  letter
    dated 17 February 2017, again contained within the  appellant's  bundle
    of documents.

12. The judge materially erred by failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting an expert report prepared on behalf of the appellant.

13. The cumulative effect of the errors means that the credibility findings
    are unsafe and the decision of the FTT is set aside  with  no  findings
    preserved.

14. Both representatives suggested that it was  appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal back to the FTT to be heard afresh. Having considered the Senior
    President's Practice Statements, in particular  paragraph  7.2  I  find
    that it is appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  FTT  because  there
    will be extensive judicial fact-finding required.

15. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course. The appeal is to be heard by an  FTT  judge  other  than  Judge
    Craft.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside. The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.  This
direction is made because the appellant has made a claim  for  international
protection.

Signed  [pic]                           Date 28 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award. The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered
by the FTT.

Signed  [pic]                           Date 28 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
