
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/08435/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for        |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business                                  |                                 |
|On Tuesday 2 February 2021                |On Tuesday 23 February 2021      |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     S M
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  This is  an  appeal
on protection grounds.  It is therefore appropriate to continue that  order.
 Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For  the  Appellant:   Mr  A  Burrett,  Counsel  instructed   by   Londonium
solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.          The Appellant appeals against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Bonavero  promulgated  on  22  January   2020   ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision,  the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 21 August 2019 refusing
      his protection and human rights claims.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He came  to  the  UK
      as a visitor on 2 February 2010 and has overstayed since the expiry of
      his  leave  in  June  2010.    He  claimed  asylum  only  after  being
      encountered and detained by the  immigration  services,  on  11  April
      2019.

3.          The Appellant's protection claim is based on his activities  for
      the Bangladesh National Party ("BNP") in  Bangladesh  and  during  his
      time in the UK.  He says that he formally joined the party in 2004 and
      was made an Assistant General  Secretary  of  his  local  branch.   He
      claims that a  criminal  case  was  filed  against  him  in  2009  for
      snatching ballot papers and boxes.  He says that in February 2009,  he
      was attacked by members of the  Awami  League  and  that  he  suffered
      injuries for which he was hospitalised for  7  days.   He  says  that,
      since his arrival in the UK, two further false cases  have  been  laid
      against him, the first in 2010 for having vandalised property and  the
      second in 2012 for attacking a police station.  He claims to have been
      convicted in his absence and sentenced to seventeen  years  in  prison
      and fined.  The Appellant has produced court documents,  letters  from
      lawyers in Bangladesh, other supporting letters from BNP officials  in
      Bangladesh and medical evidence concerning his injuries in  Bangladesh
      in support of his case.  The Appellant also claims that he will be  at
      risk on account of his sur place activities for the BNP in the UK.

4.          The Judge did not accept the Appellant's claim to  be  credible.
      He therefore dismissed the appeal.  It is common ground that the Judge
      did not refer to human rights grounds in the Decision.

5.          Permission was sought on two grounds as follows:

            Ground one: The Judge has failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's
      Article 8 claim as raised in ground three of the  grounds  before  the
      Judge.  The grounds submit that "it was incumbent on the FTT to assess
      the factual and legal aspects of A's Article 8 rights".   It  is  said
      that the failure to do so "has rendered the determination perverse".

            Ground two: The Judge has failed to take into  account  some  of
      the  documentary  evidence  when  reaching  the  conclusion  that  the
      protection claim was not credible.

6.          Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Macdonald on 27 February 2020 in the following terms so
      far as relevant:

            "... The grounds of appeal focus on  the  proposition  that  the
           Judge  clearly  erred  in  law  by  failing  to   consider   the
           appellant's Article 8 rights inside and outside the  Immigration
           Rules.  This issue has been raised  in  the  appellant's  appeal
           grounds (see paragraph 27 of the grounds).  I observe  that  his
           statement is silent on his private life here and it  is  unclear
           to what extent the issue was canvassed before the Judge.


            While the appellant arrived in the UK in  2010  it  is  arguable
           that he was nevertheless entitled to a finding on his claim that
           to return him  to  Bangladesh  would  breach  his  rights  under
           Article 8 ECHR.  As such permission to appeal  is  granted  and,
           for the sake of clarity, on all grounds."

7.          The error of law hearing was originally scheduled  to  be  heard
      on 27 March 2020.  In anticipation of that  hearing,  the  Appellant's
      solicitors lodged written submissions on 17 March 2020  and  purported
      to make an application under Rule 15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("Rule 15(2A)") to adduce further evidence
      in relation to the protection and human rights  claim.   The  covering
      letter purports to explain the reason why the evidence could not  have
      been produced earlier as follows:


            "The Appellant apologies' [sic] for not  being  able  to  submit
           these documents before the hearing in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
           but this is understood that the evidence  would  certainly  help
           his Article 8 claim succeed.  The Appellant's interest would  be
           seriously jeopardised unless the Tribunal  kindly  admits  these
           documents as the  claim  is  likely  to  be  seriously  affected
           without these supporting documents.  The Appellant  respectfully
           invited the Upper Tribunal to consider the enclosed documents in
           accordance with Rule 15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
           2008.
            Further, the fresh evidence is not only likely  to  substantiate
           his case, but would also assist the Tribunal to reach  a  fairer
           decision and enable the parties to avoid  the  cost  of  further
           litigation or application.


            In light of the facts and submissions  referred  to  above,  the
           Appellant respectfully requests the Tribunal for the  permission
           to adduce fresh evidence for the hearing dated 27 March 2020.


            He was unable to file this evidence earlier due to his  personal
           [sic], for which he apologises unreservedly.  We would fervently
           request the Tribunal to allow this evidence filed 10 days before
           the date of the hearing."

            In terms of "additional" evidence in relation to the  Article  8
      claim,  the  further  evidence  consisted  of  a  statement  from  the
      Appellant himself dated 16 March 2020, an affidavit  from  his  mother
      dated 12 March 2020 with translation, some letters from friends dating
      from early March and a few photographs.

8.          Due to the interruption  of  normal  Tribunal  business  by  the
      Covid-19 pandemic, I issued a Note and Directions dated 26 March  2020
      (sent on 24 April 2020), indicating that it might be possible for  the
      error of law issue to be  determined  on  the  papers  and  without  a
      hearing.  The views of the parties on that proposal were  sought.   By
      letter dated 2 June 2020 (received on 18 June 2020 and therefore  well
      beyond the time for filing of submissions), the Appellant's solicitors
      sought  an  oral  hearing.    The  letter  from  the  solicitors  also
      contained the following passage:

            "The basis of the Applicant's [sic] request  for  permission  is
           that  while  assessing  the   Applicant's   Article   8   claim,
           proportionality,  leave  outside  the  Rules   and   exceptional
           circumstances, the FTT judge did not take account of his Article
           8 claim.


            The fact that the Applicant's [sic] residuary human rights claim
           and compassionate circumstances are now under  consideration  at
           the last stage, it of utmost importance [sic] that his  case  is
           presented to the Tribunal in the best possible way by way of  an
           oral hearing by an experienced counsel.


            Being a human rights claim, the Applicant's [sic] matter is  not
           only fact sensitive but also is likely to require detailed  oral
           submissions by a counsel.  Further, impromptu  response  to  any
           question  by  the  tribunal  judge   and   submission   of   the
           Respondent's presenting officer would  further  the  Applicant's
           [sic] case. It is possible that  a  counsel  would  be  able  to
           assist the judge through hearing to understand his case  better,
           which is otherwise less likely.  The Applicant [sic] is  of  the
           firm belief that without such oral  submission,  his  chance  of
           winning the case would diminish  to  such  an  extent  that  his
           interest would be seriously prejudiced.


            The Tribunal is also invited  to  consider  the  fact  that  the
           Applicant [sic] will be  effectively  barred  from  raising  any
           further human rights claim in near future due to  the  operation
           of paragraph 353 of the Rules and the  principle  in  Devaseelan
           [2002] UKIAT 00702.  Thus, this is, in practical sense, his last
           opportunity to convince the Tribunal of his human  rights  claim
           and he cannot afford  to  jeopardise  his  last  chance  by  not
           availing an oral hearing [sic].


            In light of the  foregoing,  the  Applicant  [sic]  respectfully
           requests the Tribunal to allow an oral hearing  in  the  instant
           appeal."

9.    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup reviewed the file thereafter and issued  a
    further Note and Directions on 29 June 2020.  He drew attention to  the
    foregoing chronology.  He made the  following  observations  about  the
    Article 8 claim:

            "6.  Although  the  appellant  did  not  claim  any  partner  or
           children in the UK, the refusal decision  of  21.8.19  addressed
           his claim on private life grounds, both under  paragraph  276ADE
           of the Immigration Rules and outside the Rules, under article  8
           and consideration of exceptional circumstances.  The grounds  of
           appeal to the First-tier Tribunal raised his private life  claim
           between  [25]  and  [40]  of  the  grounds,  relying   on   very
           significant  obstacles  to   integration   in   Bangladesh   and
           integration in the UK during his 9 years'  residence.   Although
           exceptional and  compelling  circumstances  were  pleaded,  that
           claim was unparticularised.  It is clear that  no  consideration
           was given at all to the appellant's private life  claim  in  the
           impugned decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   However,  it  is
           not entirely clear whether, although represented by  counsel  at
           the hearing, article 8 private life was relied or raised at  all
           on his behalf.  For example, whilst the  appellant  submitted  a
           skeleton argument drafted by counsel,  the  arguments  contained
           therein do not address human rights  at  all.   Neither  do  the
           witness statements of the appellant or  his  supporting  witness
           address at all the private life claim.

            7.   I have also  looked  at  the  judge's  comprehensive  typed
           Record of Proceedings (ROP).  At the outset of the  hearing  the
           two representatives apparently agreed that the only issue was in
           relation to activities in Bangladesh and sur place activities in
           the UK, both relevant to  the  risk  on  return.   None  of  the
           recorded questioning  or  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his
           supporting  witness  related  to  article  8  issues.   Neither,
           apparently, was article 8 raised in the submissions of  the  two
           representatives at the conclusion of  the  hearing.   The  judge
           certainly would not be required to address private life  grounds
           if not pursued at the hearing by evidence or submission.  On the
           basis of the ROP, it does not appear that it was.  It  may  well
           be that the appellant wishes to pursue the matter now, it having
           been pleaded in the grounds of  application  for  permission  to
           appeal to the Upper Tribunal and given that permission has  been
           granted primarily on that ground.  However, unless the  Tribunal
           has evidence it was in fact pursued at the  appeal  hearing,  it
           would be difficult to identify any error of law on the  part  of
           the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  not  addressing  article  8
           private life.  Even if there was an error by failing to  address
           article 8, given the  circumstances  of  this  case  it  may  be
           difficult to see how such an error  was  material  and  on  what
           basis the appeal had any prospect  of  being  allowed  on  human
           rights grounds relating solely to private life  and  integration
           in the UK whilst the appellant has been  an  illegal  overstayer
           for all but 6 months of his now 10 years in the UK, particularly
           given the 'little weight' requirement of  section  117B  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

            8.   The above considerations raise a number of issues that  are
           far from clear from the papers now before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
           Although the appellant  now  wishes  to  introduce  evidence  of
           private life and integration in the UK, at this stage the  Upper
           Tribunal has to consider what in fact was before the  First-tier
           Tribunal and what submissions were made on private life grounds.
            Only if there was an error of law in the making of the decision
           of the First-tier Tribunal can the Upper Tribunal intervene."
            [my emphasis]

10.          I  was  told  that  the  Appellant's  solicitors  had  filed  a
      consolidated bundle in July 2020 but, if one was  filed,  it  was  not
      filed in hard copy and does not appear on the file.  The absence of it
      did not affect my ability to find the documents to which reference was
      made during the hearing which were replicated elsewhere.

11.         On 25 January 2021, and therefore  about  one  week  before  the
      hearing,  the  solicitors  filed  what  again  purported  to   be   an
      application under Rule 15(2A)  with  further  evidence.   That  letter
      referred to the consolidated bundle which it is  said  was  filed  and
      served on 10 July 2020 and continued as follows:

            "... 3.    Upon a brief review conducted recently, it  has  been
           revealed that  several  important  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
           private life and exceptional circumstances were not addressed by
           way evidence [sic].  He  is  now  seeking  the  Tribunal's  kind
           permission to adduce the following evidence to be considered  in
           the upcoming oral permission hearing [sic]:

           a. Additional witness statement  of  the  addressing  [sic]  his
              private life and exceptional circumstances;


           b. The death certificate of the Appellant's father  (translation
              will be provided later); and


           c. Personal reference letters from friends of the Appellant.

            Having set out Rule 15(2A), the letter set out the following:

            "... 5.    The Appellant accepts that this evidence should  have
           been adduced along with the consolidated bundle submitted on  10
           July 2020, and he apologises unreservedly for the delay.  It  is
           regretted that the importance of this evidence was not  properly
           realised earlier.  Also, the Appellant as a less educated person
           struggled to understand the method of  obtaining  evidence  from
           different sources and express his circumstances adequately which
           contributed to the delay ion submitting this evidence.

            6.   Further, the Appellant is submitting this evidence as  soon
           as he has obtained the  documents  and  he  is  submitting  this
           without unreasonable or excessive delay.  Besides, it would  not
           be otherwise unfair to admit the evidence.

            7.   The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  on  Article
           8 grounds only and without this evidence, his claim is likely to
           suffer significantly.  This,  it  is  submitted,  outweighs  the
           negative  factors  arising  from  the  delay  in  producing  the
           evidence before the Tribunal."

      Fortunately for the Appellant, that last paragraph misunderstands that
      the grant of permission was not so limited.

12.         The solicitor's letter also misunderstands the stage which  this
      appeal had reached.  It came before me at the error of law  stage  and
      not permission to appeal.  As such,  the  appeal  came  before  me  to
      determine whether the Decision contains an error of law and, if  I  so
      concluded, to either re-make the decision or remit the appeal  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal to do so.

13.         The hearing before me took place via  Skype  for  Business.   It
      was attended by the representatives as noted above and  the  Appellant
      himself.  There were a few minor technical difficulties but  not  such
      as to affect the overall conduct of the hearing.  Both representatives
      indicated that they had been able to follow the hearing throughout.

14.         Having heard from both representatives, I found an error of  law
      in the Decision based on the Appellant's second ground.   I  indicated
      that I would therefore set aside the Decision and it was  agreed  that
      the appeal should be remitted.  I indicated that I would set  out  the
      reasons for my conclusions in writing which I now turn to do.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

15.         I will return to the Appellant's ground one in  due  course.   I
      merely observe at this stage as I  indicated  to  Mr  Burrett  at  the
      outset of the hearing before me that,  although  Article  8  ECHR  was
      raised in the initial pleaded grounds of appeal, that ground  was  not
      mentioned in the  Appellant's  Counsel's  skeleton  argument  for  the
      hearing nor was there any evidence in support of a claim based on  the
      Appellant's private life  at  that  stage.   Furthermore,  I  had  the
      benefit of typed notes of the hearing before Judge  Bonavero.    Those
      notes indicate that Article 8 was not raised in the  course  of  legal
      submissions nor does it  appear  that  the  Appellant  was  asked  any
      questions about this aspect of his case.  As Judge  Pickup  identified
      in his Note, the parties are said to have agreed at  the  outset  that
      the only issue for the Judge was the protection  claim  based  on  the
      events said to have occurred in Bangladesh and the  sur  place  claim.
      There is no evidence put forward by the Appellant to suggest that this
      was an incorrect reflection of what occurred at that hearing. I  pause
      to note that Mr Burrett was not the Appellant's representative at  the
      hearing before Judge Bonavero and cannot be criticised in any way  for
      the conduct of the appeal at that stage or since. The same  cannot  be
      said of the Appellant's solicitors but I  will  return  to  deal  with
      their conduct after consideration of the error of law.

16.         Mr Burrett sought to vary  the  way  in  which  ground  two  was
      pleaded.  The focus of the ground remained on the  way  in  which  the
      Judge had dealt with the documents, but he concentrated on the Judge's
      conclusions about  and  criticisms  of  the  documents  which  he  did
      consider.  The ground as pleaded asserts that some of the  documentary
      evidence was not considered at all.

17.         In order to set Mr Burrett's submissions in context, I  set  out
      [19] to [28] of the Decision which formed the central focus  of  those
      submissions.  Those paragraphs read as follows:

            "19   I agree with Mr Martin that some of the documents in  this
           appeal, in particular those said to emanate from the Bangladeshi
           courts, lie at the centre of the appellant's asylum appeal.   It
           may also be that they are capable of being verified, though this
           is rather less certain.


            20.    In  determining  whether  this  case  is  the  one  which
           exceptionally  necessitated  the   respondent   to   carry   out
           verification checks, I take the following factors into  account.
           I note that the documents  in  question  were  obtained  by  the
           appellant himself.  Unlike in PJ, it is not the case  here  that
           the documents were transferred by one set of lawyers to another.
            I note that the appellant claimed asylum only some  nine  years
           after arriving in the UK, whilst in detention  pending  removal.
           On the other side of the equation, I bear in mind the fact  that
           the respondent accepts that the appellant is a member of the BNP
           in the UK.


            21.   Taking all these factors into  account,  I  conclude  that
           this case is not one in which the  respondent  was  required  to
           verify the appellant's  documents.   Instead,  I  must  approach
           those documents applying Tanveer Ahmed principles.


            22.   As for the provenance  of  the  documents,  there  was  an
           important inconsistency in the appellant's evidence.  He said in
           oral evidence that he had received the court documents  by  post
           in or around May 2019, and that he gave them  to  his  solicitor
           straight away.  In his  substantive  asylum  interview,  on  the
           other hand, he said that he had given  those  documents  to  his
           solicitor the day before the interview (question 16), so  on  30
           July 2019.  I put this inconsistency to the appellant, as did Mr
           Martin, but no satisfactory explanation was forthcoming.


            23.   I note also that at the end of his asylum  interview,  the
           appellant said that he had only found out  about  the  two  more
           recent cases in June 2019.  However, there is a letter  at  page
           158 of the respondent's bundle from Mr [SC] dated  21  May  2019
           which states that Mr [C] updated the appellant about  those  two
           cases 'some time  ago'  and  that  the  appellant's  mother  had
           attended Mr [C]'s office 'some time ago' to discuss  the  cases.
           That is plainly inconsistent with the appellant's account in his
           asylum interview.


            24.    I  take  into  account  the  respondent's  CPIN  entitled
           'Bangladesh:  Background  information,   including   actors   of
           protection, and internal relocation' dated  January  2018  which
           states:


                 ' 13.2.1 The  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
                 (IRBC), in a  response  dated  20  September  2020,  citing
                 various sources, stated that:
                 'In 7 September  2010  correspondence  with  the  Research
                 Directorate, an official at the High Commission  of  Canada
                 to  Bangladesh  stated  that  'There   is   a   significant
                 prevalence  of   fraudulent   documents   [in   Bangladesh]
                 including passports, birth certificates,  bank  statements,
                 taxation documents, business documents,  school  documents,
                 marriage certificates.   If  we  ask  for  it,  it  can  be
                 produced.' The Canadian Official added that '[t]here is  no
                 difficulty at all for anyone  to  obtain  these  documents.
                 Quality varies with prices paid.'


            25.   I  note  that  there  is  no  correspondence  between  the
           appellant's solicitors in the UK and his lawyers in  Bangladesh.
           All of  the  evidence  in  this  case  has  passed  through  the
           appellant's hands.  It would have been a simple  matter  to  ask
           the appellant's  lawyers  to  correspond  directly.   While  the
           appellant is plainly not required to corroborate  every  element
           of his claim, I  find  that  this  failure  weighs  against  the
           appellant.


            26.   Whilst it cannot be determinative of this asylum claim,  I
           do find that the appellant's lengthy delay  in  claiming  asylum
           significantly damages his credibility.  The appellant arrived in
           the UK in 2010, but he did not claim asylum  until  2019.   Even
           then, he only did so once in detention, having been  encountered
           on an enforcement visit.  These actions are inconsistent with  a
           claimed fear of return to Bangladesh.


            27.   I take into account the fact that the appellant  has  been
           carrying out political activities in the  UK.   I  further  note
           that the appellant's account is broadly consistent with  country
           evidence relating to Bangladesh, and in particular  the  use  of
           false criminal charges to intimidate political opponents.  Those
           matters support the appellant's case.


            28.   However, in all  the  circumstances,  applying  the  lower
           standard of proof and looking at the evidence in  the  round,  I
           find that I can give only little weight to all of the  documents
           said to emanate from Bangladesh."


18.         I permitted Mr Burrett to put forward his oral arguments  which,
      as I have said, varied somewhat from the pleaded ground.   Ms  Everett
      did not object to the variation.

19.         I begin with the parts  of  the  submissions  which  I  did  not
      accept.  I do not accept that the Judge was  being  "overly  critical"
      when dealing with the way in which the documents were obtained by  the
      Appellant.  Whilst it was open to the Appellant  to  obtain  documents
      directly and he cannot be criticised for proceeding in  that  way,  he
      has instructed solicitors in his appeal and Londonium solicitors  have
      acted for him from the outset.  The Appellant gave  the  documents  to
      his solicitors and it was for  them,  as  professionals,  to  consider
      whether the evidence was presented in the right way or whether further
      enquiries or additional documentation should be  obtained  by  way  of
      corroboration.  It was therefore open to the Judge to take  the  point
      that correspondence between the lawyers could  and  should  have  been
      provided to deal with any deficiencies in the evidence  regarding  the
      way in which the documents were obtained from Bangladesh.

20.         Neither can the Judge be criticised  for  not  dealing  in  more
      depth with the reasons for the delay in claiming  asylum.   The  Judge
      noted the Appellant's immigration chronology at [8]  and  [9]  of  the
      Decision.  The Appellant's statement before Judge Bonavero  says  only
      that the Appellant did not claim asylum earlier because he  had  leave
      to remain.  However, he only had such leave for a very limited  period
      (having come here as a visitor) and that does  not  explain  the  very
      lengthy delay thereafter.  The other reason given that he  thought  he
      would be sent  back  to  Bangladesh  if  he  brought  himself  to  the
      attention of the authorities does not withstand scrutiny since, as the
      Judge observed, even when the Appellant was encountered,  he  did  not
      claim asylum until two weeks later when in detention.

21.         However, I do accept Mr Burrett's other point regarding [28]  of
      the Decision.  As Mr Burrett rightly pointed out, the documents either
      corroborate the Appellant's claim or they  do  not.   Particularly  in
      relation to the court documents, either the Judge had to find that the
      documents were false and could be given no weight or he had to  accept
      that they were reliable and therefore added weight to the  credibility
      of the case.  The conclusion that the Judge could give  the  documents
      "only little weight" is not one which was open to him.   At  the  very
      least, he needed to explain what was meant by that  (if  needs  be  by
      reference to the acceptance of some if not all of the  documents)  and
      what impact that weight had on the credibility of the claim.  That was
      particularly important in circumstances where the Judge  accepted  the
      broad consistency of the claim with the background evidence and  where
      the Respondent had not provided any verification evidence to  directly
      undermine the court documents.

22.         Ms Everett very fairly accepted that this point  had  merit  and
      that she could not, for that reason, seek to maintain the Decision.

23.         I accept that  the  Respondent's  concession  is  one  which  is
      rightly made.  I also accept that there is some merit in ground two as
      pleaded  as  regards  documents  which  are  said  not  to  have  been
      considered by the Judge, particularly the medical evidence  about  the
      injuries which the Appellant claims to have suffered during the attack
      in Bangladesh and the reference letters purporting to corroborate  the
      evidence of false claims being raised against the Appellant.

24.         For those reasons, I  conclude  that  ground  two  discloses  an
      error of law in the Decision and I therefore set the  Decision  aside.
      The Judge's treatment of the documents is  directly  relevant  to  the
      Appellant's  credibility.   As  a  result,  the  adverse   credibility
      findings cannot stand.  The credibility of the protection  claim  will
      therefore need to be considered completely afresh.  For that reason, I
      agreed with the representatives that this appeal  should  be  remitted
      for a de novo hearing.

25.         I return now to the Appellant's ground one.  As I have  remitted
      the appeal for a de novo hearing, the Appellant will be able to  argue
      all his grounds at the fresh hearing.  I make it clear, however, that,
      if I had not found an error relying on the Appellant's ground  two,  I
      would not have found an error on ground one.

26.         Although I  accept  that  the  Appellant's  initial  grounds  of
      appeal did raise Article 8 ECHR, thereafter  there  is  no  indication
      that the Appellant was pursuing this ground of appeal.   There  is  no
      evidence which was before Judge Bonavero dealing with this  aspect  of
      the Appellant's case.  A private life claim is not mentioned at all in
      the Appellant's Counsel's skeleton argument.  The notes of the hearing
      show that it was not raised in oral evidence  or  submissions  at  the
      hearing.  Indeed,  there  is  an  express  concession  that  only  the
      protection claim was in issue. In short, there was no indication given
      to the Judge that this was a live issue.

27.         Even if, as Mr Burrett submitted, most judges  would  have  gone
      on to look at the issue whether raised or not,  Judge  Bonavero  could
      not have said anything about it except  that  there  was  no  evidence
      before him, or submissions made to him on this aspect.  He  would,  on
      the evidence then available, have been bound to  reject  it  for  that
      reason.  No issue could arise either under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of
      the Immigration Rules.  The Judge rejected the protection claim as not
      credible so that could  not  be  relevant  to  conditions  facing  the
      Appellant in Bangladesh.  The Appellant provided no  evidence  at  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  about  any  other  obstacles   to   his
      integration in Bangladesh.   Any  error  in  the  Judge's  failure  to
      mention Article 8 ECHR (which I do not accept  was  an  error  in  any
      event) could not have led to any different outcome. As such, it  would
      not have led to a setting aside of the Decision.

28.         If the success or otherwise of the  error  of  law  hearing  had
      depended on ground one, I would also have  rejected  the  attempts  to
      adduce further evidence as contained with the letters of 17 March 2020
      and 25 January 2021 which I have set out at [7] and [11] above.    The
      latter of those two letters  appears  to  have  thought  that  it  was
      necessary to explain why the evidence was not filed with the bundle in
      July 2020.  That was not the  point.   The  relevant  time  to  adduce
      evidence was prior to the hearing before Judge Bonavero.   It  is  not
      explained in either letter why  that  evidence  could  not  have  been
      produced at that time with the initial appeal bundle.  The evidence so
      far as it concerns the Article 8 claim consists of statements from the
      Appellant himself and letters from his friends in the UK.  There is no
      reason why that evidence could not have been obtained at  any  earlier
      date.

29.         This brings me on to a further point  regarding  that  evidence.
      It is suggested in the solicitor's letters that the  fault  lies  with
      the Appellant who as a lay person did  not  understand  what  evidence
      needed to be obtained or how it should be presented.  So  far  as  the
      Appellant is concerned, I accept that is right.  However, it  was  not
      an explanation or apology from the Appellant himself which was needed.
       He has been represented at  the  outset  by  a  firm  of  solicitors,
      Londonium solicitors.  They are well versed in  immigration  practice.
      They were undoubtedly being paid by the Appellant to represent him  in
      his claim and appeal.  It was for them to advise him and assist him in
      the preparation of his case.  There is no explanation  from  them  why
      this was not done adequately or at all so far as the Article 8 case is
      concerned.

30.         There is no issue of fairness arising from the exclusion of  the
      evidence had the Appellant not succeeded on  his  other  ground.   The
      Judge could not be expected to consider evidence which was not  before
      him.  The Appellant has the benefit of legal representation  which  he
      ought to be able to trust to prepare his case on all and  any  aspects
      which he is pursuing.  There is no  explanation  for  the  solicitor's
      shoddy conduct of this appeal.  Fortunately for  those  solicitors,  I
      have found an error of law which will lead to the appeal  being  heard
      afresh on which occasion the Appellant will be able to also raise  his
      Article 8 grounds.   They should however reflect on their  conduct  of
      this appeal in the future as they may not be so fortunate  on  another
      occasion.  The real impact in such circumstances, as they  observe  in
      their letters, is on the appellant whose interests they are instructed
      to represent and who may well be prejudiced if  they  do  not  act  in
      accordance with their professional obligations to him.


CONCLUSION

31.         For the foregoing reasons, ground two discloses  errors  of  law
      in the  Decision.  It  is  therefore  appropriate  to  set  aside  the
      Decision.  I do not preserve any  findings.   For  the  reasons  given
      above, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a de novo hearing.  Both representatives  submitted  that
      this was the appropriate course.

DECISION
I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bonavero
promulgated on 22 January 2020 is set aside in its  entirety.   No  findings
are preserved. The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
hearing before a Judge other than Judge Bonavero



Signed           L K Smith                         Dated: 9 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
