

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08519/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 November 2017                      |On 20 November 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                   M A M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs F Mustapha, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Egypt  who  appealed  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claims on 27 July  2016.
    His appeal against that decision was dismissed by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Ian Howard ("the FTTJ") in a decision  promulgated  on  5
    April 2017.

 2. I maintain the anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on  20
    September 2017 in the following terms:

          "1. It is arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  unlawfully
          required the appellant to corroborate his claim, in circumstances
          where it would be very difficult for him to do so - see [21]  and
          [22].

          2. It is also arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
          consider the plausibility of the appellant's account against  the
          country  background  evidence.  It  would  be  helpful   if   the
          appellant's   solicitors   outline   in   writing   the   precise
          consistencies between  the  appellant's  claim  and  the  country
          background evidence available the First-tier Tribunal."

 4. Thus the matter has come before me.

Background

 5. The appellant claims his father, a farmer, was an active  supporter  of
    Al huriya wa al Adala, the Freedom and Justice Party, in Egypt.  It  is
    described as a non-religious political wing of the Muslim  Brotherhood.
    The  appellant's  father  had  not  mentioned  his  membership  to  the
    appellant but this was a conclusion which  the  appellant  himself  had
    reached from various events: he saw a membership card in  his  father's
    wallet; his father left the family home in August 2013  and  was  later
    seen by  the  appellant  and  his  family  on  television  attending  a
    demonstration in Cairo. The appellant's  father  did  not  return.  The
    family, including the appellant, were arrested and detained. They  were
    interrogated about their father.  The appellant's mother  was  detained
    longer and was mistreated. On her  return  she  decided  the  appellant
    should leave Egypt.

Submissions

 6. Mrs Mustapha, for the appellant, adopted the grounds of appeal to  this
    tribunal.  In addition, she noted the matter raised by Judge Plimmer in
    the first paragraph of the grant.  Here the FTTJ had drawn  an  adverse
    inference from the lack of corroboration; that was an error of law  (ST
    (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119).  The appellant's
    particular circumstances should have been considered:  he  had  been  a
    minor at the relevant time; the FTTJ had not adequately taken this into
    account in his consideration of the evidence. There was no reference at
    all to the background material which was consistent and relevant to the
    issue of credibility: the respondent's operational guidance note  (OGN)
    of November 2013 was before the FTTJ. There was a failure to take  into
    account relevant material and an inadequate assessment of the evidence.

 7. For the respondent, Mr Clarke, accepted there was no prejudice  arising
    from Judge Plimmer's reference to the issue of corrobation. There was a
    reference to the appellant's age at  [17];  the  FTTJ  had  taken  into
    account the appellant's age in assessing the evidence. It was  accepted
    there was no reference to the background material before the  FTTJ  but
    this was not fatal given the reasoning: the grounds failed to show that
    the  background  material  undermined  the   findings   of   fact   and
    credibility. It was not the case that the FTTJ found the  scenario  not
    credible; the existence of a demonstration in Cairo in August 2013  had
    been accepted by the respondent. Whilst the reasoning was brief, it was
    sufficient.  Mr Clarke summarised the findings to demonstrate this. The
    cornerstone of the appellant's case was  his  father's  activities  and
    associations. His evidence was inconsistent on this. The appellant  had
    failed to provide footage of the television coverage; this  would  have
    been in  the  public  domain.  Even  if  state-owned,  the  appellant's
    solicitors could have sought or obtained a copy of the footage  without
    reference to the  appellant.  As  regards  the  claimed  detention  and
    mistreatment, there was no suggestion that this was not  in  accordance
    with the background material which indicated round-ups, detentions, and
    the involvement of family members of activists.  The difficulty for the
    appellant was that he had claimed he could not contact his mother yet a
    member of staff at the British Embassy had spoken  to  the  appellant's
    mother who was willing to meet him at the  airport  on  his  return  to
    Egypt. She had confirmed the appellant's address and details. Whilst it
    was accepted the FTTJ had not referred to the background material, even
    taken at its highest, this  did  not  impact  on  the  outcome  of  the
    hearing.

 8. In reply, Mrs Mustapha accepted the information  from  the  appellant's
    mother to the Embassy was relevant to the appellant's credibility.  The
    fact that the information she had  provided  was  consistent  with  the
    appellant being truthful.

Discussion

 9. The parties' representatives agreed that the FTTJ had failed  to  refer
    to any of the background material which was before him.  I am  grateful
    to Mrs Mustapha for providing a list of essential reading,  identifying
    relevant extracts from the background material  which  was  before  the
    FTTJ and which corroborated, it is claimed,  the  appellant's  account.
    However, Mrs Mustapha accepted that  most  of  the  extracts  cited  as
    essential reading post-dated the events in 2013 on which the  appellant
    relied before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   That  said  there  are  the
    following relevant references:

      a. "... enforced disappearances, deaths in custody and the  widespread
         use of excessive force by security forces since  2011..."  (Amnesty
         International, "Amnesty International Report  2016/176:  Egypt"  22
         February 2017).

      b. " ... repeated use of excessive  and  lethal  force  since  January
         2011... In particular, the authorities have  failed  to  conduct  a
         prompt, independent and impartial investigation  into  the  violent
         dispersal of pro-Morsi protests at the Rab'a al-Adawiya  Square  on
         14 August 2013, which lead to the death of almost 1,000 protesters.
         Furthermore, many of those currently detained have faced torture or
         other ill-treatment at the  hands  of  the  security  forces.  ..."
         (Country Information and Guidance - Egypt: Background  information,
         including actors of protection and internal relocation (May 2015).

      c. According to the government, its security  forces  arrested  almost
         22,000 suspects in 2013 and 2014,  including  some  3,000  top  and
         middle-level MR leaders and members. ..."  (Amnesty  International,
         'Egypt: 'officially, you do not exist' - Disappeared  and  tortured
         in the name of counter-terrorism' 12 July 2016.

      d. "The Inter Press Service (IPS) reports in August  2013  that  since
         Morsi's ouster, hundreds - possibly thousands - have been killed by
         security forces, including Brother hood members and others  opposed
         to renewed military rule (...). According  to  the  IPS,  fears  of
         looming oppression - especially of Islamists -  were  increased  in
         July 2013 when interior  minister  Mohamed  Ibrahim  announced  the
         reactivation of a Mubarak-era police unit devoted to monitoring and
         combating "religious extremisms". (Operational Guidance Note: Egypt
         (v2 November 2013).

      e. "The Jamestown  Foundation  reported  that  the  Egyptian  Interior
         Ministry police broke up two pro-Mursi "sit-in"  protest  camps  in
         Cairo on 14 August 2013, resulting in "hundreds  in  the  pro-Mursi
         camp, killed and perhaps thousands wounded across the country:. The
         Egyptian Centre for Economic and Social Rights estimates  that  the
         death toll during the dispersal of the Rab'a sit-in  was  estimated
         to be at least 377.  According to the Ministry of the Interior, the
         nationwide 14 August death toll of 638 includes 43 police officers.
          Over the following three days, clashes between security forces and
         Muslim  Brotherhood   protesters,   and   anti-Muslim   Brotherhood
         protesters led to at least 173 additional deaths, according to  the
         Ministry of Health. Rights groups have documented approximate 1,600
         deaths as a result of the ongoing violence since 14 August, both at
         the hands of the Egyptian military and police as well  as  Islamist
         groups and  mobs.  ...  (Operational  Guidance   Note:  Egypt  (v.2
         November 2013).

      f. Thousands of persons remained imprisoned whom authorities  arrested
         during 2013 and 2014 due to their participation  in  demonstrations
         (some of which were peaceful); however, authorities released others
         who  had  completed  their   sentences.   Authorities   held   such
         individuals under charges of  attending  an  unauthorized  protest,
         incitement to violence, or "blocking roads". ...."  (US  Department
         of State, '2016 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Egypt' 3
         March 2017.

10. The respondent did not dispute there was an on-going protest  in  Rab'a
    al-Adawiya Square in Cairo at the  relevant  time  and  that  over  100
    people died in clashes with the security forces in July  2013.  It  was
    accepted that there were demonstrations which  the  appellant's  father
    could have attended at the time claimed by the appellant.

11. It is not in dispute between the parties  that  the  FTTJ  should  have
    taken into account the background material and that  it  was  relevant.
    The respondent's position is that the failure to do so was not material
    to the outcome.

12. The background material before the FTTJ was highly relevant in that  it
    was consistent with the appellant's account of his  father's  attending
    the demonstration in Cairo in August 2013, his  seeing  his  father  on
    television at the demonstration and taking an active role  in  it,  his
    sight  of  his  father's  membership  card,  his  father's   subsequent
    disappearance and his family's arrest, detention and  ill-treatment  in
    detention.

13. The appellant was aged about 14 in August 2013. He  was  a  minor.  The
    FTTJ states at [17] that  "in  making  findings  based  upon  what  the
    appellant has said in the past I am cognizant of  the  fact  he  was  a
    minor and thus limit my findings to the matters central to his  claim".
    This is the only substantive reference to the impact of the appellant's
    minority on the assessment of the evidence.  There is no reference, for
    example, to the application of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No
    2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and  sensitive  appellant  guidance.
    While  not  yet  handed  down,  that  guidance  was  reinforced  in  AM
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD & Or [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, a  case  concerning  an
    Afghan minor. In the latter case it was held that solely  focussing  on
    the credibility of the appellant's account and  not  having  regard  to
    objective evidence testifying to the appellant's vulnerability  or  the
    risk to the appellant of  return  had  led  to  the  proceedings  being
    neither fair nor just.

14. In the present case, the FTTJ has paid lip service to  the  appellant's
    minority. He has not identified the appellant's age at the date of  the
    events in question or how his age impacted on his  ability  to  give  a
    consistent account.  The FTTJ refers to the appellant  having  prepared
    his statement in the "benign environment" of his solicitors office  (or
    his home)". There is no evidence to support that proposition which,  in
    any event, is put in the alternative.

15. The FTTJ appears to draw an  adverse  inference  from  the  appellant's
    failure to produce evidence of the existence of television  footage  of
    his father at the demonstration. This is done without consideration  of
    whether it would be reasonable for the appellant to seek to obtain such
    footage.  In ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia  [2004]  UKIAT  00119
    the  Tribunal  said  that  it  was  a  misdirection   to   imply   that
    corroboration  was  necessary  for  a  positive  credibility   finding.
    However, the fact that corroboration was not required did not mean that
    an Adjudicator (as it then was) was required to leave  out  of  account
    the  absence  of  documentary  evidence,  which  could  reasonably   be
    expected: the Adjudicator was entitled to comment  that  it  would  not
    have been difficult to provide the relevant  documents  in  this  case.
    In the present case, the FTTJ has not considered the issue  of  whether
    such footage could reasonably be expected to be  obtained.   Given  the
    passage of time, the appellant's minority (and  therefore  reliance  on
    his solicitors), the appellant's  age  at  the  time  the  footage  was
    broadcast and his evidence that he was called to the television by  his
    mother (calling into question whether he would know the news channel in
    question), it could not be assumed  the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    obtain the footage in question. This is not a case where the  FTTJ  has
    drawn an adverse inference from any failure to seek to obtain it.

16. Similarly, the FTTJ states at [22] "there is no evidence beyond what he
    says to support his claim to have been arrested  and  maltreated  along
    with his siblings and his mother."   The inference from this  paragraph
    is an adverse one.   It  is  not  clear  what  the  FTTJ  expected  the
    appellant to have produced; it was not claimed that any arrest  warrant
    or other documentation had been issued in connection with  the  arrests
    and detentions.

17. The FTTJ refers to the evidence of a telephone call  from  the  British
    Embassy to the appellant's mother,  at  the  telephone  number  he  has
    provided.  The FTTJ  was  right  to  draw  an  adverse  inference  from
    inconsistency as between the appellant's account that  he  was  not  in
    contact with his mother and the Embassy's telephone contacted with  his
    mother on the landline the appellant  had  provided.  Furthermore,  his
    mother and siblings had moved from the family's previous address  which
    suggests the appellant had the telephone number to their current  home.
    This is a significant inconsistency.

18. Failure to refer  to  the  objective  material  in  the  assessment  of
    credibility of an appellant who was a minor at the date of  the  events
    which gave rise to his asylum claim is an error of law. Taken  together
    with the cursory  manner  in  which  the  FTTJ  noted  the  appellant's
    minority, without considering specifically its impact on the individual
    circumstances of the appellant and his ability  to  give  a  consistent
    account, is a material error of law  impacting  on  the  assessment  of
    credibility.  I make the observation in passing that the FTTJ  has  not
    cited accurately the appellant's evidence at [14] in that he appears to
    cite the reasons for refusal letter when he  states  "He  and  brothers
    [sic] were interrogated for many hours about the whereabouts  of  their
    father and his whereabouts [sic]".  This is not an accurate  reflection
    of the appellant's answer to question 61 in interview;  he  said  "they
    start asking us about my father. We  told  them  we  don't  know".  The
    appellant did not state he was asked about his father's  "whereabouts".



19. Overall the reasoning in the decision is brief indeed  and  it  can  be
    inferred, given the paucity of the reasoning, that the FTTJ  has  given
    weight to  the  failure  of  the  appellant  to  provide  corroborative
    evidence [21], [22] and [23]. In essence the FTTJ has  given  only  two
    substantive reasons for disbelieving  the  appellant:  the  discrepancy
    between his belief that his father was politically involved as  against
    his finding his father's membership card. However, here the FTTJ  makes
    no reference to the appellant's explanation for  this  discrepancy  (at
    [32] of his appeal statement); there is no  assessment  as  to  whether
    that  explanation  was  reasonable.   The   only   other   reason   for
    disbelieving the appellant is the discrepancy between  the  appellant's
    denial of contact with his family  and  the  telephone  call  from  the
    Embassy to his mother.  Given the minority of the appellant at material
    times, the failure of the FTTJ to refer to the background material  and
    his drawing adverse inferences from the failure  of  the  appellant  to
    provide corroborative evidence amount to material errors of  law.   For
    these reasons, the decision must be set aside.

20. The errors of law, taken together, are central to the FTTJ's assessment
    of the credibility and reliability of  the  appellant's  account.  Both
    parties' representatives agreed that  in  such  an  event,  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing.
    That is an appropriate course for the reasons I have set out above.

Decision

21. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of errors on a point of law.  The decision is  set  aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    Judge Ian Howard.



Signed           A M Black                   Dated 17 November 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed           A M Black                   Dated 17 November 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

