
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/08222/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 January 2018                        | On 19 February 2018             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     shr
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw, instructed by Fisher Jones Greenwood
                    (Newcomen Way)
For the Respondent:  Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is a challenge to  the  decision  of  Judge  O'Malley,  who  in  a
    decision promulgated on 15 March 2017 dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's decision of 28 July 2016  refusing  his  claim
    for asylum and humanitarian protection.

2.   I need say relatively little about this since it is common ground  that
    there is a material error of law in the judge's decision and  also  the
    proposed disposition is a matter of agreement.  The difficulty with the
    decision, which, as Mr Clarke says, is in many ways a careful decision,
    relates to the evaluation  of  the  expert  evidence  at  paragraph  48
    concerning the position and likelihood of  action  of  the  appellant's
    stepmother's brothers.  The judge considered this rather  late  in  the
    day, having looked at matters otherwise and come to adverse credibility
    findings and then at paragraph 49 said:

         "In view of my conclusions about the damage to the  credibility  of
         this appellant arising from his actions, and in view of my findings
         about his inconsistencies in the other parts of his account,  I  am
         not prepared to accept that his stepmother's brothers were  working
         for Ettela'at",


    and it is necessary of course for credibility to  be  assessed  in  the
    round and the difficulty here is that that  has  not  been  done  in  a
    sense, that was an add-on to the earlier adverse  credibility  findings
    and it is of course relevant to risk.


3.   So the decision is materially flawed and it will have to go back for  a
    full rehearing before a different judge at Taylor House.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




[pic]

Signed                                  Date 15 February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
