
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08706/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18th September 2017                |On 29th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                     HA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  in
    respect of the Appellant's claim for protection by  virtue  of  refugee
    status or humanitarian protection.  The  Secretary  of  State  appealed
    against that decision and was granted permission to  appeal  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lambert.

 2. The grounds upon which permission was  granted  may  be  summarised  as
    follows.  It is arguable that the judge's reasoning is inconsistent  or
    inadequate in respect of finding the Appellant credible on his  account
    of being homosexual.  I was not provided with a Rule 24  response  from
    the Appellant but was addressed in oral submissions by his Counsel.

Error of Law and Re-making

 3. At the close of submissions I indicated that  I  reserved  my  decision
    which I shall now give.  I do not find that there is an error of law in
    the determination such that it should be set aside. My reasons  for  so
    finding are as follows.

 4. The  criticisms  made  by  the  Respondent  in  my  view  amount  to  a
    disagreement in terms of the findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge which were properly open to her.  As noted by the  judge  in  her
    determination at paragraph 15 the Respondent accepted that  if  it  was
    found that the Appellant was openly gay he would not be able to  return
    to Pakistan.  The judge fully appraised  the  previous  status  quo  in
    terms of the Appellant's previous failed  asylum  claim  implicitly  in
    accordance with Devaseelan  principles  (see  Devaseelan  UKIAT  [2002]
    000702 Starred).  The judge noted that the Appellant  had  not  claimed
    asylum when he first arrived and that his actions did not reflect those
    of a person fleeing persecution and also that the Appellant's  previous
    claims were not believed in his failed appeal.  The  judge  also  noted
    that the Appellant's previous claim to have been in a relationship with
    a woman militated against him being gay  as  he  now  claimed  but  for
    fairly robust reasons the judge allowed the appeal.

 5. In my view it is clear why the judge allowed the appeal based upon  her
    analysis of the evidence  before  her.  It  may  be  that  the  judge's
    decision is shorter than the Respondent might have wished for  but  the
    reasons are adequate and intelligible sufficiently demonstrate that the
    judge reached a decision having taken into account all of the  relevant
    factors, and reached a conclusion that was clearly open to her  on  the
    evidence before her.

 6. Thus in my view the judge's decision could not be described as perverse
    or irrational and the findings are adequate in accordance with R (Iran)
    & Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    982.

 7. In light of the above findings, I do not set aside the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby affirmed.

 9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

