

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/08625/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 August and 30 October 2017             |On 14 November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                    [L D]
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE
                               HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr A Reza of JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr S Whitwell and Mr L Tarlow,
       Senior Home Office Presenting Officers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of a panel of the First-
         tier Tribunal comprised of Judges Astle and Buchanan dismissing her
         appeal against the respondent's refusal of 25 July  2016  to  grant
         her protection. She is an Iranian national, born on [ ]  1976.  The
         appeal was dismissed by way of a determination  promulgated  on  13
         March 2017 following a hearing at Sheldon Court in Birmingham on  6
         March 2017.


      2. The case  has  an  unusual  procedural  background.  The  appellant
         claimed  asylum  on  the  grounds  of  imputed   religion/political
         opinion. On Wednesday, 1 March 2017 (by fax at  18.12  hours),  the
         appellant's representatives notified the Tribunal pursuant to s.120
         of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  that  the
         appellant had converted to Christianity and  sought  permission  to
         adduce further documentary evidence in that respect.



      3. When the matter came before the Tribunal,  Ms  I  Hussain  (Counsel
         instructed by the respondent) refused to give consent for  the  new
         matter to be considered (s. 85(5) of the NIAA 2002 applies) and the
         panel decided to confine the appeal hearing to the original  ground
         of appeal as it found it had no jurisdiction  to  address  the  new
         matter given the stance adopted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  (at
         paragraph 2 of the determination).



      4. The appeal was dismissed and  the  appellant  sought  and  obtained
         permission to appeal (from First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on  12
         July 2017) on the basis that the Tribunal had  failed  to  consider
         that the respondent had seriously breached  her  own  procedure  by
         failing to serve a written response to the appellant's s.120 notice
         and that this procedural unfairness amounted to an  arguable  error
         of law.



      5. In her  Rule  24  response  dated  25  July  2017,  the  respondent
         complained that she had not  been  provided  with  a  copy  of  the
         grounds for permission and sought to  have  these  made  available.
         Regrettably this does not appear  to  have  happened  and  when  Mr
         Whitwell appeared for the respondent before me on 31  August  2017,
         he had still not received a copy. A copy was then provided and  the
         matter proceeded when he was ready.



      6. Mr Reza, who had also represented  the  appellant  at  the  hearing
         before the First-tier Tribunal, submitted that  the  appellant  had
         served a s.120 notice on the  parties  as  required  prior  to  the
         appeal  hearing.  No  written  response  was  received   from   the
         respondent who orally refused to  give  her  consent  for  the  new
         matter to be heard at the  hearing.  Mr  Reza  submitted  that  the
         respondent had breached her own procedure  in  failing  to  provide
         written reasons for withholding consent and he referred me  to  the
         respondent's policy. He  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  been
         prevented from presenting her case on her sur place activities.



      7. Mr Whitwell responded. He pointed out that  the  s.120  notice  had
         been served very late and that the appellant's bundle  of  evidence
         was received on 3 March, the Friday before the Monday  hearing.  He
         stated that the s.120 notice had been passed on to Counsel who  had
         been instructed by the Secretary of State and he presumed  she  had
         not been able to take instructions  and  had  decided  to  withhold
         consent  herself.  He  observed  that  she  could  have  sought  an
         adjournment to enable the respondent to consider the new  material.
         He pointed out that the  appellant  had  not,  however,  sought  an
         adjournment. He submitted that the purpose of s.85(5)  was  not  to
         prevent evidence being submitted but to stop  the  respondent  from
         being "ambushed"  by  new  evidence  and  issues  at  hearings.  He
         submitted, however,  that  there  would  be  no  prejudice  to  the
         appellant if no error of law were found as she  would  be  able  to
         make a  fresh  application  which  the  respondent  would  have  to
         consider.



      8. In reply, Mr Reza submitted  that  the  appellant  could  not  have
         sought an  adjournment  once  the  panel  had  decided  it  had  no
         jurisdiction to consider the new matter. He submitted that even  if
         consent was withheld, the respondent was still required to  provide
         written reasons, even after the hearing as stated  in  the  policy,
         and she had not done so.



      9. After some discussion, given  the  general  agreement  between  the
         parties that the situation was unsatisfactory, I decided to adjourn
         the hearing to give the respondent an opportunity to  consider  her
         position and to clarify whether she still withheld her consent and,
         if so, to clarify why in writing, or whether she consented  and  in
         that case whether she wished to consider the new material before it
         was addressed by the Tribunal.



     10. Subsequently, the Tribunal received an email and skeleton  argument
         from  Mr  Whitwell  dated  6  September  2017  with  an  unreported
         determination of the Upper Tribunal (A R M: PA/05465/2016)  dealing
         with a similar issue. He submitted that,  as  found  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal, a challenge to the issue of  consent  was  a  matter  for
         judicial review, and that the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
         should be upheld with a finding that there was no error of law.



     11. The matter then came before me  on  30  October  2017  where,  once
         again, Mr Reza appeared for the appellant.  Mr  Tarlow  represented
         the respondent. He indicated that the Home Office  computer  showed
         that an appellant by the same name had  a  case  management  review
         hearing at Taylor House in February 2018. He was unable to  provide
         me with any further details.



     12.  Mr  Reza  submitted  a  skeleton  argument   and   an   unreported
         determination of the Upper Tribunal (B  A  :  HU/01334/2015)  which
         took a different view on the consent issue. He submitted  that  the
         panel should have  adjourned  the  appeal  hearing  to  enable  the
         respondent to follow her policy. He distinguished  the  appellant's
         case from A R M pointing out that was not a  claim  for  protection
         and that appellant had not served a s.120 notice. He relied on  the
         Upper Tribunal's Practice Directions and asked that an error of law
         be found and the matter be remitted to another judge of the  First-
         tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



     13. Mr Tarlow relied on his colleague's skeleton argument and submitted
         that  the  appellant's  recourse  was  to  make  a  new  claim  for
         protection or to challenge the respondent's breach  of  policy  via
         judicial review.



     14. Mr Reza responded. He  submitted  that  the  appellant  wanted  the
         matter to be dealt with as quickly as possible. He  submitted  that
         the intention of the s.120 notice should not be frustrated.



     15. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.



     16. Conclusions



     17. There is no question in my mind that the respondent has  failed  to
         follow  her  own  guidance  in  the  matter  of  giving/withholding
         consent. The document,  Rights  of  Appeal  Version  4.0  dated  15
         November 2016, sets out the definition of a new matter and provides
         inter alia:



         "Even if the new matter is not identified until shortly  before  or
         at the hearing, if it can be  considered  and  a  decision  reached
         quickly, that should be done".
         ....


         "If the new matter cannot be considered  before  the  hearing....in
         order to make the best use of Tribunal  resources,  an  adjournment
         should be sought for the Secretary of State  to  consider  the  new
         matter. Where possible, a single appeal should consider all matters
         that have been raised by the appellant".
         ...


         "The PO must consult a Senior PO or Senior Caseworker if consent is
         to be refused".
         ...


         "Where consent is refused, the SSHD will  provide  written  reasons
         for refusing consent".
         ...


         "If the new matter is considered  within  2  working  days  of  the
         hearing then the revised decision will be sent to the appellant and
         the Tribunal no later than 4 pm on the day before the hearing"
         ...


         "If the new matter is  raised  at  the  Tribunal  hearing,  written
         reasons will be provided for refusing consent within 2 working days
         of the hearing".


     18. Plainly the respondent's  published  procedure  was  not  followed.
         There is nothing to suggest that Ms Husain took instructions from a
         Senior Presenting Officer or Senior Caseworker  before  withholding
         consent. There are no written reasons for the  decision  to  refuse
         consent and, given that the respondent's own  guidance  allows  for
         new matters to be raised as late as the hearing  itself,  the  time
         factor raised by Mr Whitwell has  no  bearing  on  the  issue.  The
         timeliness issue was also considered by the Upper Tribunal in  Jaff
         (s.120 notice; statement of "additional grounds") [2012] UKUT 00396
         (IAC) where it was held that a statement of additional grounds made
         in response to a one stop notice could be made at any  time  up  to
         and including the hearing of the appeal. Moreover, the respondent's
         refusal to give consent goes against her own policy of dealing with
         all matters in a single appeal and frustrates the  process  of  the
         one stop procedure. Requiring the appellant to make a  fresh  claim
         for asylum  would  unnecessarily  waste  time  and  resources.   Mr
         Tarlow's suggestion that  this  was  an  option  available  to  the
         appellant does not accord with the respondent's  stated  policy  as
         cited above.


     19. Unreported decisions are not binding upon the Tribunal. However, in
         any event, Mr Reza has helpfully distinguished A R M from B A. A  R
         M was not a claim for protection and, importantly, no s.120  notice
         had  been  filed.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be  relied  on  by  the
         respondent. Even if it was similar on  the  facts,  the  Tribunal's
         Practice Directions state that "it will be rare for ...arguments(s)
         to be capable of being made only  by  reference  to  an  unreported
         determination" (at 11.3). Mr Reza submitted if the  Upper  Tribunal
         had intended to give guidance, the case would have  been  reported.
         There is force in that submission.



     20. It is unfortunate that despite my adjournment of the last  hearing,
         specifically so that the respondent could be  consulted  about  her
         position, this was not done.  The appellant  has  had  to  wait  an
         additional two months and resources have been expended  where  they
         could have been avoided. Mr Reza properly points  out  that  it  is
         desirable  for  protection  issues  to  be  disposed   of   without
         unnecessary delay. I do not consider it desirable or  sensible  for
         the appellant to have to make a new application for protection when
         the additional  matters  she  wished  to  raise  were  put  to  the
         respondent by way of a s.120 notice.



     21. I find that the panel of the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in
         failing to appreciate that the  respondent  had  breached  her  own
         guidance  and  policy  in  refusing  consent  without  any  written
         reasons. It would have been open to the panel to adjourn the matter
         either  for  a  short  period  or  until  another  date   so   that
         instructions could have been taken  from  an  appropriately  senior
         officer and/or to obtain the respondent's guidance to consider  the
         matter for itself.  There  has  been  procedural  unfairness  which
         amounts to a material error of law.



     22. The appellant's grounds have not, however, challenged  any  of  the
         panel's findings on the other aspect of her asylum claim. Nor  were
         any submissions made by Mr Reza on this.  Therefore,  the  findings
         made by the panel  on  issues  apart  from  the  new  matter  stand
         unchallenged. A decision is, however, required  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal on the new matter of the appellant's  conversion  and  her
         sur place claim. It can be assumed, in all the circumstances,  that
         the respondent will take action to comply with  the  terms  of  her
         guidance prior to the next hearing.



     23. Decision


     24. The First-tier Tribunal made  errors  of  law  such  that  a  fresh
         decision is required on the new matters set out above.



     25. Anonymity



     26. No request for an anonymity order was made and I see no  reason  to
         make one.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 3 November 2017












