
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08200/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 April 2019                     |On 17 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza of JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Nixon promulgated on 17 August 2019.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 25 February  1989.  He  left
    Iran in March 2014 and arrived in the UK on about 4 April  2014.  On  2
    May 2014 he claimed asylum on the basis of  his  involvement  with  the
    Kurdish Democratic Party of Iran ('KDPI'). His application was refused,
    and a subsequent appeal dismissed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  18
    August 2014 (ref. AA/04539/2004).

3.   On 11 December 2017 the Appellant made further submissions  in  respect
    of his claim for protection raising a  new  issue  in  respect  of  his
    claimed conversion  to  Christianity.  On  18  June  2018  his  further
    submissions were rejected, but it was accepted that they constituted  a
    fresh claim for asylum, and accordingly he  was  afforded  a  right  of
    appeal.

4.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

5.   At his appeal hearing in Birmingham  on  27  July  2018  the  Appellant
    appeared unrepresented. In support of his appeal Pastor [SP]  from  his
    church gave oral evidence further to a written witness  statement  (see
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 11 and 13). There was
    also written evidence from another member of the church (paragraph 19),
    and it appears that she also attended the hearing but  was  not  called
    because the Judge "indicated that I  would  take  into  account  [GC]'s
    statement" (paragraph 11).

6.   The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in  the  Decision  and
    Reasons of Judge Nixon promulgated on 17 August 2018.

7.   In substance the Judge concluded that he was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant's conversion to Christianity was genuine (paragraph 22),  and
    moreover was not satisfied that the Appellant had been involved in  any
    evangelical  or  proselytising  behaviour  on  behalf  of  the   church
    (paragraphs 20 and 22).

8.   It is to be noted that the Judge stated that he accepted the  testimony
    of Pastor [SP] and Ms [C] in so far as it related to the  fact  of  the
    Appellant's attendance at church and Bible studies from  November  2016
    and the fact of his baptism in July 2017 (paragraph 19).

9.   However, in respect of the genuineness or otherwise of the  Appellant's
    commitment to Christianity, the Judge observed that Pastor [P]  "agreed
    that all he could say about the appellant was that he  attended  church
    and Bible studies regularly" (paragraph 13). Necessarily, the Judge did
    not hear Ms [C] respond to any such questions in this regard because it
    had been indicated that she need not be called.

10.  In respect of  proselytising,  or  evangelical  activities,  the  Judge
    commented that Pastor [P] had said nothing about such a role, and  that
    "[GC] is similarly silent in her witness statement" (paragraph 20).  In
    context, it seems to  me  clear  that  Pastor  [P]  was  not  expressly
    questioned in this regard, the Judge merely stating that he would  have
    expected Pastor [P] to say something about this when  asked  about  his
    knowledge of the Appellant's faith. Necessarily, again, Ms [C] was  not
    questioned in respect of this aspect of the  Appellant's  case  because
    she was not called.

11.  I am concerned that  in  circumstances  where  the  Appellant  was  not
    represented insufficient was done by the Judge to ensure his  full  and
    fair participation in the hearing. In so far as there were any concerns
    about the possible incompleteness of Pastor [P]'s evidence, this was  a
    matter in respect  of  which  the  Judge  should  have  sought  express
    clarification from the witness himself, or prompted  the  Appellant  to
    put suitable questions to his witness. More particularly I am concerned
    that a potentially relevant witness  was  in  substance  excluded  from
    giving oral evidence by the Judge's indication that he would rely  upon
    her  statement.  In  my  judgement  in  such   circumstances   it   was
    procedurally unfair for the Judge thereafter to comment upon  Ms  [C]'s
    witness statement being "silent" on some aspects, when  it  would  have
    been a straightforward matter to hear from her directly.

12.  I do not suggest that answers would have inevitably been elicited  from
    either witness that would have substantially changed the nature of  the
    available evidence, or significantly further advanced  the  Appellant's
    case. However, the procedural unfairness - in particular in not hearing
    from Ms [C] and then relying upon the  perceived  deficiencies  in  her
    written evidence - in the context of  an  unrepresented  appellant,  is
    such that I find material error of law. The Judge unfairly  disregarded
    or otherwise marginalised testimony that at least in part spoke  as  to
    conduct of the Appellant that could have been  regarded  as  consistent
    with genuine faith, such as Ms [C]'s references to his  "keen  interest
    to ... increase his faith", "deep desire  to  understand  God  and  the
    scriptures as well as increase his own faith and educate  others  about
    God's message", and his "show[ing] a  genuine  desire  to  help  others
    understand the love that Jesus has for them".

13.  The consequence is that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  must
    be set aside. Because in substance the Appellant has not had a full and
    proper consideration of his appeal, the only just outcome is  that  the
    decision in the appeal be remade pursuant to a new hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal by a Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Nixon with all issues at large.

Notice of Decision

14.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

15.  The decision in the appeals is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon,  with
    all issues at large.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 11 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

