
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08830/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 9 February 2018                    |On 30 April 2018                      |
|                                         |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Patel, instructed by Howells Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AA, was born in 2001 and is a male citizen if Iraq.   By
    a decision dated 4 July 2017, I found that the First-tier Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that its decision fell to be set aside.   My  reasons
    for reaching that decision were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, AA, was born on 1 January 2001 and  is  a  male
         citizen of Iraq.  By a decision dated 5 August 2016, the respondent
         refused the appellant  asylum  but,  as  he  was  at  the  time  an
         unaccompanied  minor  and  there   existed   inadequate   reception
         arrangements available for him in Iraq, she gave him  discretionary
         leave to remain.  The appellant appealed  against  the  refusal  of
         asylum to the first-tier Tribunal (Judge Cox) which, in a  decision
         which was promulgated on 30 January  2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.
         The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper  Tribunal.



         2.   The judge's dismissal of the appellant's appeal turned on  his
         finding that the appellant would not be at risk  of  indiscriminate
         violence in his home area of Iraq.  At [48], the judge wrote:

         On the other hand, the  appellant's  Counsel  submitted  that  just
         because the appellant's home area falls within the  governorate  of
         Erbil does not mean that the area is safe.  He submitted that  what
         areas fall within an internal armed conflict is not  always  clear.
         I agree that the situation in Iraq is fluid.  However I  am  in  no
         doubt  that  at  present  there  is  a  concerted  effort  to  push
         Isis/Daesh out of Iraq generally and particularly  Mosul.   I  have
         accepted that the appellant's village lies quite  close  to  Mosul.
         Accordingly I am prepared to accept, on the  lower  standard,  that
         the appellant's home village is presently within an area subject to
         an internal armed conflict.

         3.   However, the judge went on [49] to find that the appellant had
         not provided satisfactory  evidence  to  show  that  the  level  of
         indiscriminate violence within his home area (in contrast to Mosul)
         reaches the Article 15(c) threshold.

         4.   The appellant claims to have lived in Baqrta village which  is
         in  the  Qarach  sub-district  of  Erbil  Province  lying  some  28
         kilometres south of Erbil itself.  I find that the judge was  right
         to note that the situation in Iraq is  particularly  fluid  at  the
         present time (as Iraqi forces seek to drive out Isis/Daesh from the
         country).  However, I agree with Mr Tettey that the judge  has  not
         given any clear reason for concluding that the appellant would  not
         face the risk of indiscriminate violence in his home  village/area;
         the appellant's village lies within Erbil Province but is close  if
         not within an area  of  Iraq  which  constitutes  the  battleground
         between Iraqi and Isis/Daesh forces.  The  judge  has,  in  effect,
         provided only a bare assertion that the appellant would not  be  at
         risk whilst the location of his home  area  and  its  proximity  to
         ongoing conflict would seem  to  require  a  reasoned  and  nuanced
         analysis. The judge has  also  failed  to  take  into  account  the
         appellant's Kurdish ethnicity and to  examine  in  any  detail  the
         extent to which he would (or would not) be likely to be assisted by
         family members or others in obtaining the  necessary  documentation
         either to travel within Iraq or to access  services  there.   I  am
         satisfied that the appellant's  asylum  appeal  has  been  properly
         determined  by  Judge  Cox;  the  only  issue   requiring   further
         consideration at a resumed hearing by the Upper Tribunal relates to
         Article 15(c).   Current  country  guidance  is  contained  in  the
         decision of AA (Article 15(c) CG  Iraq  [2015]  UKUT  0054  (IAC)).
         That case I understand at the present time is subject to an  appeal
         before the Court of Appeal.  It is for that reason that I will  not
         list the matter for a resumed hearing before me at Bradford  before
         1 September 2017.  Both parties may file at the Upper Tribunal  and
         serve on each other further  evidence  relating  to  the  remaining
         issue in dispute no  less  than  ten  days  prior  to  the  resumed
         hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 30
         January 2017 is set aside.   The  findings  as  regard  the  asylum
         appeal are preserved.  The Upper Tribunal will consider the  matter
         further  on  the  limited  issue  of  risk  to  the  appellant   of
         indiscriminate violence (Article 15(c)) at a resumed hearing before
         Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane on a  date  to  be  fixed  after  1
         September 2017.

         DIRECTIONS

         1.   The parties may file at the Upper Tribunal and serve upon each
         other any evidence upon which they wish to rely as to the issue  of
         indiscriminate violence in Iraq no less than 10 days prior  to  the
         date of the resumed hearing.

         2.   The court will provide a Kurdish Sorani  interpreter  for  the
         resumed hearing.

         3.   Time estimate: 2 hours.

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 9 February 2018,  the  focus  was
    upon the whereabouts in Iraq of Makhmur, the Kurdish village which, for
    the purpose of the humanitarian protection analysis, is the appellant's
    home area of Iraq.  For the resumed hearing, the appellant has  adduced
    some additional evidence regarding the whereabouts of the  village.   I
    see from the entry on Wikipedia that Makhmur is in "Ninawa Governate in
    Northern Iraq."  The village is described to be in a district which  is
    "disputed territory, in  between  Erbil  and  Ninawa  Governates."   It
    appears that Makhmur was captured by  the  Iraqi  Army  from  Peshmerga
    (Kurdish forces) in October 2017.  The town had, in 2014, been  in  the
    possession of ISIL militants before being recaptured by  the  Kurdistan
    Workers Party.

 3. Unfortunately, the evidence produced has  not  conclusively  determined
    whether Makhmur is in  that  part  of  Iraq  controlled  by  the  Iraqi
    government in Baghdad or  lies  within  the  IKR  (Independent  Kurdish
    Region) which is governed from Erbil.  It may be the case that the very
    question is not capable of a definitive answer.  That  is  because  the
    area remains disputed between a number of forces.  By the date  of  the
    resumed hearing, it appears that ISIS has been expelled from  the  area
    but conflict remains between Peshmerga Kurdish Forces and the forces of
    the Iraqi  government.   I  have  been  shown  an  internet  news  item
    indicating that, as recently as December 2017, there was a build-up  of
    Iraqi forces near Makhmur.  The  report  quotes  the  Kurdistan  Region
    Security Council as having said, "We are alarmed by  significant  Iraqi
    military build-up in the vicinity of Makhmur  south-west  of  Erbil  in
    preparation for an attack on nearby Peshmerga position."  Whether there
    is anything that could properly be described as a  border  within  Iraq
    between the IKR and that  area  controlled  by  the  Iraqi  forces  or,
    indeed, whether anyone at the present time is able to  determine  where
    the authority of either of those competing powers ends  and  the  other
    begins is simply uncertain.  What is clear is that the home village  of
    this appellant remains hotly contested between violent opposing forces.
     In those circumstances, I find that there  was  no  reliable  evidence
    which shows that it would be safe for the appellant to  return  to  his
    home area of Makhmur.  I am aware that my finding  conflicts  with  the
    view of the Secretary of State expressed in the refusal letter at [19].
     The Secretary of State considered that Makhmur fell  within  Kurdistan
    (i.e. the IKR).  Whether that ultimately proves  to  be  the  case,  it
    would, in my opinion, be wrong to assume  that  everywhere  within  the
    IKR, including those areas on the borders of the region, are  safe  and
    free from conflict.  On the evidence, I find that this appellant cannot
    return to his home area of Iraq.

 4. Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, did not seek to argue that, should  the
    appellant be required to exercise internal flight within Iraq, it would
    be not unduly harsh to expect him to do so.   The  appellant  would  be
    returned to Baghdad (there are no international flights to the  IKR  at
    the present time).  As a young and  (as  the  recent  medical  evidence
    adduced shows, vulnerable) Kurdish Iraqi male who  has  been  separated
    from his family in Iraq, this appellant would be at  risk  in  Baghdad,
    even if he were to remain there for a relatively short period of  time.
    There is no evidence to show that he would be able  to  take  a  flight
    from Baghdad to Erbil  given  that  he  does  not  have  the  necessary
    documents whilst  travel  overland  from  Baghdad  to  Erbil  would  be
    excessively hazardous.

 5. In the light of the findings which I have made above, I find  that  the
    appellant's  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  should   be
    allowed.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane













