
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/08013/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral determination given following hearing    |On 1 May 2018                 |
|On 6 April 2018                               |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                    Mr Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Mughal, Legal Representative of Montague
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Turkey born on [ ] 1985.  He  claims  to
    have left Turkey  in  January  2017  by  lorry  entering  this  country
    clandestinely on 16 January that year.  He claimed asylum on 3 February
    2017.  His claim was refused by  the  respondent  and  the  appellant's
    appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    O'Garro in a decision  promulgated  on  26  October  2017  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross  on  20  September  2017.   The  appellant  now
    appeals to this Tribunal,  leave  having  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 14 November 2017.

 2. When giving his  reasons  for  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge
    Cruthers noted that there was "little substance in at least some of the
    complaints made in the grounds" and  that  although  it  was  "arguable
    that.... other criticisms... may  be  well-founded",  nonetheless  "the
    appellant should not take this grant of  permission  as  an  indication
    that the appellant will ultimately be successful".

 3. Very helpfully before me, Mrs Mughal, representing  the  appellant  did
    not seek to rely with any force upon some of the grounds which had been
    argued and in particular the ground that the  judge  had  left  out  of
    account the appellant's Kurdish ethnicity,  which  Judge  Cruthers  had
    considered specifically was a ground without substance.  The  case  she
    advanced on behalf of the appellant was  essentially  on  two  grounds.
    The first was that the judge ought to have accepted that the  appellant
    had been detained twice, rather than merely accepting that he had  been
    detained once and making adverse credibility findings  with  regard  to
    his claim to have been detained  a  second  time,  and  secondly,  that
    insufficient regard was had to the risk factors that he would  face  on
    return to Turkey even if he had only been detained once.

 4. I heard submissions on behalf of both parties which  I  have  recorded.
    Although I will not set out within this  decision  the  submissions  in
    full, I have had regard to everything which was said on behalf of  both
    parties as well as to  all  the  material  contained  within  the  file
    whether or not the same is specifically referred to below.  With regard
    to the first submission that the  judge  ought  to  have  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence with regard to his second detention, Mrs  Mughal's
    argument was that having found that he  had  been  detained  the  first
    time, as he had said, she should not have  rejected  his  account  with
    regard to the second detention.  She claimed  that  the  reasoning  was
    illogical because the appellant  could  not  be  properly  said  to  be
    responsible  for  any  failures  of  the  authorities  to  make   other
    investigations.  What the judge had found at paragraph 32 was that  she
    would have expected the authorities to have  made  enquiries  of  other
    members of the appellant's family also.  If the Tribunal were  to  find
    that the judge  should  have  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    detained twice then it would follow that the judge had  not  considered
    the true position when considering the risk factors which  would  apply
    were the appellant to be returned because she had only  considered  the
    risk that he would face on the basis that he  had  only  been  detained
    once.

 5. The second submission was that even if the judge's adverse  credibility
    finding was sustainable she still failed  to  consider  adequately  the
    risk on return having regard in particular  to  the  changed  situation
    within Turkey particularly within the last eighteen months, when  there
    had been a number of incidents including bombing at the  airport.   She
    invited the Tribunal to note that at paragraph 64 of the very  old  but
    nonetheless long established country guidance decision in IK (returnees
    - records - IFA)  Turkey  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00312,  the  Tribunal  had
    referred to other information systems beyond the GBTS  system  referred
    to within IK.  It is submitted on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
    judge failed to consider what  other  records  there  would  be.   With
    regard to  the  judge's  finding  that  it  was  implausible  that  the
    authorities would not also have investigated the appellant's family  it
    was submitted that this factor should be seen as a factor in favour  of
    the appellant because it shows that he did not embellish his  claim  to
    state that his family had been investigated which he could have done.

 6. On behalf of the respondent Ms Fijiwala referred the  Tribunal  to  the
    judge's references to the risk factors contained within IK and also  to
    references to what the authorities would discover  were  they  to  make
    further enquiries to which reference will be made below.   With  regard
    to the judge's rejection of the appellant's  claim  that  he  had  been
    detained a second time, she submitted that this  was  entirely  logical
    and was properly reasoned.

Discussion

 7. I deal with the first ground  to  begin  with.   The  judge  gives  her
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim to have been detained twice
    essentially at paragraph 22.  The judge had in mind in particular  that
    the  appellant's  claim  was  that  he  had  been  arrested  when   the
    authorities had found him with food to feed some ten to fifteen  people
    in his bag when he was going up the mountain  in  order  to  graze  the
    livestock from the family farm.   The  judge  considered  that  if  the
    authorities had indeed found the appellant with food and suspected  him
    of taking it to the PKK  as  he  claimed,  they  would  not  only  have
    arrested the appellant but would also have made enquiries at  the  farm
    where the appellant lived to see whether or not the appellant's  father
    and siblings were PKK supporters like him.  The fact that it  does  not
    appear that they did so and also that the appellant's parents and other
    family members remained living in Turkey without any evidence that they
    had been arrested and detained because of their support for the PKK was
    inconsistent with the claim made by the  appellant  that  he  had  been
    detained.

 8. I bear in mind that this was a family farm and  I  do  not  accept  the
    submission made on behalf of the appellant that this finding is somehow
    illogical because the appellant is not answerable for  the  failure  of
    the authorities to take any particular  action.   What  the  judge  was
    saying in effect was that it was implausible that the authorities would
    just have arrested this appellant when in the  circumstances(which  was
    that food was said to have been supplied to the PKK from a family farm)
    they would have been bound  to  make  further  investigations.   In  my
    judgment there is nothing illogical about this reasoning.   Whether  or
    not every judge would have drawn the same conclusions is not the point.
     Provided this is a conclusion which was open to the judge which in  my
    judgment it was, the judge cannot be said to have made an error of  law
    in reaching that conclusion.

 9. I turn accordingly to consider whether or not it can  realistically  be
    argued that the judge failed to consider the risk factors  which  would
    face the appellant on return to Turkey on the basis that the judge  had
    been entitled to find that he had only been detained once.  Although it
    is argued on the appellant's behalf  that  the  judge  failed  to  take
    account of the possibility that other computer records beyond what  was
    on the GBTS computer system might have put the appellant  at  risk,  in
    fact the judge did specifically consider this at paragraph 43 where she
    found as follows:

         "43. I have found the appellant did not have a well-founded fear of
             persecution in his home area.  I  find  that  the  authorities
             there had no real interest in the appellant.   An  enquiry  to
             his local area should find his record of  detention  but  will
             find that he was released and not charged  and  there  was  no
             follow up action against  the  appellant  or  members  of  his
             immediate family.  That should satisfy  the  authorities  that
             the appellant is not of any interest to them and he  would  be
             able to go free."

10. In other words, there would be nothing on any computer system regarding
    this appellant because there was nothing to find beyond the  fact  that
    he had been released and not charged.

11. It accordingly follows that there was no material error of law in Judge
    O'Garro's decision, and this appeal must be dismissed.



Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 30 April 2018
