
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08021/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November 2020                 |On 19th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     H G
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Crichton, Maguire Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey born  in  May  1999.   He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cowx, promulgated  on
    5  November  2019,  dismissing  his   protection   claim   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on the ground that the judge  erred  in
    law because any inconsistency between his appeal statement, his  asylum
    interview and his Preliminary Interview Questionnaire  [PIQ]  statement
    was not material.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beach on 9 January 2020 on the following grounds:

         "The  adverse  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  rely
         primarily on discrepancies between the Appellant's Initial  Contact
         and  Asylum  Registration  Questionnaire  [ICARQ].  The  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge does not  appear  to  have  considered  whether  the
         evidence post the [ICARQ] was consistent and the effect of that  on
         his assessment of the answers given at the [ICARQ]. It is  arguable
         that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  not   considered   the
         principles set out in YL (Rely on SEF)  China  [2004]  UKIAT  00145
         when considering discrepancies between an initial account and later
         accounts".

3.   The appeal was listed for hearing on 16 April 2020 but was vacated  due
    to the outbreak of COVID-19. On 23 April 2020, directions  were  issued
    by the Tribunal stating that it was the Tribunal's provisional view the
    error of  law  hearing  could  be  determined  without  a  hearing.  In
    response, the Appellant filed further submissions on 5 May 2020.

4.   In the Rule 24 response dated 7 May 2020, the  Respondent  stated  that
    the judge  set  out  the  reasons  for  finding  the  Appellant  lacked
    credibility at [7] of the decision. This included a  finding  at  [7.3]
    that the Appellant's accounts differ between the ICARQ which took place
    on 27 April 2019 and his PIQ statement on 12 June 2019. The  ICARQ  was
    not taken after a long journey as it was the Appellant's  own  evidence
    that he had been in the UK two weeks before making an asylum claim. The
    Appellant was cross-examined on the discrepancies at  the  hearing  and
    the judge formed a view on the answers given. It was further  submitted
    that the SEF [statement of evidence form] had changed considerably, now
    becoming the ICARQ, since YL was promulgated in  2004.  The  Respondent
    relied on paragraphs 23 to 25 of YL. It was submitted the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was not wholly reliant on the contents  of  the
    ICARQ and that within [7] the judge  had  set  down  further  areas  of
    concern which had led to the adverse credibility findings.

5.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan  considered  the  Appellant's  further
    submissions and concluded that they raised two further arguments  which
    were not included in the grounds of  appeal.  Firstly,  the  judge  had
    erred by failing to consider the evidence of Dr  Christie,  as  to  the
    Appellant's condition and the impact of PTSD on his ability  to  recall
    the details of the trauma he had suffered. Secondly, the  judge  failed
    to give reasons to support his finding that the Appellant's account was
    implausible. Judge Sheridan granted the Appellant permission  to  amend
    the grounds to include these two new  arguments  and  to  make  further
    submissions.

6.   The Respondent made submissions on 17 June 2020 relying on the Rule  24
    response dated 7 May 2020. It  was  submitted  the  evidence  from  the
    psychologist, Dr Christie, was solely based on what she was told by the
    Appellant and as such, the judge  was  entitled  to  afford  it  little
    weight. It was further submitted that it was unclear from the papers if
    the  Appellant  was  referred  to  Dr  Christie  by  his  GP   or   his
    representatives. This was relevant because the Appellant did not appear
    to be taking any medication  or  receiving  treatment  for  any  mental
    health issues. Given the diagnosis of PTSD was based entirely  on  what
    the Appellant told  the  psychologist,  it  did  not  follow  that  the
    diagnosed PTSD was able to affect the account given by the Appellant on
    arrival in the UK. The judge assessed all of the evidence in the  round
    and the challenges made  against  the  decision  were  insufficient  to
    dislodge the judge's sustainable findings.

7.   The Appellant made submissions dated 22 June 2020  stating  that  there
    were material errors of  law  because  any  inconsistency  between  the
    Appellant's appeal statement, the asylum interview and  PIQ  statements
    was not material. The appellate  process  gave  the  Appellant  several
    opportunities to set out his account. It  was  inevitable  that  errors
    would slip in that may seem material but, as in this  case,  were  not.
    The error in relation to the year when the Appellant was first arrested
    was one digit, 8 instead of 7. It was  submitted  that  every  material
    particular was the same as between the accounts. The accounts were  not
    markedly different. The threat referred to at [6.2] was no different to
    a threat to kill. The judge had failed to consider the evidence in  the
    round applying the lower standard of proof and in effect insisted  that
    the Appellant gave two entirely different accounts.

8.   In addition, it  was  submitted  that  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    psychological report amounted to an error of law. The judge  failed  to
    consider the impact that PTSD would have on the Appellant's ability  to
    recall the details of a trauma memory on arrival in the UK.  The  judge
    had failed to apply YL and, had he done so, he would  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion. Further, the judge's finding that the Appellant's
    account was implausible was lacking reasons. The judge stated: "I  also
    find HG's account of this incident to be implausible.  If  the  Turkish
    authorities wished to cultivate HG as an informant, they  would  surely
    have attempted more subtle means than those described by HG".

9.   There was evidence in the  expert  report  of  Dr  Kaveh  Ghobadi  that
    supporters  and  members  of  pro-Kurdish  have  experienced  arbitrary
    arrest, unlawful detention, mistreatment and  torture  by  the  Turkish
    authorities. Following the failed coup and under emergency rule,  there
    was an intensified 'crackdown' on members and supporters of  HDP.   The
    judge had failed to  take  into  account  the  country  information  in
    finding that the Appellant's account was not  credible  and  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for those conclusions.

Submissions

10.  Ms Crichton relied on her written  submissions  of  22  June  2020  and
    responded to the Rule 24 response.  She  submitted  the  Appellant  was
    given an initial opportunity to explain his claim and was asked to give
    very brief reasons. The judge had not  assessed  the  evidence  in  the
    round. It should be clear from the decision the reasons for  dismissing
    the appeal and the judge had failed to give reasons in  accounting  for
    his negative credibility findings. The  judge  was  applying  a  higher
    standard of proof than was applicable. Ms  Crichton  accepted  that  an
    adverse  credibility  finding  could  be  made  in  relation   to   the
    discrepancies, but the judge relied on minor discrepancies  to  dismiss
    the appeal. The Appellant was suffering from PTSD  which  affected  his
    ability to recall accurately his claim when initially interviewed.

11.  Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response and  his  written  submissions
    dated 17 June 2020. He submitted the judge had considered the  evidence
    in the round and heard lengthy cross-examination on the  discrepancies.
    There was a four-month period between initial screening  and  the  full
    asylum interview. The  main  thrust  of  the  refusal  notice  was  the
    Appellant's lack of knowledge of HDP  of  which  he  claimed  to  be  a
    supporter. When taken at its highest, the Appellant  was  a  low  level
    supporter and according to the background evidence he would not  be  at
    risk on return. The discrepancies referred to at [7] were not minor but
    quite serious. The Appellant had the interviews read back  to  him  and
    made no mention of any mistakes. There was no complaint raised  by  his
    representative.

12.  The judge  considered  the  Appellant  had  seriously  embellished  his
    claim. Applying YL an asylum seeker could be expected to tell the truth
    and it would be expected that he would give the correct  year  for  his
    arrest and recall any threats to kill which he claimed  occurred  after
    he was clearing  up  from  the  Newroz  celebrations.  The  Appellant's
    account differed greatly in this case  and  the  judge's  decision  was
    sustainable. The psychological evidence described symptoms of PTSD, not
    a finding that the Appellant  was  suffering  from  PTSD.  The  judge's
    finding on the psychological report was open to  him  on  the  evidence
    before him and he conducted a holistic assessment. In any event,  taken
    at its highest, the Appellant was a low level supporter and not at risk
    on return. Both parties agreed that if I found there was  an  error  of
    law, the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusion and Reasons

13.  The judge set out the Appellant's account in the  ICARQ,  the  PQI  and
    PIQ statement at [6.1] and [6.2].

         "6.1 HG claims to have been involved with the HDP  since  at  least
             Mar  17  when  he  helped  with  the  cleaning  of  a   Newroz
             celebration site. It was  after  these  celebrations  that  he
             claims to have been detained  by  police  on  21  Mar  17.  He
             alleges that he was psychologically  and  physically  tortured
             that night,  being  questioned  about  the  HDP  and  possible
             connections to the PKK. He lost  consciousness  and  the  next
             morning he  was  beaten  by  a  police  officer  before  being
             released. It is relevant to compare this full account  in  his
             witness statement dated 17 Sept  19  with  his  first  account
             given to the respondent in his [ICARQ] dated 27 Apr 19. In his
             questionnaire at pages 6 and 7 he was asked why he  could  not
             return to his home country. In response  he  referred  to  his
             arrest on 21 Mar 2018 (not 2017), being asked  to  act  as  an
             informer, being warned about his behaviour, then released.  At
             the earliest opportunity to explain his fears,  he  failed  to
             mention any form of physical or mental abuse  by  the  Turkish
             authorities.

         6.2  In his witness statement  HG  mentions  the  alleged  incident
             which prompted him to flee from Turkey. He claims  on  22  Mar
             19, the day after the Newroz celebrations in Elbistan, he  was
             at his grandmother's house when soldiers kicked down the  door
             and entered the house. He was questioned by a 'commander'  who
             asked him to work for the authorities as an informant  against
             the HDP and the PKK.  If he failed to do so they  would  shoot
             him and his grandmother in the head next time they came to the
             village. In his [ICARQ], he mentioned being  followed  by  the
             authorities, who came to his grandmother's home, asked him  to
             be an informant and threatened to detain him if he did not. In
             this his first opportunity to explain his  fears  he  made  no
             mention of threats to kill him or  his  grandmother,  which  I
             find to be a significant omission at a point when he was  free
             to provide an honest and accurate account".

14.  The judge made the following relevant findings at [7]:

         "7.   I  conclude  that  the  Appellant  has  not  proved,  to  the
             applicable lower standard of proof, that  he  is  entitled  to
             international protection and I dismiss the appeal. The reasons
             for my conclusions are:

             HG's account of persecution by the Turkish Authorities

         7.1  I found HG's account of being physically  and  psychologically
             abused by the Turkish police in Mar 17 and of being threatened
             with death by members of the military or gendarmerie in Mar 19
             to be both implausible and inconsistent.

         7.2  In his first account to the Home Office in an [ICARQ] dated 27
             Apr 19 he was asked why he could  not  return  to  Turkey.  He
             mentioned his arrest on 21 Mar 17 and his release but made  no
             mention at all of the  physical  and  mental  abuse  he  later
             claimed in his witness statements. If he had been  beaten  and
             mentally tortured as later described, one would have  expected
             him to make reference to it at the first opportunity.

         7.3  I noted a further inconsistency  regarding  the  date  of  the
             first occasion on which he found himself in police custody. In
             the [ICARQ] at page 6 of 12 HG said it was on 21 Mar  18,  but
             later gave the date as 21  Mar  17  at  paragraph  29  of  his
             witness statement and again in his PIQ  statement.  I  am  not
             satisfied that such an error was a genuine mistake. One  might
             mistakenly recall the year of an  event  which  happened  many
             years before, but I am not satisfied that one would make  such
             a mistake when the event was only the year before or two years
             before.

         7.4  Similarly, in the [ICARQ] he made no mention at all of threats
             to kill him or his grandmother. Instead he said his  fear  was
             of being detained. The later addition of  alleged  threats  to
             kill has a distinct air of embellishment.  I  also  find  HG's
             account of this incident to be  implausible.  If  the  Turkish
             authorities genuinely wished to cultivate HG as an  informant,
             they would surely have attempted more subtle means than  those
             described by HG, which again were not mentioned in  his  first
             account to the Home Office.

         7.5  It was apparent from HG's testimony that he was  nothing  more
             than a low- level supporter of the HDP, who only came  to  the
             notice of the authorities on two occasions, if one accepts his
             account as true, which I do not. I am not  satisfied  that  HG
             did come to the attention of the authorities and I am likewise
             not persuaded by his belated account of ill-treatment.

         7.6  HG claims to suffer  from  PTSD  and  in  support  produces  a
             psychological assessment by  Dr  Zara  Christie.  Dr  Christie
             opines that HG appears to be  experiencing  symptoms  of  PTSD
             based on the description of traumatic events and  experiencing
             flashbacks, nightmares  and  fear.  I  do  not  find  that  Dr
             Christie's report is in any way determinative of  the  primary
             factual issue in this case, which is whether  or  not  HG  was
             subjected to violence, threats of violence  and  psychological
             abuse which then caused him to fear persecution if returned to
             Turkey. Dr Christie's opinion on PTSD is founded  entirely  on
             HG's account of events and based on  an  assumption  that  his
             account of traumatic episodes is true. Any such  diagnosis  is
             of limited value in a case such as this as is founded entirely
             on an assumption  that  an  Appellant  has  given  a  truthful
             account to the expert. One has to first assess the veracity of
             the Appellant's account. In this case I am not  persuaded  the
             account provided to Dr  Christie  represents  the  truth.  The
             account given by HG to the Tribunal is essentially the same as
             that given to Dr Christie,  therefore  I  find  Dr  Christie's
             report in no way corroborative of HG's claim  and  I  give  no
             weigh to it.

         The Appellant's Immigration History

         7.7  HG left Turkey and first went to France.  On his  own  account
             he arrived in France on 30 Mar 19. His attempt to enter the UK
             on 6 Apr was foiled but he succeeded in making it to London on
             17 Apr 19. From London he went to Edinburgh on 18 Apr  19  and
             it was not until 27 Apr 19 that he claimed asylum. When cross-
             examined he said he did not claim asylum in France because  he
             did not know anyone in France  who  could  support  him.  When
             asked to account for the delay in claiming asylum in the UK he
             put it down to the  Home  Office  being  closed  over  a  bank
             holiday weekend. The respondent suggests the failure  to  seek
             asylum first in France and the delay in seeking asylum in  the
             UK damages HG's credibility and further submit that Section  8
             of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants)  Act
             2004 should  be  given  effect.   I  accept  the  respondent's
             position with regard  to  HG's  asylum  history.  I  find  his
             failure to seek asylum at the first opportunity in France does
             further undermine his credibility as does the  delay  of  some
             ten days in making his asylum claim once in the UK".

15.  It is apparent when reading the totality of the judge's  decision  that
    the judge does not rely on minor discrepancies of incorrect dates or  a
    description of threats to kill. The judge clearly finds  that,  at  the
    earliest opportunity, the Appellant failed to mention any ill-treatment
    or any threats to his life by the Turkish authorities.  These  are  not
    minor discrepancies; these are significant discrepancies. The judge  in
    effect found that the Appellant had seriously embellished  the  account
    in his witness statement and evidence before the Tribunal to that which
    he put forward in his ICARQ.

16.  At the earliest opportunity, the  Appellant  failed  to  mention  being
    beaten and psychologically tortured when arrested in March 2017 and  he
    also failed to mention any threat to his life or his grandmother's life
    when the authorities came to his grandmother's house after  the  Newroz
    celebration on 22 March 2019. These findings were open to the judge  on
    the evidence before him and he gave adequate reasons for coming to this
    conclusion. The judge applied the correct standard of proof in  finding
    that the Appellant's account given in his witness statement and at  the
    hearing was significantly different to that  disclosed  in  his  ICARQ.
    This finding was consistent with the principles in YL.

17.  The judge also gave other reasons, in addition  to  the  discrepancies,
    for finding that the Appellant's account  was  not  credible.  He  gave
    adequate reasons for why he attached little weight to the report of  Dr
    Christie. The psychological report referenced symptoms of PTSD and  how
    the Appellant could reduce the intensity of his distress.  Dr  Christie
    made no assessment of whether the Appellant's symptoms were  consistent
    with his account of ill-treatment. There was nothing in that report  to
    suggest that the Appellant would have difficulty recalling  details  in
    his ICARQ.

18.  The judge also relied on the Appellant's failure  to  claim  asylum  in
    France and at the first opportunity when he arrived in  the  UK.  These
    findings supported the judge's adverse credibility finding and I am not
    persuaded that the grounds of appeal or the  submissions  made  on  the
    Appellant's behalf demonstrate that there is an error  of  law  in  the
    decision. Any lack of reasoning in relation to the judge's findings  at
    paragraph 7.4, that the Appellant's account of the authorities visiting
    his grandmother's house was implausible, was not material.

19.  It is apparent from [6] that the judge considered  the  country  expert
    report. In particular the judge stated:

         "I have given regard to the expert report of Dr Kaveh  Ghobadi  who
         describes historic persecution of the Kurdish people by the Turkish
         state, recent repressive measures against the HDP and  its  members
         and supporters and discrimination against the Alevi religion, which
         falls short of persecution. The report  provides  a  background  to
         this claim which I determine on its own facts."

20.  I find the judge  took  into  account  the  background  information  in
    assessing the plausibility of the Appellant's account and any  lack  of
    reasons in the judge's conclusion in that respect was not material.

21.  In any event,  the  judge  considered  the  Appellant's  claim  at  its
    highest and concluded that he was a low level supporter. The  Appellant
    would not be at risk on return. There was no challenge to this finding.
    Any error of law in relation to the assessment of credibility  was  not
    material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.

22.  Accordingly, I  find  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  decision
    promulgated on 5 November 2019 and I dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 16 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


         J Frances

Signed   Date: 16 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

