
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08781/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th March 2019                             |On 21st March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                Mr Rumin Mia
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J Austin, promulgated on 4th September 2018, following a  hearing
    at Manchester on 23rd August 2018.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and was born  on  1st
    March 1977.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated
    1st July 2018, refusing his application for asylum and for humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that he came to the UK  in  2011,
    in order to avoid creditors for gambling debts and a loan that  he  had
    taken.  He was under threat of death from the creditors.  He arrived in
    the UK with no intention of returning to Bangladesh.  This  is  because
    he feared being killed there.  He was unable to pay his gambling debts.
     The Appellant was encountered by immigration officials and arrested by
    the police for working illegally at the Shaithi Takeaway on 22nd  March
    2018.



The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered the Respondent's refusal  letter,  to  the  effect
    that the Appellant had offered different accounts of  his  problems  in
    his two interviews, which damaged his credibility.  He had  also  given
    different names of his two creditors.  He  claimed  he  was  physically
    attacked by creditors but did not mention being assaulted.   He  stated
    he used the last of his money to leave his home country to  escape  his
    creditors.

 5. He was then discovered working illegally in  the  UK  as  a  chef.   He
    failed to explain why he was not using his earnings to settle his debts
    in Bangladesh by sending money home.

 6. The judge also considered the Appellant's account, which  was  that  he
    had been given a straightforward and consistent account throughout  the
    proceedings.   He  had  a  gambling   problem.    He   had   built   up
    insurmountable debts.  The delay in  claiming  asylum  was  because  he
    feared the outcome of any claim that he might make.   If  he  had  been
    returned back to Bangladesh.

 7. The judge found that the Appellant had not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof that was upon him.  He had not set out to repay  his  debts.   He
    had given an inconsistent account.  The judge was  not  satisfied  that
    the Appellant would suffer treatment in Bangladesh which  would  breach
    his Articles 2 and 3 human rights.

 8. The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  proceeded  under  a
    mistake of fact, took into account matters that were  not  put  to  the
    Appellant at the hearing, and failed to give adequate reasons.

10. On 10th December 2018 permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.



Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 8th March  2019,  Mr  Greer,  appearing  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant,  made  his  submissions  with   his   usual
    commendable brevity.  He elaborated upon what was stated in the grounds
    of application.   There  were  three  essential  grounds.   First,  the
    mistake as to fact.  This arose under the mistaken assumption that  the
    Appellant had provided  different  names  of  creditors  and  different
    types.  When the reality was that they were the same people, whose name
    given during the screening interview was phonetically  similar  to  the
    names subsequently given in the main  interview.   Mr  Greer  submitted
    that I should look at the Secretary of State's bundle  (at  B6  and  at
    question 4.1 there).  I should compare this with what was said  in  the
    substantive interview (at question 20 at page 37).  I should also  look
    at the Appellant's bundle (at pages 27 to 28).  It would be clear  that
    there are no stark differences in the names that are given.  The  names
    are the same.

12. Second, there was the issue of "procedural impropriety" and this  arose
    from the fact that, the issues, in relation to why  the  Appellant  had
    not paid off his debts, if he was fearful of return  to  Bangladesh  on
    account of ill-treatment that he would face  from  his  creditors,  was
    never put to him.  It was not put to him during his interview.  It  was
    not put to him at the hearing either.  Therefore, the Appellant was not
    given the chance to deal with this critical basis of refusal  that  the
    judge eventually adopted.

13. Third, there was the question  of  the  failure  to  provide  "adequate
    reasons".  This too, submitted Mr Greer, was important (if one looks at
    paragraphs 27 to 28 of the judge's decision) because if the  judge  did
    not consider the fact that the names were  phonetically  different  but
    otherwise the same; and if the judge did not consider that  the  issues
    that troubled the Tribunal, such as why the Appellant  was  not  paying
    off his debts, had not been put to the Appellant, then the reasons  for
    refusal were inadequate.

14. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that this challenge was nothing more
    than a disagreement with the judge's findings.  If  one  looks  at  the
    Appellant's witness (which is barely more  than  two  pages  long)  the
    Appellant deals with none of the issues  that  he  currently  complains
    about (see pages 27 to 29), notwithstanding the fact, that  the  issues
    have all been flagged up in the refusal letter.  He simply says that he
    borrowed money and he now owed it.  It was for the Appellant to provide
    the basis for his claim in the witness statement, once the decision had
    been made in the refusal letter to reject  his  asylum  and  protection
    claim.

15. Second, it cannot be procedurally unfair if the very  issues  that  had
    been flagged up in the refusal letter, are not then  addressed  by  the
    Appellant himself in his witness statement.  It is in fact, open to the
    judge to infer whatever he may from the  Appellant's  failure  to  deal
    with the issues in his witness statement.

16. Finally,  the  Secretary  of  State  relied  upon  the  refusal  letter
    (especially paragraph 33), where the Secretary of  State  states  that,
    "it is unclear why you didn't use these monies to pay off your  debts".
    If the Appellant did not give an explanation at the hearing after that,
    this was entirely to be laid at the  Appellant's  door.   The  Tribunal
    could not be criticised for this.



No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

18. First, there is the issue of the Appellant  having  given  a  confusing
    account of the debts that he owed to his creditors.  It has  been  said
    that the Appellant had given the names of the same  two  creditors  but
    they were phonetically different sounding.  That may or may well not be
    the case.  What is clear, however, is that in the  refusal  letter  (at
    paragraph 27), the Appellant is shown as having given the names of  his
    creditors as "Faslu Rahman Faslu" and "Abdul Masabay" (AIR Q20-21).  In
    his screening interview, the names that  the  Appellant  gives  are  "A
    Rahman Fajlu" and "Abdul Musabbir" (SCR Q.4.1).  On this basis, it  was
    open to the judge to conclude that the first  creditor  mentioned  here
    was not phonetically different but was a different  person  altogether.
    In his asylum interview, the Appellant refers to  "Faslu"  but  in  his
    screening interview the Appellant refers to "Fajlu".  Even if one makes
    an allowance for the difference of one letter in this  name,  the  full
    name is still not the same as recited by the  Appellant  in  these  two
    interviews.

19. Second, the judge does give adequate reasons for the  decision.   These
    reasons amount to at least four in paragraphs 27  to  28.   First,  the
    judge states that the Appellant has not made an attempt  to  repay  his
    debts from his earnings in the UK even though he  admits  he  has  been
    employed as a chef in a restaurant (paragraph 27).  This was  a  matter
    that was already referred to in the refusal letter.  Second, the  judge
    observes that the Appellant has close family members who could  support
    him and assist him in clearing his debt.  Third, the judge states  that
    the Appellant has given different names for his creditors at  different
    times, and this cannot be a mistake of fact, given what I  have  stated
    above already.  Fourth, the judge concludes that it would be reasonable
    to have expected the Appellant to have done something  more  to  remove
    the threat by repaying some or all of the debt either by himself or  by
    the assistance of his family (paragraph 28).   Finally,  the  judge  is
    particularly entitled  to  come  to  this  conclusion  because  of  his
    observation that this conclusion that he arrives at  is  emphasised  by
    the fact that the Appellant states that his  family  in  the  UK  "will
    provide in financial assistance  to  the  Appellant's  own  family  who
    remain in Bangladesh, so it shows that there were means to  remove  the
    claimed threat of the unpaid debts" (paragraph 28).

20. I should add, that no one in the hearing below, considered the issue as
    to whether the Refugee Convention was engaged in the first place  given
    that this was a dispute between two private parties, where  the  State,
    (had the state been required to come to  the  Appellant's  assistance),
    could have provided him with necessary remedies, if he  was  threatened
    to be beaten up or injured or killed.  It is a matter that I  need  say
    no more about because it does not form the basis of the decision below.
     All I need say is that the judge was perfectly entitled to come to the
    conclusions that he did and there is no error of law in this decision.



Decision

The decision of the judge does not involve the making of an  error  of  law.
The decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th March 2019

