
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08064/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 April 2019                      |On 23 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     ST
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Dolan of Counsel instructed by ASK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 11 October  1981.   On
    10 April 2018 his application for asylum was refused by  the  Secretary
    of State and his appeal against that decision was heard by a First-tier
    Judge on 23 October 2018.

2.   Having heard oral evidence from the  appellant  and  his  brother,  and
    having considered medical and expert evidence in a  lengthy  (27  page)
    decision,  the  judge  rejected  the  appellant's  claim   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human  rights  grounds  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The application for permission to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was rejected.  Renewed grounds of appeal were  settled  by  Mr
    Dolan who appears before me.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  granted
    permission observing:

         "2.   In  many  ways  the   First-tier   Tribunal's   decision   is
             conspicuously careful but I have no hesitation in saying  that
             that judge's consideration of the medical evidence is arguably
             wrong.

         3.   However it is less clear to me how the alleged errors may have
             impacted on the decision which is based on a broad  evaluation
             of the evidence as a whole.

         4.   The consideration of the  expert  evidence  is  also  arguably
             flawed.  The judge's dissatisfaction with the  instruction  to
             the expert arguably distracted wrongly from its worth".

    Permission was granted on each ground of appeal.  On 25 March 2019  the
    respondent filed a response.  It was argued that the  judge  had  fully
    considered the evidence.  In relation to the medical evidence the judge
    had dealt with it in full and given clear reasons why it did not assist
    the appellant to the extent claimed.  In relation to the expert  report
    the judge had made clear points about the  instructions  given  by  the
    solicitors.  The expert had not been asked explicitly to deal with  the
    fact that the appellant's core claim had  already  been  rejected.   In
    addition, the judge found discrepancies between the appellant's account
    and the account of his brother.  His conclusions  as  to  the  risk  on
    return were open to him.

3.   Counsel submitted there was a glaring  error  in  connection  with  the
    judge's assessment of the medical evidence.  Two doctors had  diagnosed
    post-traumatic stress disorder  about  which  the  judge  had  made  no
    findings.  He had accepted that the appellant suffered from anxiety and
    depression but did not deal with the issue of PTSD.  He had  failed  to
    apply the vulnerable witness guidance.

4.   In response to the point made by Upper Tribunal Judge  Perkins  it  was
    submitted that the errors were capable of affecting the  determination.



5.   The vulnerable witness guidance should be applied as was made clear  by
    the Court of Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of  State  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1123 as submitted in paragraph 12 of the  renewed  grounds  of
    appeal.  There had been a previous decision by Judge Powell  but  Judge
    Powell did not have the benefit of medical evidence.  The determination
    should not have been  treated  as  binding.   The  judge  had  fettered
    himself in his task  by  not  starting  afresh  having  regard  to  the
    appellant's vulnerability.  The country expert, Mr  Smith,  had  raised
    concerns about how the appellant would present to the security services
    on return given his severe mental  health  and  vulnerabilities.   This
    would attract attention.

6.   The question of the appellant's vulnerability had  been  backed  up  by
    two medical experts.

7.   The doctors who had prepared the medical reports  had  been  criticised
    for not having regard to the previous  determination  but  the  refusal
    letters had been before them and these had included an  edited  version
    of the earlier decision.  Counsel acknowledged that matters could  have
    been made clearer in the instructions given.  The judge had not been in
    error in bearing in mind the instructions when considering  the  weight
    to be given but the experts were aware of their duties.   Both  experts
    considered there would be a high risk  of  suicide  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.   Despite  this  being  an  extensive   determination   it   was
    unfortunately unsafe.  Dr Smith was an accepted expert  and  had  given
    evidence in country guidance cases.

8.   Mr Tarlow relied on the respondent's response and  submitted  that  the
    grounds  were  simply  a  disagreement  with  the  First-tier   Judge's
    assessment and reasons.  It had been open  to  him  to  find  that  the
    psychiatric report should be given less weight and the same applied  to
    the expert report from Dr Smith.  The decision was adequately  reasoned
    and not perverse and the  determination  should  stand.   In  response,
    Counsel drew attention to paragraph 65 of the decision where the  judge
    had found that the level of medication prescribed by the appellant's GP
    was consistent with the appellant having anxiety  and  depression  "but
    not with the severity  of  the  condition  described  by  Dr  Goldwyn".
    However, Dr Goldwyn had stated in paragraph 38 of the report  that  the
    prescription  "has  NICE  guidance   for   PTSD,   and   is   also   an
    antidepressant".   There  had  been  a  total  failure  to  assess  the
    appellant's PTSD which rendered the appellant vulnerable.  If an  error
    was found the appeal should be remitted for rehearing.

9.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before  me  and  the  submissions
    that have been made.   This  is  a  difficult  case  because  as  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins observed in many  ways  the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision was conspicuously careful.  Further, his  comments  about  the
    instructions to the various experts  were  to  a  degree  justified  as
    Counsel accepts.  On the other hand the previous judge's  decision  was
    included in the instructions to the country expert Dr Smith.   The  way
    in which it is put by Judge Perkins - "the judge's dissatisfaction with
    the instruction to the expert  arguably  distracted  wrongly  from  its
    worth" appears in my view to summarise the position aptly.

10.  It is less clear that the judge did not  deal  with  the  case  on  the
    basis that the appellant was vulnerable.  For example, in paragraph  20
    he refers to discussion before the evidence was heard about how best

         "to  enable  the  appellant  to  give  his  evidence,   given   the
         vulnerabilities outlined in the psychiatric report.  It was  agreed
         that questions should be put simply and directly.  The need  for  a
         non-confrontational approach was  also  agreed.   Further,  it  was
         agreed that, if he needed a break  at  any  stage,  that  would  be
         allowed".

    While the judge did not make express reference to the  guidance  it  is
    implicit that he had it in mind.

11.  In my view the error  in  this  case  is  that  the  judge  was  unduly
    dismissive of the expert material being deflected and preoccupied  with
    the instructions given to the experts rather than the content of  their
    reports. For their part, both doctors considered whether the  appellant
    was feigning symptoms as is said in paragraph 8 of the renewed  grounds
    of appeal and the country expert was concerned with the plausibility of
    the appellant's account rather than its credibility  (paragraph  18  of
    the grounds.)  The judge, as Counsel submits, did not make an  explicit
    finding about the appellant suffering from PTSD and  Counsel  raises  a
    question  mark  about  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  issue  of  the
    appellant's GP prescription.

12.  If the judge had accepted the medical evidence, then at the very  least
    his conclusions as to the risk on return  and  in  particular  how  the
    appellant would have behaved would have been  subject  to  review.   In
    addition, his  whole  approach  to  the  question  of  the  appellant's
    credibility would have had to be refocused.  This is  in  my  view  the
    answer to the question posed  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  when
    granting permission.  The errors in the judge's approach were  material
    in the circumstances of this case.

13.  For the reasons I have given I find that the  determination  is  flawed
    by a material error of law.  I agree with Counsel that given the extent
    of fact-finding required the only appropriate course is for the case to
    be remitted for a fresh hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
    different judge.

14.  The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.



Anonymity Direction

15.  It is appropriate that the anonymity  direction  in  this  case  should
    continue.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 23 April 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
