
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08216/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 22 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     RE
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Jamaica.  By  a  decision  which  I
    promulgated on 25 February 2019, I found that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law such that its  decision  fell  to  be  set  aside.  My
    reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, RE, is a male citizen of Jamaica who  was  born
         on [~] 1975.  On 26 November  2015  at  Bristol  Crown  Court,  the
         appellant was convicted of supplying a controlled drug class A  and
         sentenced  to  two  years'  imprisonment.    The   appellant   made
         submissions on 7 September 2016 in respect of Articles 2, 3  and  8
         of the ECHR and asylum.  By a decision dated 25 November 2016,  the
         Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's  application.   The
         appellant appealed on asylum and human rights grounds to the First-
         tier Tribunal (Judge G Andrews) which, in a decision promulgated on
         27 June 2018 dismissed the appeal on asylum and Articles  2/3  ECHR
         grounds and refused humanitarian protection but allowed the  appeal
         on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,
         with permission, in respect of the decision to allow the appeal  on
         Article 8 ECHR grounds.  There is no cross  appeal  in  respect  of
         asylum or Articles 2/3 ECHR by the appellant.   Accordingly,  those
         matters will not be revisited by the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   There are four grounds of appeal.

         Ground 1: Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
         2002

         3.   I shall deal with those grounds with which  the  Tribunal  may
         dispose most readily first.  Judge Andrews found that the appellant
         had rebutted the presumption in respect of  Section  72(2)  of  the
         2002 Act.  The judge found [40] that the appellant was not a danger
         to  the  community.   I  note  that  Judge  Chohan,   who   granted
         permission, purported to refuse permission on this ground.  But, in
         the light of Safi  and  others  (permission  to  appeal  decisions)
         [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC) Judge Chohan's failure to record the  "split"
         grant of permission in the appropriate part of the  grant  document
         means that I shall consider all grounds of appeal.  I notified  the
         representatives of this decision at the hearing.

         4.   Having said that, the fact that the judge  has  dismissed  the
         asylum appeal and there is no appeal from the appellant in  respect
         of that decision renders the Section 72 argument  academic.   Given
         the appellant has lost his asylum appeal and  is  not  entitled  to
         humanitarian protection (see paragraph 339D of HC 395)  it  matters
         not whether the appellant is excluded or otherwise  from  obtaining
         refugee protection.   I  would  note,  however,  that  the  judge's
         findings on Section 72 are particularly detailed and,  having  read
         the  grounds  carefully,  I  find  that  these  are  no  more  than
         disagreement with findings which were available to the judge.

         Article 8: "Unduly Harsh"

         5.   The remaining grounds of appeal concern the  judge's  analysis
         of the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The parties  were  agreed
         that the correct test is that set out in Section 117C(5):

         Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         6.   Judge Andrews found that it was not only unduly harsh for  the
         family to relocate to Jamaica but also  that  it  would  be  unduly
         harsh on the child C if he were to be separated from the appellant.



         7.   There are three children of the appellant and CE, his  partner
         but the judge has focused on C because she considered his  case  to
         be "the clearest."  [81].  The judge recognised that "C is  only  5
         years old".  C has been diagnosed with complex social communication
         difficulties, expressive and receptive language difficulties and is
         delayed in his emotional development.  The judge noted at [47] that



             "In most areas of learning he was working at an age band  very
             much lower than his actual age.  He receives  support  from  a
             paediatrician and from a speech and language  therapist.   The
             appellant is engaged in working with school staff and  medical
             professionals to help C."

         8.   The judge found that "moving to Jamaica would involve removing
         C from his school and separating him from his professional  support
         he currently receives" [82].  The judge concluded that "taking  all
         this into account, I find that moving to Jamaica would [be]  likely
         to have a negative impact on C."

         9.   The question is not whether the removal of the  entire  family
         to Jamaica would have a  negative  impact  on  C  but  whether  the
         consequence for him and the other children would be  unduly  harsh.
         The Secretary of State submits that the judge's findings fall short
         of a "unduly harsh threshold".

         10.  I disagree with the submission that the judge has not made  "a
         rounded assessment of all the factors";  the  judge's  decision  is
         especially detailed.  However, the fact remains that the judge  has
         not considered what help, if any, would be available  for  C  which
         might replicate the care that he currently receives in  the  United
         Kingdom.  The judge appears to  have  assumed  (perhaps  correctly)
         that the care would not be at the same level  but  there  does  not
         appear to have been any evidence in  respect  of  that  issue.   In
         addition, the family would be together and the problems  which  the
         judge identifies with C being separated from  the  appellant  would
         not be present.

         11.   As  regards  separating  C  from  the  appellant  by  way  of
         deportation, the judge's analysis is  characteristically  detailed.
         The judge was aware that CE would  remain  with  the  children  and
         would be able to look after C.  However,  she  would  have  limited
         support from  her  other  family  members  in  the  United  Kingdom
         [83(ii)].  The judge concluded that  "the  appellant's  deportation
         would be likely to  result  in  a  significant  diminution  in  the
         support that C  receives."   The  respondent  does  not  appear  to
         challenge  the  judge's  finding  that  the   appellant   plays   a
         significant part in day-to-day care for C and the  other  children.
         I am aware also that CE has a job and that her ability to  maintain
         employment and income for  the  family  and  also  look  after  the
         children and care in particular for C and his special  requirements
         may be put in doubt by the removal of the appellant.  Further,  the
         judge whilst noting C's youth (5 years old) and observing that  the
         appellant had been in  custody  for  part  of  C's  life  found  at
         [83(iv)] that the appellant has "been in the UK ever  since  C  was
         born."  In assessing the role which  the  appellant  plays  in  C's
         life, the Tribunal should not simply take note of the fact that for
         part of that period the appellant has been  in  prison.   The  fact
         that he has been in prison indicates that there has been  a  period
         when the conditions which will exist if the appellant  is  deported
         have already been "tested" on the family.  While  C's  considerable
         problems are documented, the evidence as  to  how  C  responded  to
         being separated from the appellant  whilst  the  appellant  was  in
         prison is  insubstantial.   The  judge  records  that  "C's  school
         suggests that C fared badly when the appellant was in  prison"  but
         it is not clear exactly what is meant by that statement.

         12.  There is a further difficulty, which is  acknowledged  by  the
         judge, that the main evidence in respect of C and how he is  likely
         to react to the deportation of the appellant is given by one of C's
         teachers.  That teacher found that it would be "hugely  detrimental
         effect on the whole family - especially  C"  if  the  appellant  is
         deported.  Quite rightly, the judge  treated  that  last  statement
         "with some caution since it is not clear that the teacher  has  the
         expertise to make this assessment."  However, the judge went on  to
         say "I also consider [the teacher's] letter to be  consistent  with
         the picture painted by CE's evidence."

         13.  I am concerned in this  appeal  that  the  high  threshold  of
         "undue harshness" has not been crossed by the  evidence  which  was
         before the Tribunal.  Judge Andrews is  to  be  commended  for  the
         detail  of  her  exhaustive  analysis.   I  acknowledge  also   the
         difficulty in  determining,  on  any  set  of  facts,  whether  the
         threshold has been crossed.  One of the difficulties in  this  case
         is that, irrespective of whether the appellant is deported, C  will
         continue to have problems.  I am not satisfied on my reading of the
         decision that the judge has explained  why  the  worsening  of  C's
         problems as a result of the appellant's deportation  will  have  an
         effect on C which is unduly harsh.  Some disruption of a child with
         C's problems is inevitable if a parent is separated from the child.
          C's problems may magnify the effect of separation  but  I  am  not
         satisfied, in this instance, that the evidence shows any more  than
         that the pre-existing and very real problems of a little  boy  will
         not be lessened as a result of being separated from his father.   I
         am also, as I  have  stated  above,  troubled  by  the  absence  of
         evidence regarding C's circumstances and those of the family  as  a
         whole during the period when the appellant was in prison.   I  have
         recorded above that evidence as to how the family coped or did  not
         cope during that period may assist in indicating the likely  effect
         of a future separation.

         14.  It is with some reluctance, therefore, that I  set  aside  the
         First-tier Judge's decision which in many  respects  represents  an
         exemplar of thorough, detailed analysis and clear expression.   The
         judge's  findings  as  regards  asylum,  Articles  2,  3  ECHR  and
         humanitarian protection are preserved and will not be revisited.  I
         am not satisfied that the Upper Tribunal can  remake  the  decision
         now on the basis of the existing evidence.  I am also bound to  say
         that the quality of representation which the appellant received  at
         the initial was problematic and I am not satisfied  that  his  case
         was advanced as  thoroughly  as  it  deserved  to  be.   For  these
         reasons, the appeal will remain  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the
         decision will be remade following a resumed hearing  before  me  at
         Cardiff or Newport.

         Notice of Decision

         15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 27 June 2018 is set aside.  The judge's findings in  respect  of
         asylum, Articles 2  and/3  ECHR  and  humanitarian  protection  are
         preserved.  The only issue remaining to be decided is in respect of
         Article 8 ECHR.   The  Upper  Tribunal  will  remake  the  decision
         following a resumed hearing before Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane  at
         Cardiff/Newport on a date to be fixed."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Cardiff  on  8  August  2019,  the  appellant
    attended and gave evidence  in  English.  Surprisingly,  the  appellant
    solicitors had, in the period since the initial hearing, taken no steps
    all to update any of the evidence. There was no new  witness  statement
    for the appellant or his partner nor was there  any  medical  or  other
    expert evidence at all relating to the children, C and K,  even  though
    the appellant claims  that  C  continues  to  suffer  from  significant
    problems relating to his development and speech. I  have  expressed  my
    concern with the standard of representation which  this  appellant  has
    hitherto received in my error of law decision [14].

 3. The appellant was asked in cross-examination about  evidence  which  he
    had given the First-tier Tribunal (see First-tier Tribunal decision  at
    18(i)). He said that he had not known his mother but had  been  brought
    up by another woman in Jamaica who had recently died. He could not  say
    when exactly she had died. He had not been in touch with  her,  in  any
    event, in recent times. He was also unable to explain why it  had  been
    claimed at his criminal trial that he had dealt in drugs  in  order  to
    pay for an oxygen cylinder for his mother. He was also asked about  the
    description of his occupation on the birth certificate of  one  of  his
    children and on which he is described as a 'builder.'  He  denied  that
    had worked as a builder but the appellant could  not  explain  why  the
    entry had been made on the birth  certificate.  The  certificate  shows
    that the appellant himself had applied for the registration.

 4. The appellant said that C is at present  in  mainstream  education  but
    arrangements have been made for him to attend a special school as  from
    September 2019. The appellant  could  not  explain  why  there  was  no
    updating school or social worker report or evidence  from  any  medical
    practitioner regarding C's problems  with  development,  any  treatment
    proposed and probable prognosis.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. Although there is no new evidence, I had the documentary evidence which
    had been before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  evidence  includes  a
    letter from a teacher of C which notes that C's parents 'work together'
    to support him and  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would  have  a
    'hugely detrimental effect on the whole  family  -  especially  C.'  In
    common with the First-tier Tribunal judge, I treat this last  statement
    with some caution given that it is unclear  why  the  teacher  believes
    that she possesses the expertise to make such an  assessment.  In  oral
    evidence, the appellant himself was singularly unhelpful  in  providing
    any detailed up-to-date evidence of C's condition. He said no more than
    that the child struggles to express himself in speech and that he  will
    attend a special school later  this  year.  No  evidence  whatever  was
    provided  which  might  illuminate  the  possible  effect   which   the
    deportation of the appellant may have upon C or other  members  of  the
    family. I have considered the evidence which is detailed by the  First-
    tier Tribunal in  its  decision  at  [25-30].  However,  much  of  that
    evidence is now 2 years old and I am  reminded  that  the  Tribunal  is
    dealing with young children whose capabilities and needs are likely  to
    alter significantly over such a period of time. I am prepared to accept
    that the children C and  K  are  likely  to  continue  to  suffer  from
    emotional and behavioural difficulties which may or may not have  their
    origins in  the  appellant's  offending  and  subsequent  imprisonment.
    Beyond that, there is no evidence at all upon which I  might  base  any
    detailed  assessment  of  the  likely  impact  of  deportation  on  the
    children. I am reminded that this appeal  must  be  determined  on  the
    basis of the evidence and not upon speculation by  the  appellant,  his
    representatives or, indeed, the Tribunal as to the possible  effect  of
    separation upon children who clearly are to some extent (although it is
    completely unclear to what extent) vulnerable.

 7. The appellant falls to be considered under section  117C  of  the  2002
    Act:

         Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign
         criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

 8. For the effects of deportation on a partner  or  upon  children  to  be
    accurately described as 'unduly harsh,' evidence must be adduced  which
    is capable of showing that this high  threshold  has  been  crossed.  A
    degree of harshness is to be expected in any case of separation  so  it
    is important for the Tribunal to examine how, in  any  part  case,  the
    effects may extend beyond 'due' harshness (see KO (Nigeria)  2018  UKSC
    53). In the present  case,  I  accept  that  the  appellant's  children
    experience difficulties in development (in the case of C) and emotional
    and behavioural control (in the case of K). I accept that C will  begin
    attending a special school from  September  2019  but  it  is  entirely
    unclear what kind of special school he will attend or how  that  school
    may seek to address his problems with communication. The  child  K  was
    not referred to at all by the appellant at  the  resumed  hearing.  The
    appellant's partner CE did not attend to give oral evidence nor did she
    submit any fresh witness statement. Given that such evidence as we have
    from school suggests that CE and the  appellant  jointly  shoulder  the
    burden of caring for children, the fact that there was no evidence from
    the source is particularly surprising.

 9. I repeat that I can only determine this appeal and  the  basis  of  the
    evidence actually adduced. It is not for the Tribunal to 'fill  in  the
    gaps' in the evidence or to speculate about  the  possible  effects  of
    deportation when no evidence exists to indicate those  likely  effects.
    That is the case even  where  that  Tribunal  accepts  that  there  are
    children involved in an appeal who may be struggling in terms of  their
    development and behaviour. I find that  there  is  simply  no  evidence
    sufficient to show that the effects of deportation upon any  member  of
    the appellant's family are likely to be so severe  as  to  merit  being
    described as unduly harsh. I have no evidence to  show  the  extent  to
    which separation from the appellant  will  make  the  problems  of  the
    children worse; the children have experienced problems even when  under
    the daily care of the appellant and his partner.  In  circumstances,  I
    find that the appellant has failed to show that he should  fall  within
    the provisions of Exception 2 of section 117C. He has  failed  to  show
    that the  effects  upon  the  children  or  upon  the  partner  of  his
    deportation are likely to be unduly harsh. In  the  circumstances,  the
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Upper Tribunal has remade the decision. The appellant's  appeal  against
the decision of the Secretary of State dated 25 November 2016 is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 15 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




