
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08504/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28th March 2018                       |On 8th May 2018                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr A S
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr V Kulendran (Legal representative)


                             RE MAKING DECISION

1.   The appellant in this matter is the Secretary of State. I  shall  refer
    to my previous decision and reasons (EOL decision) promulgated on  23rd
    February 2018 in which I found an error of law in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which I set aside.   That  decision  sets  out  the
    background facts, the procedural history, and the  relevant  issues  in
    this matter which I do not repeat herein.  In short  the  Claimant  has
    lived in the UK for 17 years.  He does not meet the Rules.   He  argues
    that because of mistakes by the SSHD he failed  to  succeed  under  the
    legacy programme, and that factor led to  unfairness  and  delay  which
    were matters that  ought  to  have  been  considered  by  the  SSHD  in
    assessing proportionality under Article 8.

2.   Having found an error in law I directed that the matter be  reheard  by
    way of submissions on the sole issue of Article 8 outside of the  Rules
    having regard to all relevant matters under private life including  any
    past unfairness and having regard to  the  public  interest  and  under
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  &  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended).  The preserved facts are as follows:

           . The chronology as set out above at paras 2-12 EOL decision.

           .  The  Claimant's  immigration  history  including  length   of
             residence of 17 years, use of false  identity  for  entry  and
             claim for asylum, lawful re entry and an unsupported claim for
             asylum and working without permission .

           . The Claimant did not abscond between 2002 and 2010 but  it  is
             uncertain as to what if any steps were taken by his solicitors
             to contact the SSHD from 2002 to 2010 [61-63].

           . There is no evidence to support that the Claimant made a human
             rights claim in June 2001 [62].   He  asked  for  this  to  be
             considered on 19.6.2010. It was conceded by the SSHD  that  if
             the Claimant had made a HR  application  he  came  within  the
             criteria to be considered under the legacy  programme  created
             on 5.3.2007 [43].

           . The SSHD decided on  17.11.2011  that  the  Claimant  was  not
             entitled to be granted leave under the  Legacy  programme  and
             having regard  to  para  395  and  Chapter  53  [57-58].  This
             decision was maintained on 26.7.2013, 3.2.2015 and 1.8.2016.

           .  The  SSHD  promptly   dealt   with   all   applications   and
             representations made by the Claimant since 2010 [63].

           . The Claimant has a wife and children in India with whom he has
             an on going relationship.



Submissions

3.    At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Kulendran  relied  on  his   written
    submissions.  He  applied  to  admit  letters  from  various  firms  of
    solicitors (produced in the submissions  folder)  as  evidence  of  the
    Claimant's attempts to regularise his stay (whilst  accepting  that  he
    did not make contact directly with the SSHD). I  agreed  to  admit  the
    further  evidence  under  Rule  15(2)  UT  Procedure  Rules  2008.   Mr
    Kulendran further relied on SSHD v SAID & others [2018] EWCA Civ 627 at
    paragraph 153 (a copy of  which  was  forwarded  to  me  following  the
    hearing), as to the relevance of delay in an Article 8  assessment.  He
    relied on the length of residence accumulated by  the  appellant  under
    Article 8 and the delay and unfairness.

4.   In response Mr Bramble emphasised that the resultant delay had in  fact
    enabled the Claimant to remain in the  UK  which  was  to  his  benefit
    rather than detriment.  There was no evidence of the nature and  extent
    of any private life built up by the Claimant over the years. The  focus
    of the submissions was simply the length of residence  and  unfairness.
    The SSHD had to consider the public interest under section 117B of  the
    2002 Act. The Claimant had no lawful leave and  any  private  life  was
    built up whilst in  a  precarious  situation.  The  Claimant  had  been
    working without permission.  The Claimant had a wife  and  children  in
    India.  In all the circumstances the  public  interest  outweighed  the
    private life of the Claimant.



Discussion and conclusion

5.    As stated above I rely on my EOL decision which set  out  the  factual
    background and my analysis of the legal issues leading to my conclusion
    that the FtT erred in law  in  allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules. I accept that the period of residence is a
    compelling factor capable of justifying consideration  outside  of  the
    Rules.

6.    I heard the submissions made by both representatives  and  have  taken
    into account the Claimant's detailed written submissions and  case  law
    cited together with the decision of  Said.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Claimant has established a private life in the  UK  by  reason  of  the
    length of residence of 16 years. I find that the Claimant did  instruct
    two firms of solicitors during 2002 and in 2010/2011 in an endeavour to
    regularise his stay and to that extent  I  find  that  there  was  some
    attempt to regularise his stay and that  he  had  not  absconded.   The
    focus of the Claimant's case was long residence, delay and  unfairness.
    There was and is no evidence of any substance adduced  with  regard  to
    the nature and extent of his private life in  the  UK  at  the  various
    hearings before the FtT.  I have been provided with a letter of support
    from the President of the Gravesend Gurdwara which confirmed  that  the
    Claimant is honest, hardworking and has contributed to the  local  Sikh
    community, which I accept. There is no issue as to family life;  it  is
    accepted that the Claimant has a wife and children in India  with  whom
    he remains in contact and has an on going relationship.

7.   There is no merit in the argument that delay has led to  unfairness  to
    the Claimant.  I entirely accept Mr Bramble's submission that any delay
    has been to the benefit of the Claimant in that he has remained in  the
    UK for longer than he would otherwise have been able to.  In  terms  of
    any unfairness caused to the Claimant I find  that  whilst  there  were
    mistakes by the SSHD which led to unfairness, this does not  amount  to
    an historic injustice as there was no illegality established.  I  refer
    to and rely on the EOL decision on these issues at [26-34]. I find that
    the SSHD has considered and reconsidered all  aspects  pursued  by  the
    Claimant over the years  and  properly  given  effect  to  the  various
    decisions made by the first tier Tribunals.  It is  accepted  that  the
    Claimant was eligible to be considered under the Legacy Programme,  but
    the Claimant did not have  any  legitimate  expectation  of  succeeding
    under the Legacy Programme. I am satisfied that the SSHD  has  properly
    considered the Claimant's application under the  Legacy  programme  and
    rejected the same.  I have preserved  the  findings  of  fact  made  in
    respect of these matters and which are set out above, and  on  which  I
    rely.  The written submissions are an attempt to have those matters  re
    litigated, which I do not propose to do and cannot be justified.

8.  There is no evidence  to  show  any  interference  with  the  Claimant's
    private life other than there will be  some  readjustment  required  on
    return to India after such a long absence.  However, the Claimant  will
    be able to continue to practise his faith and to attend the Gurdwara in
    India.  In addition the Claimant will have support both practically and
    emotionally from his family in India to re establish a private life  in
    India. There is no evidence of any aspect  of  the  Claimant's  private
    life that cannot re replicated in India.  The Claimant's  private  life
    was established when his  immigration  status  was  precarious  and  he
    entered the UK using a false name to make  a  claim  for  asylum.   The
    Claimant has also worked in the  UK  without  permission.   I  find  no
    interference  with  the  private  life  based  on  delay  or   historic
    injustice. Any interference is  in  accordance  with  the  Law  as  the
    decision was made to refuse the Claimant's human rights application.  I
    entirely reject any argument that there was an unlawful  decision  made
    and this was accepted by the most recent FtT; there has been  no  abuse
    of process by the SSHD. My primary conclusion is that there will be  no
    interference with the Claimant's private life, but if I am wrong then I
    consider proportionality.

9.  I have regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act (as amended). I find  that
    the appellant does not speak English (section 117B(2).  There was  some
    evidence that he was supported financially by his cousin,  although  he
    was working without permission and so it cannot be  said  that  he  was
    financially independent (section 117B(3)). I acknowledge that there  is
    no evidence of reliance of State funds, yet there is no evidence of any
    payment of tax or National Insurance.   The Claimant has used deception
    in the past having entered using a false identity and made  a  spurious
    claim for asylum.  There is nothing qualitatively in his  private  life
    that carries any weight in favour of the Claimant's  private  interests
    other than the length of his residence. The Claimant has  not  met  the
    immigration Rules based  on  his  long  residence  and  the  rules  are
    designed to reflect where  the  public  interest  lies.   The  Claimant
    failed to meet the rules in terms of the length of residence, in  terms
    of integration in the UK and his circumstances in  India.    As  stated
    above there is some evidence of the Claimant having integrated  in  the
    Sikh community but there is nothing to  show  any  particular  ties  or
    connection that cannot be replicated in India.  There was  no  evidence
    of any close ties in the UK. The Claimant's own family  are  living  in
    India which is  of  significance  in  the  proportionality  assessment.
    Little weight is given to his private life as it was  established  when
    his immigration  status  was  precarious  (section  117B(5)).   Section
    117B(6) does not apply.

10.  Having considered all of the issues under Article  8  I  conclude  that
    the maintenance of immigration control  is  public  interest  and  that
    there is no evidence to satisfy me that the private  interests  of  the
    appellant outweigh the public interest.



Decision

11.  The decision that I remake is to dismiss the Claimant's appeal.

                               Signed                     Date 16.4.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



ANONYMITY ORDER

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                               NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                     Date 16.4.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


