
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08052/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17th April 2018                      |On 10 May 2018                      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                  MISS D A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Thomas instructed by Freemans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Saudi Arabia, appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 1st  August
    2017 to refuse her application for asylum.  First-tier Tribunal Judge P
    J S White dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated on
    30th November 2017.  The Appellant now appeals  against  that  decision
    with permission  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  on  21st
    February 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant was issued  with  a
    multi-visit visa on 7th April 2015 valid for two years.  She says  that
    she travelled to Bahrain and then to the UK, Dubai  and  Kuwait  before
    returning to the United Kingdom on 30th June 2016.  She claimed  asylum
    on 24th January 2017.  The basis of her claim  is  that  she  lived  in
    Saudi Arabia with her mother and brother and that her parents  divorced
    when she was 2 and thereafter her father mainly lived  in  Kuwait  and,
    although she had nothing to do with him, he remained her guardian.  She
    says that she studied for a time in Jordan accompanied by her  brother.
    She visited the UK a number of times accompanied by  her  mother.   She
    says that  in  2014/15  four  men  approached  her  father  asking  for
    permission to marry but each time he refused.   As  she  wanted  to  be
    married she brought a case against him in the  court  in  her  mother's
    name.  She claims that the court case was thrown out by the  judge  who
    she believes had been pressurised  by  her  father  who  is  a  wealthy
    businessman.  She claims that her father contacted her mother and  then
    her brother making threats to kill the Appellant because she  had  sued
    him and shamed the family. She claims that she  left  Saudi  Arabia  in
    November  2015  travelling  hidden  in  a  car  without  her   father's
    permission.

 3. The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  application.  The  Appellant's
    identity and nationality were accepted and it was accepted  that  women
    in Saudi Arabia were a particular social group.  However the  Secretary
    of State did not accept any other element of the Appellant's claim.

 4. The judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant and made  findings  at
    paragraphs 17 to 33 of the decision.  The judge stated at paragraph  17
    that it is not in dispute that women in Saudi Arabia are subject  to  a
    restrictive guardianship system under which they require permission  of
    a male guardian to do many things  including  travelling  or  marrying.
    The judge considered the Appellant's claimed situation and  found  that
    it is probable that her  father  does  indeed  remain  the  Appellant's
    guardian [18].  The  judge  considered  a  number  of  court  documents
    produced by the Appellant from Saudi Arabia and expressed  concerns  in
    relation to these documents including the fact that they appeared to be
    addressed to the General Court rather than  the  Family  Court  who  it
    appeared would have jurisdiction in relation to  family  matters  [21].
    The judge also expressed concerns in relation  to  the  nature  of  the
    court proceedings said to have  been  brought  noting  that  the  court
    papers referred to proceedings in relation to the Appellant's  brothers
    and find that it is "rather unclear what was in fact going on in  these
    proceedings"[22].   The  judge  also  considered  it  unclear  why  the
    father's hostility should be directed  solely  at  his  daughter.   The
    judge  expressed  surprise  that  some  details  in  relation  to   the
    Appellant's father's connections with the Saudi Royal  family  had  not
    been mentioned until the Appellant gave oral evidence [24].  The  judge
    went on to  say  "I  do  not  find  this  account  of  events  entirely
    consistent or plausible" and went on to consider a  number  of  factors
    about the fact that it was said that the Appellant's was said  to  have
    brought the case [26].  The judge raised other issues  in  relation  to
    the plausibility of the Appellant's claim.  The judge  considered  that
    the delay in the Appellant claiming asylum was not a factor to which he
    attached too much  weight  [30].   The  judge  reached  conclusions  at
    paragraph 31 saying

         "...the overall effect is that I am not satisfied, even to the  low
         standard required, that the Appellant has indeed been threatened by
         her father, or is in fear of him, or that she is at  real  risk  of
         being killed on return.  Nor am I satisfied that she  has  in  fact
         brought proceedings against him as claimed.  She may well  wish  to
         escape from the restrictions faced by women  in  Saudi  Arabia  but
         that does not mean that she is at risk of persecution".

 5. It is contended in the grounds as amplified by Ms Thomas at the hearing
    that the crux of the complaint in this case is that the  judge  got  so
    far with his  findings  but  did  not  go  onto  consider  whether  the
    Appellant is at risk of persecution on the basis of the facts as found.
     She submitted that the crux of the Appellant's case is that her father
    had rejected four marriage proposals but there is  no  finding  by  the
    judge as to this key issue. She accepted that the judge had,  at  least
    in part, made adverse findings in relation to the court case.   However
    she contended that it was incumbent on the judge  to  consider  whether
    the fact that four marriage proposals had been turned down amounted  to
    persecution in light of the Appellant's  evidence  and  the  background
    information.  She highlighted Article 9 of the Qualification  Directive
    and submitted that the right to marry is a fundamental right and it  is
    a strong right. Reliance was placed on R (Baiai) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 53 in the submission that  marriage
    is  a  fundamental  right  and  that  national  laws   must   be   non-
    discriminatory  and  consistent  with  the  fundamental  principles  of
    dignity and freedom which underlie the whole Convention.  She submitted
    that in circumstances where the  Appellant's  father  has  consistently
    refused to grant his daughter permission to marry she would be  exposed
    to a real risk of a severe violation of her basic human rights and that
    in turn would amount to persecution.  She submitted that the judge  had
    failed to make proper findings in relation  to  the  Appellant's  claim
    that her father had refused to grant her permission to marry and  that,
    had the judge properly engaged with this issue, then the  wider  issues
    of discrimination amounting to persecution were in play.  She contended
    that it is clear from the findings in paragraphs 22, 23 and 26 that the
    judge appeared to accept that court proceedings had been taken but from
    the conclusion at paragraph 31 it indicated  that  the  judge  was  not
    satisfied that they were brought by  the  Appellant.   However  in  her
    contention it is clear from the submissions and the  case  put  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that the case was brought by her mother.

 6. In his submissions Mr Duffy accepted that there were no findings in the
    decision as to what the Appellant's current situation is and what would
    happen to her upon her return to Saudi Arabia.  He accepted that  there
    was a lacuna in the findings as to whether the court case was taken and
    who had taken it. He accepted that further consideration of that  issue
    is required.

 7. I have taken into account Mr Duffy's concession. In my  view  paragraph
    31 of the decision is unclear.  It is unclear whether or not the  judge
    accepted that the Appellant's mother brought court proceedings in Saudi
    Arabia as claimed in which the mother sought  some  type  of  authority
    from the court in relation to the marriage of the  Appellant.   In  the
    absence of a clear finding as to this aspect of the  Appellant's  claim
    it is not possible to evaluate whether the  Appellant  is  at  risk  of
    persecution upon return to Saudi Arabia.

 8. In these circumstances and given that this goes  to  the  crux  of  the
    Appellant's appeal I find that the failure to make  clear  findings  of
    fact as to central aspects of the Appellant's case amounts to an  error
    of law. As it is not possible to reach sound conclusions as to any risk
    faced by the Appellant in the  absence  of  such  findings  I  set  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  aside.  In  order  to  remake  the
    decision it is necessary to make full findings of fact. In light of the
    nature and extent of such fact finding I consider it  appropriate  that
    the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the matter to  be
    considered afresh.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.

I set it aside.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 3rd May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the matter has not yet been determined by the First-tier Tribunal  a  fee
award should be considered when the appeal is considered there.


Signed                              Date: 3rd May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
