
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08966/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 March 2020                     |On 20 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms G Patel, instructed by
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gould promulgated 1.11.19, dismissing her appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated  3.9.19,  to  refuse  her
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection made on 17.8.16,  made  on
    the basis of being the victim of trafficking for the purpose of  sexual
    exploitation.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane granted permission to appeal on 9.1.20,
    finding that whilst the grounds in large part amount to no more than  a
    disagreement with the findings, the  judge  "arguably  failed  to  have
    regard to a relevant consideration namely the country guidance decision
    of the Upper Tribunal in TD and AD (trafficked women)  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    092 (IAC)."

Error of Law

 3. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 4. The appellant's case was  that,  leaving  her  two  children  with  her
    parents in 2010, she lived with her sister in Tirana and obtained  work
    as a hotel cleaner. In 2012, she met [R] who offered her work  for  him
    in another city, Durres, to which she agreed without knowing  what  the
    job was. Her account is that she was forced into  prostitution  between
    January 2012 and November 2012, when the premises were  raided  by  the
    police. She returned to live in the family home  without  incident  for
    some three years between 2012 and  2015.  When  [R]  made  contact  and
    threatened her in 2015, her father arranged for her to leave Albania on
    false  Italian  ID  documentation.  Her  claim  is  that  having   been
    trafficked for the purpose of prostitution in Albania she  is  at  risk
    from the trafficker on return to Albania.

 5. The primary ground and the reason justifying the granting of permission
    is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider  the  guidance
    in TD and AD, in particular that one of the ways women  and  girls  are
    taken into trafficking is being duped by  a  false  job  offer.  It  is
    submitted that the judge failed to consider that whilst  the  appellant
    had studied at university she had thereafter only  secured  work  as  a
    cleaner in a hotel where she met her trafficker offering her  a  better
    job. However, whilst the  judge  made  no  specific  reference  to  the
    Country Guidance, a reading of the decision does not  demonstrate  that
    the error was material to the outcome of the appeal.

 6. In granting permission, Judge Keane stated, "It was incumbent upon  the
    judge to apply the proposition for which the decision stood as  country
    guidance." Reference was made to (c) of the headnote where it is stated
    that "some women are lured to leave  Albania  with  false  promises  of
    relationships or work. Others may seek  out  traffickers  in  order  to
    facilitate their departure from  Albania  and  their  establishment  in
    prostitution abroad. Although such women cannot be said  to  have  left
    Albania against their will, where they have fallen under the control of
    traffickers for the purpose of  exploitation  there  is  likely  to  be
    considerable violence within the relationships and a lack  of  freedom:
    such women are victims of trafficking."  Judge  Keane  considered  that
    whilst the judge found that the appellant had not been trafficked,  the
    Tribunal might arguably have arrived at  a  different  finding  if  the
    judge had taken  into  account  that  support  for  the  phenomenon  of
    trafficking (and correspondingly the  appellant's  case  to  have  been
    trafficked from Albania) which was intrinsic to  the  gravamen  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in TD and AD."

 7. The respondent's Rule 24 response, dated 29.1.20, submits that  instead
    of generalising about the potential risk to women in Albania,  at  [22]
    to [24] the judge "correctly utilised the individual  circumstances  of
    the appellant to find that she herself would be unlikely to  be  swayed
    by the false promises of a trafficker. The fact that some  women  might
    be so persuaded does not mean that this particular appellant would  be,
    based on her education and resourcefulness. The respondent respectfully
    submits that the case of TD  and  AD  requires  an  evaluation  of  the
    individual circumstances of each appellant, which is what the FFTJ  has
    done. The respondent therefore submits that there can be material error
    of law in a Judge failing to mention a Country Guidance  case,  if  the
    principles of that case have been followed. The respondent respectfully
    submits that the remainder of the grounds are simply disagreements with
    the well-reasoned findings of the FTTJ."

 8. The judge considered but ultimately,  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    decision, rejected her factual account of events in Albania,  including
    her claim to have been duped by [R], detained against her will,  forced
    to work as a prostitute for some 11 months, and in  fear  of  [R].  Her
    account was found incredible in the detailed considerations and reasons
    given between [22] and [33] of the  decision,  including  a  number  of
    inconsistencies. The judge also found that she would not be at risk  on
    return. It is unnecessary to highlight every finding  which  undermined
    the  credibility  of  the  claim  but   amongst   those   include   the
    inconsistency between the claim that [R] held influence with the police
    and yet the premises were raided and he arrested whilst  the  appellant
    was freed.

 9. Amongst the other rejected elements of her claim was that she was  held
    captive for 11 months without any attempt by her family to contact her.
    The grounds at [7] argue that the judge  failed  to  consider  material
    evidence in the form of the amendments  to  her  asylum  interview,  in
    which she stated that once in three weeks  she  was  allowed  a  single
    phone call to speak to her parents, supervised by  [R],  who  told  her
    what to say. However, the appellant said no such thing  in  her  asylum
    interview and the so-called amendments were not corrections to what was
    said but a post-interview attempt to revise  the  difficulties  arising
    from her account and  about  which  she  had  been  challenged.  Little
    weight,  if  any,  could  be  given  to   such   amendments.   In   the
    circumstances, there is no material error in this regard and it was not
    one of the grounds pursued by Ms Patel.

10. At [11] of the grounds it is complained of the judge that matters  were
    raised at [28] the decision that were not put to the appellant  in  the
    hearing either by cross-examination by the respondent's representative,
    or questions in clarification from the judge. It is suggested that this
    was procedurally unfair. However, all the  judge  was  highlighting  at
    [28] were the inconsistencies  between  the  claim  that  [R]  had  and
    continues to have  influence  with  the  police  and  that  the  police
    approved a raid on  the  premises  that  resulted  in  the  appellant's
    alleged release and [R]'s arrest. There was no obligation to  put  this
    matter to the appellant; it was not a new issue. If the argument in the
    grounds is right, then virtually every judge would  have  to  reconvene
    every appeal hearing to put his preliminary findings to  the  appellant
    for a response. Further, as the judge set out at [31] of the  decision,
    despite the claimed influence with the police and that her  account  to
    the police had been 'wiped', she was in her own family home  for  three
    years with no evidence that [R] or his associates were able  to  locate
    her,  all  of  which  was  inconsistent  with  his  claimed  power  and
    influence. Ms Patel pointed out that the  case  authority  referred  to
    corruption of  the  police  force  in  Albania,  being  complicit  with
    traffickers, but that was not the point being made by the judge in  the
    decision. It was the inconsistency between claimed  influence  and  the
    factual  account  elements  detailed   above   which   undermined   the
    credibility of the factual claim. No error of law is disclosed in  this
    ground.

11. Whilst TD and AD drew attention to women being duped, the  judge  found
    that the appellant was an intelligent and well-educated  woman  from  a
    wealthy family background, which the Guidance at (h)  of  the  headnote
    provides are relevant factors as to whether a trafficked woman would be
    at risk on return and whether they would be able to access  sufficiency
    of  protection  from  the  authorities  depends  on  their   individual
    circumstances including those factors set out at (h).

12. Even if the appellant had been duped into  becoming  a  prostitute  and
    effectively trafficked to a different area  of  Albania,  she  was  not
    trafficked to the UK for the purpose of sexual exploitation and it  did
    not necessarily follow that she would be at risk  on  return.  She  was
    able to live with her family in the family home, at the address she had
    provided to the police, with her children  in  the  local  school,  and
    remained undisturbed for three years. She was not in any way in hiding.
    These findings at [31] of the decision have not been challenged. As  Mr
    Tan pointed out, the judge has given a variety of reasons  for  finding
    the appellant not credible and  why  she  was  unlikely  to  have  been
    trafficked within Albania. Mr Tan emphasised that the case  authorities
    indicate there is no typical profile and that the better  the  person's
    circumstances the less likely that they have been trafficked or are  at
    risk on return for that reason. Reference was made to [158] of  AM  and
    BM (trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC), which emphasised
    that each case will turn on its own particular facts and that  relevant
    characteristics including the social status and  economic  standing  of
    the appellant's family, the  level  of  education,  and  her  state  of
    health. "We consider women from wealthier backgrounds or those who  are
    better educated would find it easier to reintegrate. Women  from  those
    grounds would, however, be far less likely  to  be  trafficked  in  the
    first place." Of course, this has to be read in the light of TD and  AD
    and the finding that women could be duped, as explained above. However,
    taking the decision as a whole, I am satisfied that  whilst  the  judge
    did not specifically consider TD and AD, it is beyond  doubt  that  the
    judge more than adequately  addressed  the  issue  as  to  whether  the
    appellant could have been duped as claimed. In reality, in the light of
    the considerations made by the judge, that part of the  case  authority
    relied on by Ms Patel  could  not  have  made  any  difference  to  the
    significant  other  adverse  credibility  assessment  factors  and  the
    outcome of the appeal. It follows that any error is not material.

13. The remaining grounds are, as the judge granting  permission  surmised,
    no more than a disagreement with the findings and an attempt to reargue
    the appeal.

Decision

14. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 13 March 2020


