
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08713/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th July 2019                    |On 06th August 2019                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    m m s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 7th September 1980.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history and  was  subject  to  a
    Notice of Refusal from the Secretary of State to applications  on  both
    February 2015 and January 2017.  The latter  constituted  a  review  of
    further submissions on the original application.  A further application
    was made and that was refused by Notice  of  Refusal  dated  27th  June
    2018.  Therein the Appellant claimed that she would  be  at  threat  of
    persecution returning to Albania as a single woman  with  children  and
    that lack of protection from  the  Albanian  authorities  and  internal
    relocation would not be an option.

 2. The subject of the present Notice of Refusal  came  before  Immigration
    Judge Khan on appeal at Harmondsworth  on  26th  October  2018.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 9th November 2018 that  application
    was refused.  Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal  and
    on 30th January 2019 Upper Tribunal Chapman remitted the matter back to
    the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing.   That  rehearing  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot sitting at Taylor House on  4th  March
    2019.  In a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  1st  May  2019  the
    Appellant's appeal was again dismissed.

 3. On 9th May 2019 renewed Grounds of Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 30th May 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bristow  granted
    permission to appeal.  At paragraph 3  of  the  grounds  of  permission
    Judge Bristow notes that there is a reference in the  decision  of  9th
    November 2018 at paragraph 17 to the decision that was  set  aside  and
    refers to  information  therein  as  to  the  implausibility  that  the
    Appellant's cousin had not provided evidence or attended  the  hearing.
    On the basis that the decision of Immigration Judge Talbot had been set
    aside and the appeal remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing Judge Bristow considered that it was  arguable  that  the
    judge in referring to the decision made an error of law  and  that  the
    error was material to the outcome of the  appeal.   Permission  on  all
    grounds was allowed.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by her  instructed  Counsel
    Mr Hawkin.  Mr Hawkin is familiar with this matter, he is the author of
    the Grounds of Appeal.  The Appellant did not personally attend  and  I
    am advised that one of her  children  is  unwell.   The  Appellant  has
    previously been granted anonymity.  No application is made to vary that
    order and the anonymity direction will remain in place.  The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Tarlow.

Submissions/Discussion

 5. Mr Hawkin submits that the matter should be remitted and that there  be
    a de novo hearing.  He submits that it was  wrong  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to consider the previous hearing and have regard  to  it
    and to use information from within it to make  an  adverse  credibility
    finding.  He submits that to  do  so  undermines  the  purpose  of  the
    direction of Upper Tribunal Chapman remitting the  matter  back  to  be
    reheard with none of the findings of fact to stand.

 6. Mr Hawkin also seeks to rely  on  his  other  Grounds  of  Appeal.   He
    submits that the finding of the judge that the Appellant's evidence was
    "lacking both in detail and corroborative evidence" is not supported by
    the Appellant's written or oral testimony and it is his contention  the
    other grounds in similar manner to the  main  thrust  of  his  argument
    reflect the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  have  been
    infected by consideration of the previous judge's decision and that  in
    the interests of fairness the decision should be set aside.

 7. In response Mr Tarlow submits that there is no error of  law  found  if
    the determination is read fully.  What the judge has done is note  that
    the Appellant's cousin did not give evidence at  the  previous  hearing
    and the reference to implausibility refers to the judge's own view that
    the witness statement from the Appellant's  cousin  for  the  basis  of
    cross-examination and evidence for the judge in Judge Talbot's view had
    been essential.  He submits that  there  was  nothing  wrong  in  Judge
    Talbot making such assertions and that the judge is saying he  did  not
    believe the credibility of the Appellant because there was no  evidence
    available from a witness who would have  been  extremely  important  to
    support it.

 8. Thereafter the judge makes  further  adverse  credibility  findings  in
    paragraphs 18 to 20 of his decision and these  are  findings  that  the
    judge he submits was entitled to make.  Overall he submits there is  no
    material error of law.

 9. In brief response Mr Hawkin submits that merely by reading the decision
    when it has been set aside with none of the findings of fact  is  wrong
    and that in this case it has led the judge down the wrong path.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. As a matter of fact and law I do not consider that it is wrong for  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to make  reference  to  a  previous  decision
    albeit if it has been set aside and remitted back to be heard de  novo.
    What may well be wrong is to base findings of  fact  on  that  decision
    when it has been stated that none of those  findings  of  fact  are  to
    stand.  That I acknowledge would seemingly constitute an error  of  law
    unless there had been fresh evidence of a similar ilk to that that  had
    been before the original First-tier Tribunal Judge.

13. The  important  paragraph  here  is  paragraph  17  of  Judge  Talbot's
    decision.   It  starts  by  making  reference  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's evidence is lacking both in  detail  and  in  corroborative
    evidence.  He sets out therein the corroborative evidence that he would
    have expected.  The part of the paragraph with which  Mr  Hawkin  takes
    exception is as follows:

         "Bearing in mind both that the cousin's absence was  noted  by  the
         judge at the previous hearing but also that she  had  been  legally
         represented for several years I find it quite implausible that  her
         solicitors would not have spoken to her about getting corroborative
         evidence from her cousin or that the cousin himself would not  have
         been anxious to do whatever he could to support her  in  this  way.
         Yet there was not even a witness statement from him and when  asked
         about this, the Appellant claimed that her  solicitors  have  never
         mentioned the need for this.  I find  the  Appellant's  failure  to
         obtain supporting evidence from her cousin to  seriously  undermine
         the claim of her credibility."

14. Thereinafter at paragraphs 18 to 21 he looks at further evidence  which
    gives rise to his credibility concerns.  I do not consider  that  there
    is anything within the manner in which the  judge  has  addressed  this
    matter which implies that he has  drawn  adverse  credibility  findings
    from Judge Khan's previous decision.  The reference he makes  are  ones
    that he was perfectly entitled to and reflect his own assessment of the
    position as it was before him.  As such  I  do  not  consider  that  it
    constitutes any material error of law.

15. A proper approach to credibility would require  an  assessment  of  the
    evidence and  of  the  general  claim.   This  is  something  that  has
    effectively been described by  Judge  Talbot  in  some  detail  in  his
    determination.   In  asylum  claims,  relevant  factors  would  be  the
    internal consistency of the claim, the  inherent  plausibility  of  the
    claim and the consistency of the claim with  external  factors  of  the
    sort typically  found  in  country  guidance.   I  accept  that  it  is
    theoretically correct that a claimant need do no more  than  state  his
    claim but any claim still needs to  be  examined  for  consistency  and
    inherent plausibility and in nearly  every  case  external  information
    against which the claim could be checked would be available.

16. This approach seems to be exactly the  approach  that  has  been  quite
    properly addressed by Judge Talbot.  His references as to the  evidence
    he would have expected to find are ones that he was perfectly  entitled
    to make and the fact that the Appellant's cousin's absence was noted by
    Judge Khan does not in any way being referred to constitute a  material
    error of law.

17. In addition I have given due consideration to the other grounds set out
    by Mr Hawkin in his extensive Grounds of Appeal.  I am  satisfied  that
    the  manner  in  which  the  corroborative  evidence  and  the  grounds
    generally set out therein are dealt with are  thoroughly  and  properly
    addressed by Judge Talbot and that he has made findings  based  on  his
    own analysis of the evidence that he was perfectly  entitled  to.   For
    all the above reasons the decision discloses no material error  of  law
    and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error of  law.
 The Appellant's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The Appellant has previously been  granted  anonymity.   No  application  is
made to vary that order and none is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
