

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08299/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 April 2019                         |On 3 May 2019                     |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                             barham abdul karim
                            (NO anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals (with permission of FtT Judge Doyle) against  the
    decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge Ford that was issued on  10
    August 2018.  Judge Ford decided the appellant was not a  refugee  from
    Iraq or otherwise in need of  international  protection  and  that  his
    associated human rights claim did not succeed.  Judge Ford's reason for
    her decision was that she found the appellant had not given a  credible
    account and therefore his protection claim was not made out.

 2. At the start of the hearing, Mr Howard and Ms  Aboni  agreed  that  the
    grounds challenged the credibility findings made by Judge Ford.

 3. Mr Howard focused his arguments on whether Judge Ford  gave  sufficient
    reasons for finding the appellant's  account  was  not  credible.   His
    argument centred on whether Judge Ford had taken into consideration her
    positive finding at [31] that the appellant had been able to identify a
    police station in his home area when deciding the appellant had  failed
    to prove to the lower standard of proof that he was  from  Kirkuk.   Mr
    Howard argued this failure to deal with this positive  factual  finding
    undermined Judge Ford's conclusion at [37] that the appellant  had  not
    established he was from Kirkuk.

 4. I did not need to hear from Ms Aboni because I was not satisfied  there
    is any merit in Mr Howard's arguments.  Judge Ford  indicated  at  [31]
    that the ability of the appellant to identify a  local  police  station
    was not sufficient to establish he was from that  area.   At  [33]  she
    gave six clear reasons for finding  the  appellant's  account  to  lack
    credibility.   Those  reasons  draw  on  the  evidence  and   highlight
    inconsistencies in the account as  well  as  the  appellant's  lack  of
    effort in seeking to substantiate his claims and his failure  to  claim
    asylum in a safe country en route to the UK.

 5. It is obvious Judge Ford had regard to the provisions of paragraph 339L
    of  the  immigration  rules,  which  transpose  article  4(5)  of   the
    Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC).   That  is  the  correct  legal
    approach to assessing credibility  in  a  protection  claim.   All  her
    findings were open to her on the evidence and there  is  no  allegation
    that any are legally perverse.  I am satisfied  Judge  Ford  took  into
    account all the evidence, including her positive finding.

 6. Because the appellant failed to discharge the low standard of proof, it
    was open to Judge Ford to  conclude  the  appellant  had  not  given  a
    truthful account about being from Kirkuk or  about  not  having  family
    support in Iraq.  I am satisfied her  conclusions  at  [37]  are  sound
    regarding returnability.

 7. I am satisfied the  arguments  presented  are  mere  disagreement  with
    legitimate judicial findings and disclose no legal error.  As a result,
    I uphold Judge Ford's decision.

 8. I add that the grounds relating to whether Judge Ford adequately  dealt
    with article 3 ECHR fall away because her findings that the appellant's
    account was not credible is upheld.  As a  result,  the  appellant  has
    failed to show he faces a real risk of serious harm contrary to article
    3 if he returns to Iraq.

Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons  of  Judge  Ford  and  I
uphold her decision.

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                                       Date         1 May 2019

     Judge McCarthy
     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


