
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08142/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13th September 2017                |On 5th October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                   Mr IAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  [  ]  1986.   The
    Appellant having entered the UK as a  dependent  partner  in  2010  and
    having had that grant of leave to remain subsequently extended  claimed
    asylum on 22nd  January  2016.   The  Appellant's  claim  was  that  if
    returned to Sri Lanka he feared he  would  be  arrested,  detained  and
    imprisoned for life  by  the  authorities  as  a  person  suspected  of
    supporting the LTTE.  That application was refused by Notice of Refusal
    sent by the Secretary of State on 22nd July 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Meyler sitting at Stoke on 15th May  2017.   That  appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds in a decision and reasons  promulgated  on
    22nd May 2017.  At that hearing the judge made an anonymity  directions
    order.  No application is made to vary that order  and  it  remains  in
    place.

 3. On 8th June 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Those grounds contended:-

      i) that the Immigration Judge had  erred  in  her  assessment  of  the
         documentary evidence and in criticising the Appellant  for  failing
         to contact former members of the LLRC;

     ii) that  the  judge  had  erred  in  misrepresenting  the  Appellant's
         evidence;

    iii) that the  Immigration  Judge's  findings  were  at  odds  with  the
         objective evidence.

 4. On 19th June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle granted permission to
    appeal.  Judge Astle noted that the grounds argued that the judge erred
    in her assessment of the documentary evidence and  in  criticising  the
    Appellant for failing to contact former members of the LLRC.  She noted
    that the judge cited no authority or basis for finding that there was a
    "general prevalence of unreliable documents produced  by  attorneys  in
    Sri Lanka."  The evidence regarding the attorney was not challenged  by
    the Respondent.  There was no obligation on the Appellant to request  a
    document  verification  report.   The  grounds  state   that   it   was
    unreasonable to expect the Appellant to approach former members of  the
    LLRC.  Secondly it was argued that the judge erred  in  misrepresenting
    the Appellant's evidence and thirdly that her  findings  were  at  odds
    with the objective evidence.  In granting permission  to  appeal  Judge
    Astle considered that it was arguable that the judge may have erred  in
    her treatment of the documentary evidence.   The  other  grounds  could
    also be argued.

 5. On 10th July 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Therein it is stated it was open to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to attach whatever weight he saw fit  and  that  it
    was open to find that there was a prevalence of  false  and  unreliable
    documentation in Sri Lankan appeals.  Further it was submitted that the
    judge having considered the Appellant's evidence was entitled  to  find
    that he would not be at risk on return after applying the risk  factors
    found in the case of GJ and Others.  He submitted that the  Grounds  of
    Appeal amount to a mere disagreement.

 6. It is on this basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Ms Anzani.  Ms Anzani  is  familiar  with  this  matter.   She
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and she is the  author  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge granted an
    anonymity direction for reasons set out in paragraph 5  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  No application is made  to  vary  that
    order and that order remains in place.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Ms Anzani starts by indicating that Mr Bates has conceded to  her  that
    the evidence does distinguish between the incidents of  2008  and  2010
    and consequently she relies on her  written  Grounds  of  Appeal.   She
    takes me to them.  Her first submission is that the judge has erred  in
    her assessment of the  documentary  evidence  and  in  criticising  the
    Appellant for failing to contact  former  members  of  the  LLRC.   She
    advises that there were a  number  of  documents  submitted,  including
    documents from the Appellant's Sri Lankan attorney.  She points to  the
    finding by the judge of the fact that there is a general prevalence  of
    unreliable documents produced by attorneys in Sri Lanka  and  considers
    that this is a sweeping statement and one that cannot be  relied  upon.
    She asked me to consider paragraphs 6 to 8 of  her  Grounds  of  Appeal
    which I have done and reiterates that the Immigration Judge has  failed
    to identify what other "expert evidence" she expected to see in respect
    of the documents supplied by the Appellant and  that  it  is  far  from
    clear what further expert evidence that the Appellant could  reasonably
    have acquired.  She  also  submits  that  the  Appellant  disputes  any
    obligation on his part or that of his representatives  to  request  the
    document verification report and submits that what is being  asked  for
    goes beyond the necessary lower standard of proof.

 8. Further she notes that the Immigration Judge appears to  criticise  the
    Appellant for failing to contact former members of the LLRC but reminds
    me that the Upper Tribunal in GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees)
    Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT (IAC) confirmed that  the  individuals  who  gave
    evidence to the LLRC implicating the Sri Lankan Security Forces,  armed
    forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in alleged war crimes are at  risk
    of persecution and require international protection.  She submits  that
    to expect an Appellant to approach former members of that commission is
    unreasonable in all the circumstances.

 9. Ms Anzani turns to her second ground, namely that the Immigration Judge
    has erred in her misrepresenting the Appellant's evidence.  She asks me
    to consider paragraphs 10 and 11 of her Grounds of Appeal which  I  do.
    Finally she turns to the third  ground,  namely  that  the  Immigration
    Judge's findings are at odds with the objective evidence.  She takes me
    to the authority of MM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 36  where  it
    was accepted that a  material  error  of  law  had  occurred  where  an
    Immigration Judge had concluded that the Appellant would not have  been
    able to depart from the airport unnoticed if the Sri Lankan authorities
    had an interest in him.  She submits that in this case  the  judge  has
    similarly erred in that nothing in the  objective  evidence  undermined
    the Appellant's account as to having been able to obtain  his  passport
    through the aid of an agent  and  thereafter  to  fleeing  through  the
    airport even when subject to a weekly reporting condition.  She submits
    consequently that the objective evidence suggests that the  Appellant's
    account is reasonably likely and there is clear corroborative  evidence
    of his account and consequently that there is a material error of  law.
    She asks me to find material errors of law in the decision and to remit
    the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

10. Mr Bates starts his submissions by pointing out that it is necessary to
    consider how the judge viewed the evidence.  He takes me to  paragraphs
    39 to 41 of the decision and submits they must be taken in context  and
    the judge was perfectly correct as set out at paragraph 41 to  consider
    the documents in the round in accordance with the usual  principles  in
    Tanveer Ahmed.  He refers me to paragraph 40 in some  detail,  pointing
    out that it is not being suggested that the Secretary of  State  should
    herself have got a document verification report and that the judge does
    not blame the Secretary of State for not verifying the  documents.   He
    points out that the judge has stated that there were  other  evidential
    routes that the Appellant could have explored and that  the  judge  has
    found in the absence of this she should consider the  evidence  in  the
    round.  He submits that that is a correct  approach  and  discloses  no
    material error of law.

11.  He  accepts  that  the  judge  has  speculated  with  regard  to   the
    generalisation that documents produced by attorneys in  Sri  Lanka  are
    unreliable but submits that that is a general proposition that she  was
    entitled to follow.  He points out  that  in  fact  Ms  Anzani  in  her
    Grounds of Appeal has noted that there is extensive objective  evidence
    to widespread corruption and bribery in Sri Lanka and submits that this
    could also apply to the legal profession.  He asks me to consider these
    factors in the round.

12. He points out that the judge's  findings  and  reasons  are  extensive,
    starting at paragraph 24 and that the judge was entitled to reject  the
    extent of the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs 32 to 35 and  that  at
    paragraph 36 it is not just the granting of bail the  judge  has  taken
    issue with, and that this has to be looked at alongside  paragraph  37.
    He points out that the judge notes therein that the Appellant was  able
    to get his passport back and that the factual  matrix  therein  reduces
    the credibility of the Appellant's story.  He submits that the core  of
    the credibility is perfectly reasoned by the judge and falls within the
    range of findings the judge can make.

13. He accepts there is an error  of  fact  (as  mentioned  previously)  at
    paragraph 33 and that the  judge  has  confused  the  evidence  of  the
    affidavit, referring it to being June 2010 when the  witness  statement
    makes it clear that the period referred to was in 2008, but he  submits
    that that is not material due to the judge having given cogent  reasons
    as to why the Appellant could not give evidence of this nature  on  the
    basis that it would not be available to  him.   He  submits  that  such
    error does not go to the core findings and he asks me  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

14. In brief response Ms Anzani submits that Mr Bates is attempting to give
    evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and that the
    finding of credibility is not tainted.   She  submits  again  that  the
    documents must be considered as part of the evidence and that they were
    consistent  and  that  the  judge's  approach  is  flawed.   She  again
    emphasises that not all attorneys engage in using  false  documentation
    and that it is not open to the Appellant to approach people involved in
    the LLRC.  She submits that the finding of the judge is flawed and asks
    that the matter be remitted with none of the findings of fact to stand.



The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

17. The findings and reasons given by the judge are detailed.  Not only are
    they detailed, they are fully reasoned.  It is the role  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal to determine whether or not there is a material error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It is not  the  role
    of the Upper Tribunal to rehear the matter.  It is  regularly  possible
    that a different judge on hearing evidence  may  come  to  a  different
    conclusion.  That is a feature of the  judicial  process.    Ms  Anzani
    relies on three basic Grounds of Appeal in making her  submission  that
    there is an error of law.  The first is that the judge has erred in her
    assessment of the documentary evidence and in criticising the Appellant
    for failing to contact former members of the LLRC.  At paragraph 41 the
    judge has considered all documents produced in the  round.   The  judge
    was entitled to do so.  Paragraph 41 has to be read in conjunction with
    paragraph 40.  It is not for the Secretary of State  to  go  seeking  a
    document verification report and the judge in the final  two  sentences
    of paragraph 40 has set out other avenues that the Appellant could have
    pursued but has failed to do so.  Further there is  objective  evidence
    supportive of the view that in the round unreliable documents  have  in
    the past been produced by attorneys in Sri Lanka.  I accept  that  that
    however does not mean that in each individual case that is the norm and
    each individual case has to be looked at on its own facts.  This  I  am
    satisfied the judge has done.  She has considered  alternative  options
    for providing the reliability of documents before her, noted  the  lack
    of any expert evidence and made findings based on her reasoned analysis
    that the Appellant had shown to the lower standard that  the  documents
    sent by the attorneys could not be relied  upon.   Those  are  findings
    that she was entitled to make.  The reasoning process is such  that  it
    does not disclose a material error of law.

18.  Ms  Anzani's  second   contention   is   that   there   has   been   a
    misrepresentation of the Appellant's evidence.  It is  accepted  by  Mr
    Bates that  at  paragraph  33  there  is  a  misrepresentation  of  the
    incidents referred to in the witness statement.  However I agree  with
    Mr Bates that whilst there is an error of fact it is not  material  due
    to the cogent reasons given thereafter as to why the evidence would not
    have been available.  This  Ground  of  Appeal  has  to  be  looked  at
    alongside the third ground, namely  the  contention  that  the  judge's
    findings are at odds with the objective evidence.  This  is  not  borne
    out by the  decision.   The  judge  has  given  full,  due  and  proper
    consideration to the oral testimony provided by the Appellant.  She has
    noted that she has difficulty in accepting that the Appellant would  be
    entrusted  with  editing  sensitive  news  items  concerning   national
    security, given that the media is so tightly controlled and that  there
    is no satisfactory explanation provided as to why the  Appellant  would
    have been granted bail in 2014 if an arrest  warrant  had  been  issued
    against him four years earlier on the  basis  that  he  had  failed  to
    cooperate with  an  investigation.   She  makes  findings  of  fact  at
    paragraph 37 that she is entitled to and she has given  full,  due  and
    proper  consideration  throughout  the   decision   to   the   relevant
    authorities.

19. The judge has thereafter  gone  on  to  summarise  her  conclusions  in
    paragraph 43 where having considered  all  the  evidence  with  anxious
    scrutiny she concludes that the Appellant has not discharged the burden
    of showing that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood he would be
    persecuted or at real risk of serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.   In
    essence the submissions made on his behalf amount to disagreement  with
    the judge's findings.  For all the above reasons I  am  satisfied  that
    the decision is well reasoned and that the judge  has  given  full  and
    proper consideration  to  all  the  facts  of  this  matter.   In  such
    circumstances the decision does not disclose a material  error  of  law
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  upheld  and  the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

