
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08945/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House Without a Hearing   |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 21 July 2020                               |On 18 August 2020            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    R M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Iraq  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing him international protection.

 3. Permission to appeal was given by the First-tier Tribunal and on 1  May
    2020  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane  sent  out  a  Note  and  Directions
    suggesting, inter alia, that the appeal is suitable  for  determination
    without a hearing.

 4. The Procedure Rules do not entitle an appellant to a hearing but it  is
    certainly the long-established custom  of  the  Tribunal  to  determine
    appeals after a hearing has taken place.  The difficulties  created  by
    the well-known COVID-19 pandemic include a  considerable  reduction  in
    available hearing rooms so that it will be impracticable  to  determine
    all the appeals in the system with an oral hearing without  some  being
    subject to unconscionable delay  which  is  obviously  undesirable  and
    contrary to the requirements of the Procedure Rules.  Nevertheless I am
    obliged by paragraph 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 to have regard to any views expressed by the parties on  the
    need for an oral hearing.  As far  as  I  can  see  neither  party  has
    specifically directed their minds to that  point  but  in  response  to
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane's  Note  and  Directions  the  Appellant  has
    produced "Further Submissions" following Tribunal  directions  and  the
    Secretary of State has produced "Written Submissions" by Mr Ian Jarvis,
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer and the Appellants have  produced
    a Reply.  I intend to take note of all the points made there.

 5. I am satisfied that this is a case that can be  dealt  with  adequately
    without an oral hearing and that in this case and any  disadvantage  to
    either party  because  there  is  a  "paper  hearing"  is  considerably
    outweighed by the advantage of quicker disposal and also the  advantage
    of not delaying further other cases that may need an oral hearing. I am
    satisfied that it is right to determine this appeal without  a  hearing
    which is what I now set out to do.

 6. By way of introduction and at the risk of oversimplification it is  the
    Appellant's case that he cannot be returned safely to Iraq and  because
    he ran off leaving behind him a daughter of a wealthy  family  who  was
    pregnant as a result of his activities.  Additionally, he claims he has
    lost his necessary  identification  documents  so  cannot  be  returned
    anyway.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge, like the  Secretary  of  State,
    did not believe him and the core issue before me is whether the judge's
    reasons for disbelieving the Appellant are sufficient to dispose of the
    appeal and if they are themselves lawful.

 7. The judge began by noting that the Appellant was born in 2001 and so is
    still a young man.

 8. In summary it was his case that he was in a relationship  with  a  girl
    called Lezan who became pregnant by him.  Lezan's family were connected
    with the Taliban and were powerful.  Lezan's  sister  told  the  family
    what had happened and of the Appellant's role in it and he was afraid.

 9. The judge noted it was the Secretary of State's case that the Appellant
    was not believable.   The  judge  then  gave  copious  self-directions,
    perhaps more than was really useful. There were then also long extracts
    from country guidance.  But, starting at paragraph 34, there were clear
    findings.

10. The judge said unequivocally that he did not find the appellant's claim
    credible.

11. He made it plain that he was attaching only  little  weight  to  "minor
    discrepancies" in the narrative but he found it  significant  that  the
    Appellant claimed on the one hand that his father wanted  him  punished
    and encouraged people to punish him but on the other hand arranged  for
    his escape. This appears to be a reference to his answer to question 92
    at interview where he said that when the  family  home  was  raided  he
    understood his father to have said that he would disown the  Appellant,
    his son, if he had done "some big mistake" and that if what  they  were
    saying was true they could find him and punish  him  in  any  way  they
    wanted.  This is the judge echoing the point made in the refusal letter
    at paragraph 42.

12. Why it should be assumed that the father's  expression  of  disapproval
    made to irate members of a powerful family who had effectively  invaded
    his home looking for the Appellant who the father knew was not there is
    a truthful expression of the father's feelings is not clear.   If  this
    were the only point taken I may be rather concerned about the decision.

13. The judge was concerned about inconsistencies  in  the  oral  evidence.
    The Appellant had told the judge that he had not had any  contact  with
    Lezan and that he had spoken to his paternal uncle once  after  he  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom.   He  confirmed  that  his  parents  and
    siblings are in Iraq and said that the CSID  (identification  document)
    was at his parents' home.  However he then stated that he did  not  ask
    his uncle to obtain the CSID because he was unsure if his father  would
    give it to his uncle and went on  to  say  that  his  father  may  have
    discarded it but he could offer no explanation  for  his  father  doing
    that and later changed his account to state he did ask his uncle and he
    told him that his father no longer had it.  This was a contradiction of
    his earlier evidence and the judge found that damaging.

14. The Appellant also told the judge in his oral evidence that he was  not
    threatened while he was  in  Iraq  but  according  to  the  judge  this
    contradicted the things said in his screening interview and  in  answer
    to question 4.1 at the asylum interview.   The  reference  to  question
    "4.1"  must  be  a  reference  to  the  "Initial  Contact  and   Asylum
    Registration  Questionnaire"  where  he  did  say  unequivocally  "they
    threatened me a few days before I left Iraq".  However, he went  on  to
    explain that "they" went to his home looking for him and to his  school
    and they found his family.  In answer to question 89 in  the  interview
    he said his uncle told him that "when they went  to  our  family,  they
    raided our family".  He explained in answer to  question  92  that  the
    family home was raided when he could not be found and that led  to  the
    answer indicated above.

15. I am unsure why the judge found that the Appellant had claimed  not  to
    be  threatened  while  he  was  in  Iraq,  and  then   said   something
    inconsistent with it.  As I read the evidence there was a threat and it
    was relayed to him through family members.

16. However, at paragraph 39 the judge found it significant the Appellant's
    family continued to live in Iraq without difficulty.  The  judge  found
    their living peacefully odd in the light of the objective  evidence  of
    honour killings (if I  may  be  permitted  a  convenient  if  hideously
    inappropriate term) and the claim that  the  girlfriend's  family  were
    powerful.

17. The judge considered Facebook postings which  indicated  that  somebody
    called Lezan had been found a job by her  well-connected  family.   The
    tone of the article is expressing surprise that she got  the  job  that
    she did with the academic qualifications that she had.

18. I see no basis for criticising  the  judge's  finding  that  there  was
    nothing before him that linked the article with the "Lezan" said to  be
    pregnant by the Appellant  and  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  it
    surprising that the Appellant's girlfriend's allegedly powerful  family
    would have found their daughter a job.  The natural progression of  the
    pregnancy would surely be expected to bring them disgrace.

19. The finding that the Appellant had not shown he did not have access  to
    his CSID card is based on his general untruthfulness  and  particularly
    his inconsistent evidence about the whereabouts of the card.  The judge
    decided that the Appellant had got his card but even if that were wrong
    he had contact with his family and a new card could be obtained.

20. That said the Grounds and Further  Submissions  are  not  helpful.   In
    particular the  Further  Submissions  clearly  do  not  understand  the
    Decision and Reasons.  It is just wrong  to  say  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge accepted that the  Appellant  had  a  relationship  with
    someone called Lezan and left her pregnant.  All the judge did was  not
    discount the story because of minor inconsistencies  or  discrepancies.
    Similarly, the judge did not accept that the Lezan in the photograph in
    Facebook  was  the  Lezan  relied  on  by  the  appellant.    He   said
    unequivocally, as  the  Further  Submissions  recognise,  is  that  the
    evidence "does not link Lezan to the Appellant".  The judge however did
    indicate that Lezan's family were being supportive and that was not  an
    indication that they were outraged.

21. The criticisms of the approach to  the  CSID  card  rather  missed  the
    point.  The judge did not believe the Appellant and so little  is  said
    there about the importance of the card or what was claimed said to have
    happened at the embassy is of any value.

22. The Appellant suggests that the judge applied too  higher  standard  of
    proof.  This point  is  made  better  under  (4)  where  the  judge  is
    criticised for not identifying the background material which  supported
    his conclusion that the evidence that the person called Lezan had  been
    found a job was inconsistent with the "objective evidence"  about  what
    would happen if the appellant's account  was  truthful.   However  this
    mystery can be resolved by reference to the refusal letter which refers
    to a Country Policy and Information Note Iraq Kurdish  "Honour"  Crimes
    of August 2018.  This says that there are  examples  of  honour  crimes
    against men but the person at risk is far more likely to  be  a  woman.
    The difficulty for the Appellant here is that on his version of  events
    the appellant is at risk but his lover is being supported.  This  is  a
    point the judge was entitled to take.

23. For the reasons I have already given, some of the points taken  by  the
    judge do not seem to me to be weighty and I am doubtful that  they  are
    capable of being  thought  weighty.   However,  the  finding  that  the
    conduct towards the alleged lover, if true, is  inconsistent  with  the
    background material is explained and was open to the judge and it  does
    undermine the credibility of the claim as a whole.   Either  the  story
    about "Lezan" in the Facebook  report  is  convenient  and  applies  to
    somebody else and is irrelevant to the story or if,  as  could  be  the
    case, it is indeed the right Lezan then the Appellant's  case  depended
    on an unlikely outworking of the honour killing  process  and  that  is
    something to which the judge was entitled to give weight.

24. Looked at as a whole the decision is adequate and the reasons given  do
    not undermine it to the point of  making  it  irrational  or  otherwise
    unlawful.

25. I dismiss the appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 August 2020                 |





