
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08973/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 December 2018                  |On 22 January 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                              ABDUL ADAM YEHYA

                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain     (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                   DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal") which  it  made  after  an
oral  hearing  of  6 July 2018  and  which  it  sent  to  the  parties  on
18 July 2018; whereupon it dismissed his  appeal  from  the  Secretary  of
State's decision of 1 September 2017 refusing to grant  him  international
protection.

2.    Shorn of all but essential detail, the relevant factual history is  as
follows: The  claimant  is  a  male  citizen  of  Sudan.   He  was  born  on
1 March 1988.  He claims to have left Sudan in  early  2014  and  recounts
travelling  through  Libya,  Italy  and  France  prior   to   entering   the
United Kingdom ("UK"), clandestinely, on 8 March 2017.  It is recorded that
he claimed asylum on the same day.  The Secretary of State,  in  considering
the claim, accepted that he is a national of Sudan and that  he  is  a  non-
Arab Darfuri and a member of the  Tama Tribe.  Despite  her  acceptance  of
those potentially significant aspects of the claim, the Secretary  of  State
issued a decision refusing to  grant  international  protection.   She  took
that decision  because,  notwithstanding  the  difficulties  which  non-Arab
Darfuris are likely to experience in Darfur, she considered  that  he  could
safely internally relocate to Khartoum and it would not be  unreasonable  to
expect him to do so. So, when the claimant appealed to  the  tribunal,  that
was the key issue for it to decide.

3.    The tribunal, in fact, having  noted  the  Country Guidance  case  of
AA (non-Arab  Darfuris  -  relocation)  Sudan  CG [2009]   UKAIT 00056
(18 December 2009) and the less directly relevant Country Guidance case of
MM (Darfuris) Sudan (CG) [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC) (5 January 2015), decided
that there had been a change of circumstances in Sudan and in particular  in
Khartoum since those cases had been decided.  Had those cases been  followed
it would almost certainly have been concluded that the  claimant  could  not
internally  relocate  to  Khartoum.   However,   after   considering,   with
considerable  care,  the  background  country  material  and  the  competing
arguments which had been put to it, the  tribunal  decided  it  was  legally
permissible to and that it should depart from Country Guidance.

4.    As indicated, permission was given to appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal
and at the hearing of 21 December 2018, the parties  addressed  me  as  to
whether or not the tribunal had erred in law such that  its  decision  ought
to be set aside.

5.    Mr Hussain,  in  a  nutshell,  argued  that  there  was  insufficient
material  before  the  tribunal  to  enable  it  to  lawfully  depart   from
Country Guidance. He also argued that, in any event, in considering whether
this claimant could return to Khartoum the tribunal had failed to  consider,
as it was required to do, his individual circumstances and  characteristics.
 Rather, argued Mr Hussain, it had simply decided that  he  could  relocate
there because of its view that  non-Arab Darfuris  are  not  persecuted  in
Khartoum whereas the assessment needed to be broader than that.  Mr Diwnycz
indicated he  would  "stand  behind  the  rule 24  reply"  which  had  been
submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State and  which  indicated,  albeit
not in any detail, that the appeal was opposed.

6.    Mr Hussain spent a good deal of time upon what was really his primary
argument to the effect that the decision to depart  from  Country Guidance,
on the available material, was unsustainable.  But the  tribunal  had  quite
extensive material and, in any event, was entitled to reach a  view  on  the
material which the parties had given to it.  Although I do not need  to  set
it out in view of the alternative conclusion I have  reached,  the  tribunal
undertook a very thorough consideration as  to  whether  or  not  it  should
depart  from  Country Guidance  decisions  in  a  passage   running   from
paragraphs 27-36 of its written reasons.  It is not  necessary  for  me  to
decide, for myself, whether  the  Country  Guidance  should  or  should  not
continue to be followed.  But I am not persuaded that it  was  not  open  to
the tribunal itself to depart from  Country Guidance  for  the  reasons  it
gave.  Nevertheless, I have decided its decision has to  be  set  aside  for
the reason which I will now explain.

7.    With respect to internal relocation  to  Khartoum  the  tribunal  said
this:

    "36.   ... I find on the basis of the joint report and the Home Office
    CPIN of August 2017 that there are  substantial  numbers  of  non-Arab
    Darfuris residing in the Greater Khartoum area and that although there
    may be  discrimination  in  relation  to  employment  against  non-Arab
    Darfuris, this falls short of persecution.  It is of  course  necessary
    to  apply  the  particular  circumstances  of  the  appellant  to   the
    background information.  In this case, I find that the appellant  would
    not be of significant interest to the authorities as a  result  of  his
    previous arrests.  As previously indicated, I find that that arrest was
    based upon his geographical location rather than any specific political
    activism on his part and that the appellant would not be of interest to
    the authorities on the basis of his previous history or because of  his
    ethnicity.  Having considered all of the circumstances  in  the  round,
    particularly the individual circumstances of the appellant, I find that
    there are strong grounds supported by cogent evidence of  change  which
    is well established and durable  and  sufficient  to  depart  from  the
    previous Country Guidance.  I  therefore  find  that  if  returned  to
    Khartoum, the appellant would not face  risk  of  persecution  and  the
    appellant could be  safely  relocated  to  Khartoum.   In  all  of  the
    circumstances, I do not find that the appellant has a well-founded fear
    of persecution on return to Sudan and I dismiss his asylum appeal."

8.    I appreciate that, in that passage, the  tribunal  did  remind  itself
that it must consider the individual circumstances of the claimant.  But  it
did not, in substance, conduct an inquiry as to the those circumstances  and
his characteristics other than asking and  answering  in  the  negative  the
question of whether or not he  would  face  persecution  in  Khartoum.   Its
general consideration as to internal flight had to  have  a  somewhat  wider
scope than that and I accept Mr Hassain's submission on  that  point  which
was not expressly opposed, at least not in terms, by Mr Diwnycz.  So,  with
regret because of what is  otherwise  it  seems  to  me  a  most  impressive
consideration of the Country Guidance departure issue, I must set aside the
tribunal's decision.

9.    Having decided to set aside the decision I  have  concluded  the  best
way  forward  is  for  me  to  remit  to   the   First-tier Tribunal   for
reconsideration without my preserving anything of the  tribunal's  decision.
I have so decided because it does seem to me that, notwithstanding  my  view
that the Country Guidance outcome was open to the tribunal for the  reasons
it gave, there is scope for another tribunal, properly directed, to reach  a
different view.  If I am remitting I do not consider it  to  be  appropriate
for me to tie the hands of the tribunal in any way.

10.   My having decided to  remit,  I  am  statutorily  obligated  to  issue
directions.  But since I do not want to step on the first  tribunal's  toes,
they are brief.  They are as follows:

    A.     The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  it  made  on
         14 July 2018 and which it sent to the parties on 18 July 2018 is
         set aside.


    B.     The First-tier Tribunal shall conduct a complete  rehearing  of
         the appeal.  The rehearing shall  take  place  before  a  different
         Judge  to  the  one  who  decided  the  appeal  on  14 July 2018.
         Alternatively, if the appeal is to be considered by a  panel,  that
         panel should not include that Judge.


    C.     These directions may be replaced, amended or supplemented at any
         time by any salaried  judge  of  the  First-tier Tribunal  in  the
         Immigration and Asylum Chamber.

Decision

The  making  of  the  tribunal's  decision  of  14 July 2018  (sent   on
18 July 2018) involved the making of an error of law.   Accordingly,  that
decision is set aside.

The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  in
accordance with the directions set out above.




Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.  No such direction was  made  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal and none was applied for before me.


                       Signed

                                             M R Hemingway
                                             Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                           Dated                                          22
January 2019


