
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08237/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2020                    |On 20 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1989 and is a male  citizen  of  Afghanistan.
    His appeal against the refusal of asylum was dismissed in 2013. Further
    representations  made  leading  to  a  further   decision   to   refuse
    international protection dated 15 August 2019. The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal which, in  a  decision
    promulgated on 23 December 2019, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan, by directions issued on  16  April  2020,
    reached the provisional view that the question of error of law in  this
    appeal  could  appropriately  be  determined  without  a  hearing.  She
    directed both parties to file written  submissions.  Having  considered
    those submissions carefully and having read the file in detail, I  have
    decided to allow the appeal and to set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal which I find fell into legal error. I have  not  directed
    an initial hearing and note that the  appellant's  representatives  had
    taken no final view on the determination of the appeal  on  the  papers
    (representatives had indicated that they would give their  view  having
    seen the Secretary of State's submissions). The Secretary of State  was
    content for the question of error of law to  be  determined  without  a
    hearing.

 3. There are a number of grounds of appeal. I do  not  intend  to  address
    every ground in detail but, for the benefit of the next tribunal  which
    will hear this appeal, I would say that I found no error in the judge's
    reliance upon the principle set out in Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department v D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702 *nor do I find that the judge
    erred in law in her treatment of the appellant as a vulnerable witness.
    Where the judge did  fall  into  error,  in  my  opinion,  was  in  her
    treatment of the latest expert  evidence  at  used  by  the  appellant,
    namely the report of Dr Guitozzi. At [34], the judge wrote:

         "The report of Dr Guitozzi says that  the  appellant's  account  of
         what happened on 18 January 2013 is plausible as it  fits  in  with
         the background evidence about  how  the  Taleban  carry  out  their
         activities. Thus it is plausible that the Taliban's private  houses
         for meetings and other purposes, had plenty of spies,  take  action
         in response to raids, target and abduct  family  members.  That  is
         recognised, but one has to assess this appellant's case on its  own
         merits after making findings a  credibility  of  his  own  personal
         account."

 4. The appellant makes the valid point that, although the decision of  the
    judge contains this partial summary of the expert report, the judge has
    given no indication at all as to whether or not she accepts or  rejects
    the expert evidence or any  part  of  it.  The  meaning  of  the  final
    sentence in the paragraph which I quoted above is  not  entirely  clear
    but I take it to mean that the judge considered that it was appropriate
    to 'make findings of credibility'  on  the  appellant's  'own  personal
    account' before assessing the  remainder  of  the  evidence,  including
    expert report. If so, this betrays a fundamental error in the  approach
    to the assessment of the evidence  and  to  the  determination  of  the
    appellant's credibility. In Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367, the  Court  of
    Appeal held:

         "24. It seems to me to be axiomatic that  a  fact-finder  must  not
         reach his or her  conclusion  before  surveying  all  the  evidence
         relevant thereto. Just as, if I may take a  banal  if  alliterative
         example, one cannot make a cake with only one ingredient,  so  also
         frequently one cannot make a case, in the sense of establishing its
         truth, otherwise than by combination  of  a  number  of  pieces  of
         evidence. Mr Tam, on behalf of the Secretary of State, argues  that
         decisions as to the credibility of an account are to  be  taken  by
         the judicial fact-finder  and  that,  in  their  reports,  experts,
         whether in relation to medical matters or in relation to in-country
         circumstances, cannot usurp the fact-finder's function in assessing
         credibility. I agree. What, however, they can offer, is  a  factual
         context in which it may be necessary for the fact-finder to  survey
         the allegations placed before him; and such  context  may  prove  a
         crucial aid to the decision whether or not to accept the  truth  of
         them. What the  fact-finder  does  at  his  peril  is  to  reach  a
         conclusion by reference only to the appellant's evidence and  then,
         if it be negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be  shifted
         by the expert evidence. Mr Tam has drawn the court's attention to a
         decision of the tribunal dated 5 November 2004, namely  HE  (DRC  -
         Credibility and Psychiatric Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321  in  which,
         in paragraph 22, it said:

             "Where the report  is  specifically  relied  on  as  a  factor
             relevant to credibility, the Adjudicator should deal  with  it
             as an integral part of the findings on credibility rather than
             just as an add-on, which does not undermine the conclusions to
             which he would otherwise come.""

 5. The judge should have considered the expert report  together  with  the
    other evidence and background material before  determining  credibility
    of the appellant's case based upon the existing material and his latest
    submissions. The judge was required to  do  this  notwithstanding  that
    there had been a previous decision which she properly considered  as  a
    starting point for her own assessment  by  reference  to  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v D (Tamil) [2002]  UKIAT  00702  *.  The
    fact that there is no further mention of the expert following  [34]  is
    perhaps an indication that the judge considered  that  the  appellant's
    lack of credibility, as established by the previous tribunal, was  such
    that further examination of the expert report was unnecessary. However,
    the judge erred in law by not making any proper findings in respect  of
    the expert evidence and by directing herself  to  consider  the  expert
    evidence only after she had rejected the credibility of the appellant's
    account.

 6. In the light of what I say above, I set aside the decision. I find that
    there will need to be a new fact-finding exercise; none  of  the  facts
    found by the judge shall stand. That exercise is  better  conducted  in
    the First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal is returned to remake  the
    decision following a hearing de novo.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 23 December  2019  is
set aside. None of the findings of factual stand. The appeal is returned  to
the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Kaler; 1.5 hours;  Hatton  Cross;  Pushtu
interpreter) for that tribunal to remake the decision  following  a  hearing
de novo.


Signed                              Date 17 August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
