
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08472/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2017                            |On 31 October 2017            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                            Mr Sefatullah Habibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Vidal, counsel, instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  Appellant,  a  national  of  Afghanistan,  appealed  against  the
    Respondent's decision, dated 28 June 2016, to refuse  an  asylum  claim
    and in addition rejected claims based on private life  or  family  life
    under the Rules and also with reference to Article 8 ECHR.

2.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  J  H  H  Cooper  (the
    Judge), whose decision [D] on 24 March 2017, dismissed  the  appeal  on
    asylum and human rights grounds.  Before the Judge experienced counsel,
    Mr Muquit, representing the Appellant conceded that the claim could not
    be  pursued  in  relation  to  the  Refugee  Convention,   Humanitarian
    Protection, and Article 3 ECHR grounds in terms of risks on return.  Mr
    Muquit confined the case to essentially arguing that the  claim  should
    be allowed under the provisions of Article 8 ECHR.  It was accepted  at
    that stage that at the date of application the Appellant's wife,  a  UK
    national, of Pakistan origin, was under the age  of  18  and  therefore
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.

3.   The matter proceeded on that basis and the Judge set  out  the  matters
    particularly relied upon by the Appellant and on  behalf  of  his  wife
    concerning her personal difficulties, her family circumstances and  her
    current educational undertaking and aspirations.  The findings set out,
    with reference to the  case  of  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11,  a  general
    consideration of the material matters was arrived at and in [D 68]  the
     Judge summarised the particular factors advanced.

4.   It is fair to say that the Judge's decision does not suggest  nor  does
    it appear of the grounds that issues of difficulties that the  wife  of
    the Appellant might  face  on  return  in  finding  employment  or  the
    unlikelihood of her being able to pursue the  higher  education  course
    that  she  would  have  followed  in  the  United  Kingdom,  were   not
    specifically pressed by evidence as to the availability  of  employment
    or the effects of societal mores confining the degree  to  which  women
    can work in Afghanistan nor did it appear there  was  any  argument  or
    evidence on what  education  aspirations  of  the  Appellant  could  be
    continued in Afghanistan.

5.   It is true to say that those two matters of  employment  and  education
    were not dealt with in the summary [D68] but it seemed to me  when  the
    Judge so thoroughly addressed the other issues raised  it  is  unlikely
    that he would have omitted to refer to evidence or issues if  they  had
    been before him.  Those two issues would have been addressed  if  there
    was a sustainable argument being pressed on behalf of the Appellant and
    his wife.

6.   Be that as it may, the position was that permission was refused in  the
    First-tier Tribunal but on renewal  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan on 29 August 2017 in which she stated:

         "Although there appears to be no  evidence  to  indicate  that  the
         country conditions were argued as part of the case  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal hearing, and it appears no  background  evidence  was
         submitted in support of the appeal, it is at  least  arguable  that
         the security situation in Afghanistan should have  been  well-known
         to an experienced Judge and was a relevant factor that needed to be
         considered  in  assessing  whether   there   were   'insurmountable
         obstacles' to the Appellant continuing his  family  life  with  his
         British wife in Afghanistan.  In HN & SA (Afghanistan) v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 123 the  Court  of
         Appeal noted the deterioration in the security system.  ..."


7.   It seemed to me that  this  is  not  a  sustainable  challenge  to  the
    decision, first, because it was not a matter pursued and nor indeed was
    it so self-evident on the basis  raised  that  it  could  be  called  a
    'Robinson obvious' point that should have been addressed.  The position
    is that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  faced  return  to  Kabul:  The
    circumstances there did not support the general  conclusion  that  such
    are conditions there that he and she could not return there because  of
    the dangers.  If that had been the argument and it  was  so  manifestly
    obvious it seemed to me highly  unlikely  that  Mr  Muquit  would  have
    failed to address it.  It simply is not susceptible to the  point  that
    it was an oversight.

8.   Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan continued in the grant as follows:

         "Nor was there any assessment of the impact on the Appellant's wife
         considering  publicly  available  information   relating   to   the
         treatment of women in Afghanistan.  No consideration was  given  to
         whether, at the date  of  the  hearing,  the  developments  in  the
         Appellant's circumstances meant that he might now meet the eligible
         requirements of the Immigration Rules, which would have provided an
         indication of the weight to be given to the Respondent's policy  as
         expressed in Appendix FM when assessing where a fair balance should
         be struck.  The grounds are not well-particularised but do at least
         justify further consideration at a hearing."


9.   It seemed to me that there are a number of points that can be  made  as
    to this matter.  First and foremost, the fact is that  Appendix  FM  as
    had been raised falls to one side, as was conceded.  It was not pursued
    as an issue before the Judge that it was in effect a near miss and then
    with reference to Mustafa [2016] UKUT 27 that  it  nevertheless  was  a
    relevant consideration to press in the  Article  8  ECHR  case  because
    circumstances had changed through the passage of time between the  date
    of decision and the date of the hearing before the Judge.  Furthermore,
    it seemed to me that there were other considerations, even if  the  age
    matter was addressed, which gave rise to concerns as to whether or  not
    Appendix FM would be applicable particularly with reference to Appendix
    FM paragraph EX.1.

10.  Therefore, the Judge, I take the view,  would  and  did  properly  have
    regard  to  the  case  of  Agyarko  and  looked   at   the   particular
    circumstances of the case.  I do not,  whilst  recognising  that  [D68]
    does not summarise her employment or educational aspirations it did not
    appear on the face of it nor was  it  supported  by  the  grounds  that
    education and/or  employment  were  issues  that  actively  were  being
    pursued.  I might have reached a different decision in the  appeal  had
    this case been before me but that is not the basis on which I interfere
    in decisions simply because I might have reached a different view.

11.  Ms Vidal has strenuously pressed the merits of her points,  with  which
    I might indeed agree in terms of  how  I  would  have  considered  this
    matter were I considering it for my own part as a First-tier Judge, but
    I do not find that that discloses an error by   the  Judge  in  dealing
    with this matter in his decision.  Accordingly I do not find  that  any
    other Tribunal seized of the  same  material  and  presented  with  the
    arguments in the same way would have reached a different conclusion.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed                                  Date24 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 24 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

