
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08989/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd January 2019                          |On 15th January 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. B. Asanovic, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for the
      avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  SA is granted anonymity
      throughout these proceedings.  No report of these proceedings shall
      directly or indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to
      the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this
      direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of
      court.


   2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge Devittie promulgated on 21st June 2018.  The FtT Judge dismissed
      the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 31st
      August 2017 refusing her claim for asylum.


   3. The appellant is an Afghan national.  The appellant claims that her
      husband and daughter had been killed by a Governor, who was a
      Jihadist.  Her husband had previously been employed by the Ministry of
      Defence and in the course of his duties he had mistreated a Jihadist,
      who is now an official in one of the areas of Kabul. She claims to
      have left Kabul on 24th October 2012, shortly after the murder of her
      husband and daughter. She travelled to Dubai where she stayed for a
      period of 28 days.  From there, she travelled to Austria where she
      made a claim for asylum. She then travelled to the UK using a false
      passport and claimed asylum on 10th December 2012.  Her asylum claim
      was refused in August 2014 and her appeal against that decision was
      dismissed by FtT Judge Morris for the reasons set out in a decision
      promulgated on 27th April 2016. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal was
      dismissed for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 29th
      June 2016 and the appellant was appeal rights exhausted on 1st
      November 2016.  In or about February 2017, the appellant made further
      submissions to the respondent and it was the decision of the
      respondent dated 31st August 2017, that gave rise to the appeal before
      the FtT Judge.


   4. In readiness for the hearing of the appeal before the FtT Judge, the
      appellant's representatives had filed and served a bundle comprising
      of some 58 documents over 392 pages. Although much of that bundle
      included background material, the first 62 pages included in a
      psychiatric report, and statements from the appellant's father,
      brother and sister. The day before the hearing of the appeal, the
      appellant's representatives also served a statement made by her
      daughter ("LA") and a statement made by her son ("HA").


The decision of the FtT Judge


   5. At paragraph [3] of his decision, the FtT Judge sets out a summary of
      the appellant's claim for asylum.  At paragraphs [4] to [6] of the
      decision, the Judge refers to the findings made previously by FtT
      Judge Morris in April 2016 and the observations made by the Upper
      Tribunal in June 2016.  At paragraphs [7] to [9], the Judge refers to
      the psychiatric evidence before him, noting that the appellant suffers
      from post dramatic stress disorder and the opinion of the psychiatrist
      that the appellant did not have capacity to give evidence.  At
      paragraphs [10] to [14], the Judge refers to the submissions made on
      behalf of the appellant.  The Judge's findings and conclusions upon
      the protection claim are set out at paragraphs [17] to [19] of the
      decision, and the Judge's conclusions upon the Article 8 claim based
      upon a 'suicide risk' are to be found at paragraphs [20] to [23] of
      the decision.  At paragraphs [16] to [18] of the decision, the Judge
      states:


           "16.   The questions that this appeal raises were determined by
           this tribunal in a previous determination. The first immigration
           judge on that occasion made clear findings of fact to the effect
           that the appellant had not established that her husband had been
           killed as well as her daughter by the governor. The  first
           immigration judge  also made clear findings that she would not
           be at risk as a lone woman returning to Afghanistan in part
           because she would be returning with her son.


           17.    It is contended on appellant's behalf that this tribunal
           should reconsider the findings of the first immigration judge
           and come to a different conclusion in the light of the medical
           evidence that has now been presented. I have examined with
           anxious scrutiny the medical evidence presented. It sets out the
           scientific principles in support of the fact that mental ill-
           health of the sort suffered by the appellant can affect memory.
           The psychiatrist also was of the opinion that her mental
           condition was such that that she was not capable of giving
           evidence in this hearing.


           18.    In my opinion however, no case has been made out, to
           justify the conclusion that this tribunal should come to a
           different conclusion to that of the first immigration judge. I
           have arrived at this decision for the following reasons:


                (1)    The first immigration judge made clear and
                comprehensive findings of credibility when he dismissed this
                appellant's claim. It is contended on the appellant's behalf
                that if the immigration judge had before him the
                psychiatrist's report indicating the appellant's loss of
                memory  this could have affected her presentation of the
                asylum claim, he would have come to a different conclusion.
                It does not seem to me, from a reading of the credibility
                findings, that they rest wholly on the appellant's failure
                to recall certain details of the past. I should add, quite
                apart from making the submission that her memory affected
                her presentation of her asylum appeal, the appellant's
                counsel has not drawn my attention to particular findings
                the first immigration judge made in his credibility findings
                that can be attributed to this this appellants lack of
                memory. Appellant's counsel has not drawn attention to any
                responses in the asylum interview that show failure of
                memory.


                (2)    The Upper Tier Tribunal found no error in the First-
                tier Tribunal's findings of fact. This is therefore, in a
                sense, an attempt for a reconsideration of those findings of
                fact, on the basis that at the time of the hearing her
                memory was so compromised, that the credibility findings of
                the first immigration judge should not stand. Looking at the
                appellant's claim, in its overall context, this would seem
                to have been a high-profile murder by a very senior public
                official. In seeking this reconsideration reliance is placed
                solely on the psychiatrist's report, but no effort has been
                made to give credence to the incident upon [she] failed
                memory is based in the form of any publication in the media
                of this event."


The appeal before me


   6. The appellant advances a number of grounds of appeal.  Permission to
      appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Dr H Storey on 21st
      November 2018. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not
      the decision of FtT Judge Devittie involved the making of a material
      error of law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the
      decision.


   7. At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I informed the parties
      that in my judgement, the decision of the FtT Judge is infected by a
      material error of law and that the decision should be set aside. I
      said that I would give the full reasons for my decision in writing.
      This I now do.


Error of Law


   8. As is apparent from the extracts of the decision of the FtT Judge that
      I have set out above, FtT Judge Devittie was not satisfied that this
      was an appeal in which he should depart from the adverse credibility
      findings made by FtT Judge Morris previously, in the decision
      promulgated on 27th April 2016.  The first two grounds of appeal
      advanced by the appellant and that were the focus of the submissions
      before me by Ms Asanovic, centre upon the FtT Judge's conclusion that
      the appellant has not made out her case to justify the conclusion that
      he should come to a different conclusion to that of the "first
      immigration judge".


   9. It is said by the appellant that in reaching his decision, FtT Judge
      Devittie failed to consider the evidence of the appellant's son and
      daughter, who had both made statements, and who had both been tendered
      for cross examination at the hearing of the appeal.  Their evidence
      was at least capable of corroborating the appellant's account of
      events, and there had been no previous adverse credibility findings
      made against the appellant's daughter.  Ms Asanovic submits that
      surprisingly, there is no reference at all in the decision of FtT
      Judge Devittie, to the evidence that was before him and the Judge
      focuses in his decision, entirely upon the previous decision of FtT
      Judge Morris.  Ms Asanovic submits that although the Judge makes
      reference to the psychiatric report before him, and notes in
      particular, that the appellant was prescribed medication in 2014, and
      thus pre-dating the hearing of her appeal in 2016, the Judge appears
      to dismiss that evidence by concluding in paragraph [17] of the
      decision, that the psychiatric evidence set out the scientific
      principles in support of the fact that mental ill-health of the sort
      suffered by the appellant can affect memory. The Judge fails to
      properly address the psychiatric evidence which was in fact that there
      was significant evidence that at the hearing previously, the appellant
      would have been suffering from significant symptoms of depression,
      psychosis and previous trauma.


  10. Mr Kotas, rightly it seems to me, accepts that the FtT Judge fails to
      refer to the evidence that was before him, including the statements of
      the appellant's son and daughter, and any oral evidence that they may
      have given.


  11. As there has been a  previous  determination  by  an  FtT  Judge,  the
      Devaseelam principles plainly  apply.   Ms.  Asanovic  accepts,  quite
      properly, that the first Judge's determination should  always  be  the
      starting-point. It is the authoritative assessment of the  appellant's
      status at the time it  was  made.  Facts  happening  since  the  first
      Judge's determination can always be taken into account by  the  second
      Judge.  The previous decision, on the material before the first  Judge
      and at  that  date,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  second  Judge's
      decision.  Facts personal to the appellant that were  not  brought  to
      the attention of the first Judge, although they were relevant  to  the
      issues before him, should be treated by  the  second  Judge  with  the
      greatest circumspection. An appellant who seeks, in a later appeal, to
      add to the available facts in an effort to obtain  a  more  favourable
      outcome, is properly regarded with suspicion from the point of view of
      credibility. It must also be borne in  mind  that  the  first  Judge's
      determination was made at a time closer to the events alleged  and  in
      terms of both fact-finding, and general  credibility  assessment,  the
      first Judge would tend to have the advantage.


  12. Although the first Judge's determination should always be the starting-
      point, it is not the end point. What is clear is that the FtT Judge
      here, has failed to refer to the evidence that was before him in
      reaching his decision. It may well be that having considered that
      evidence, and in particular, the evidence of the appellant's daughter,
      the FtT Judge would have reached the same decision, but there is
      simply no reference at all in the decision, to that evidence.  The
      weight to be attached to it, would have been a matter for the Judge
      but in the absence of any reference to the evidence in the decision at
      all, I cannot have any confidence that it was considered by the Judge
      at all.


  13. The Psychiatric report of Dr Basu followed an examination on 14th
      December 2017.  There had been no Psychiatric evidence at the hearing
      of the appeal before FtT Judge Morris on 23rd March 2016 and the
      appellant had given oral evidence at that hearing.  Dr Basu states in
      his 'Opinion and Recommendations' that the appellant was formally
      diagnosed as suffering from PTSD, in October 2016.  At paragraph
      [10.2.1] of the report, Dr Basu notes that there is very little
      information available about the appellant's mental state in July 2014,
      However, it is known that in June 2014 she was prescribed amongst
      other medication, medication for psychosis, and medication for
      depression, anxiety or obsessive compulsive disorder.  At paragraph
      [10.2.2], Dr Basu notes that "... There is significant evidence,
      therefore, that at her hearing on [28 June 2016] Ms Amiry would have
      been suffering from significant symptoms of depression, psychosis and
      previous trauma".  That is evidence that goes beyond "scientific
      principles in support of the fact that mental ill-health of the sort
      suffered by the appellant can affect memory".  It was at least some
      evidence that was capable of undermining the adverse findings made
      against the appellant previously and required careful consideration.


  14. In my judgement, the absence of the reference to the evidence before
      the FtT Judge, taken together with a failure to adequately engage with
      the psychiatric report establishes a material error of law in the
      decision of the FtT Judge, such that it should be set aside.  I have
      carefully read the decision of the FtT Judge.  The Judge may have been
      entitled to treat the fresh evidence with some circumspection, but the
      Judge appears to have treated himself as bound by the previous
      decision without making findings of his own, as to the fresh evidence
      adduced before him, that had not been before the Tribunal at the time
      of the previous decision.  The outcome of the appeal might well have
      been the same, but I cannot be sure that it would have been.  The
      error of law is one that is therefore capable of affecting the outcome
      of the appeal.


  15. I do not therefore consider it necessary to consider the further
      grounds of appeal that are relied upon by the appellant. Suffice it to
      say for present purposes that the FtT Judge also failed in the
      decision, to address the Article 8 appeal on family or private life
      grounds.


  16. The decision needs to be re-made and, as suggested by the  parties,  I
      have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal, having taken into account paragraph  7.2  of  the
      Senior President's Practice Statement of  25th  September  2012  which
      states;


           '7.2   The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
           proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting  the  case
           to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
           satisfied that;


                (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party
                before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair  hearing  or  other
                opportunity  for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to   and
                considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


                (b)    the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact-finding
                which is necessary in order for the decision in  the  appeal
                to be re-made is such that, having regard to the  overriding
                objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case  to
                the First-tier Tribunal.'


  17.  In my view, the requirements of paragraph 7.2(a) and (b) apply.   The
      Judge has failed to set out, and carefully consider  in  his  decision
      the evidence before him.  The nature and extent of any judicial  fact-
      finding necessary will be extensive. The parties will  be  advised  of
      the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.


 Notice of Decision


  18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


  19. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing  afresh,
      with no findings preserved.


  20. An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date          7th January 2019

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and there can be no fee award.






Signed                                       Date         7th January 2019

 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



