
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08183/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2020                           |On 5 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE



                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born in 1979 and  is  a  male  citizen  of  Iraq.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 5 August 2019 refusing his application for international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on  20
    November 2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside. I have reached that decision for the following reasons.

 3. At [16], the judge found that the appellant had  'changed  his  account
    between interview and his witness statement prepared for the  hearing.'
    The judge found that, in his asylum interview, the appellant  had  told
    the officer that the man with whom his family had a  land  dispute  was
    connected to a tribe in Iraq which he identified as '[L S]'. The  judge
    noted  that,  since  the  interview,  the  appellant  and  his  witness
    statement had identified  the  tribe  to  which  the  man  belonged  as
    'Rokhzaee.' At the initial hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  both
    representatives agreed that the judge had misunderstood  the  evidence;
    [L S]  had  consistently  been  identified  by  the  appellant  as  the
    individual with whom his family had a dispute  and  not  the  tribe  of
    which the individual was a member; that tribe has  been  identified  by
    the appellant throughout as Rokhzaee. Mr McVeety, who appeared for  the
    Secretary of State before the Upper Tribunal, accepted that the  weight
    given by the judge to this incorrect identification of a discrepancy in
    the evidence seriously undermined the analysis as a whole. Indeed,  the
    judge describes what she considered to be a discrepancy as  a  'central
    feature of [the appellant's] case and something I  consider  he  should
    have been reasonably able  to  give  a  clear  and  consistent  account
    about.'

 4. I have no reason to suppose that the  judge  has  not  carried  out  an
    evaluation of the totality of the evidence, as she was required to  do.
    In reaching her conclusion that the appellant account was untrue, it is
    impossible to separate out her misunderstanding part  of  the  evidence
    from unchallenged findings elsewhere in the decision. In any event,  it
    is clear that the judge did not consider this part of the  case  to  be
    peripheral. In the circumstances, there is no alternative  but  to  set
    aside all the findings  of  fact  and  to  direct  examination  of  the
    evidence de novo and remaking of the decision. Given the extensive fact-
    finding required, that process is better conducted  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal set aside. None of the findings
    of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.


          Signed                             Date 13 February 2020

          Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


