
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08264/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th May 2019                     |On 14th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     IN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Besso of Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
                    Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  Judge  Lever  and  Judge
    O'Rourke (the judges) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT)  promulgated
    on 7th February 2019.

 2. The Appellant is an Egyptian citizen born  14th  September  1985.   His
    asylum claim was based upon a fear of the family of his former partner,
    who he claims murdered her as a punishment for being in a  relationship
    with him, and his fear of persecution by  the  Egyptian  state  on  the
    basis of having been  convicted  in  his  absence  of  being  a  Muslim
    Brotherhood sympathiser.

 3. The claim was refused by the Respondent on 13th August 2017.  An appeal
    hearing took place on 8th December 2017 before Judge Boyes of the  FtT.
    The appeal was allowed, but subsequently the Upper Tribunal  set  aside
    that decision and remitted the appeal back to the FtT to  be  heard  de
    novo.

 4. The judges heard the appeal on 5th February 2019.   Oral  evidence  was
    given by  the  Appellant.   The  FtT  found  the  Appellant  to  be  an
    incredible witness and did not accept that he had been convicted in his
    absence in Egypt, and therefore did not accept that he would be at  any
    risk from the authorities in Egypt.

 5. In relation to the Appellant's fear of his  late  girlfriend's  family,
    the FtT found at paragraph 41;

         "Fear of his late  girlfriend's  family.   We  accept  that  it  is
         entirely possible that the events as described took place (or  some
         variant of them) and that they led to the Appellant leaving  Egypt.
         However, we accept the submissions in the refusal  decision  as  to
         sufficiency of protection, or, in the alternative, safe  relocation
         within Egypt (particularly given  that  over  ten  years  have  now
         passed)".

 6. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. Reliance was placed upon three grounds.

 8. Firstly, the FtT  adopted  an  incorrect  approach  to  credibility  at
    paragraph 29.  The FtT was required to consider the credibility of each
    of  the  Appellant's  assertions,  assessing  coherence  when  measured
    against objective evidence.  Instead, the FtT used blanket findings  to
    dismiss the Appellant's credibility in the round, thereby allowing  the
    FtT to pick and choose which aspects of the Appellant's claim should be
    believed.

 9. Secondly, the FtT adopted an incorrect approach to internal  relocation
    and sufficiency of protection.  The FtT accepted at paragraph  31  that
    it was "entirely possible" that the events described took place and led
    the Appellant to leave Egypt.  The Appellant therefore had  a  fear  of
    his dead partner's family.  The  FtT  approach  was  simply  to  accept
    submissions in the Respondent's refusal decision as regards sufficiency
    of protection and internal relocation.  The FtT did  not  consider  the
    Appellant's countervailing submissions or evidence.

10. The FtT failed to  take  into  account  information  contained  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement about the loss of support from his family
    in Egypt.  The FtT failed to take into account the Respondent's Country
    Policy and Information Note on Egypt: Background Information, including
    actors of protection, and internal relocation published July  2017  and
    in particular paragraph 2.3.4 at C16 of the  Appellant's  bundle  which
    states;

         "In general, where the  person  fears  non-state  agents,  internal
         relocation is likely to be reasonable but will depend on the nature
         and origin of the threat as well as the person's circumstances  and
         profile".

11. The FtT failed to consider the  Appellant's  profile  or  his  personal
    circumstances.

12. Thirdly,  the  FtT  engaged  in  impermissible  plausibility  reasoning
    finding  it  "inherently  implausible"  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    convicted in his absence.  There was no attempt to  assess  that  claim
    against the objective evidence and submissions which had been  made  to
    the FtT to  the  effect  that  trials  in  absentia  are  anything  but
    "inherently implausible".

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Loke in the following terms;

         "It is arguable that the judges' reasons regarding credibility  did
         not  sufficiently  engage  with  the   Appellant's   account.    In
         particular, those reasons given at  [29(iii),  (iv)  and  (v)]  are
         arguably not sustainable reasons to reject the Appellant's account.
          Furthermore the findings at para [31] do not make it clear exactly
         what was accepted by the Tribunal.  If  the  Tribunal  so  accepted
         that Fatima's mother's family had  influence  with  the  police  as
         averred in the Appellant's witness statement, then this would  have
         a bearing on internal relocation".

14. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

15. At the oral hearing Miss Besso relied and  expanded  upon  the  grounds
    upon which permission to appeal had been granted.  Mr Howells submitted
    that the FtT had not erred in law, and had  made  findings  which  were
    open to make on the evidence, and  given  adequate  reasons  for  those
    findings.

16. The FtT produced a comprehensive decision, initially  setting  out  the
    law,  thereafter  describing  the   hearing   and   the   documentation
    considered, and  then  proceeding  to  set  out  in  some  detail,  the
    Appellant's  case,  and  the  Respondent's  reasons  for  refusing  the
    application.  The FtT then summarised the oral submissions made by  the
    representatives.

17. The findings  commence  at  paragraph  28.   Paragraph  29  deals  with
    credibility.  I do not accept the submission that the  FtT  adopted  an
    incorrect approach.  At paragraph  28  the  FtT  set  out  the  correct
    approach, confirming that  the  oral  and  written  evidence  has  been
    considered in the  round.   In  considering  credibility  the  FtT  was
    entitled to note that the Appellant accepted  that  when  he  initially
    entered the UK, he gave a false name, date of  birth  and  nationality.
    He claimed asylum in 2010 and subsequently absconded.

18. Miss Besso referred to paragraph 29(iii) in which the FtT described the
    Appellant and his then Sponsor's failure to attend the 2014 hearing  of
    his EEA appeal, "indicating  an  opportunistic  and  meritless  claim".
    Miss Besso submitted that the FtT was wrong  in  law  to  describe  the
    previous  EEA  application  and  appeal  as  being  "opportunistic  and
    meritless". In my view it may have been more appropriate for the FtT to
    have referred to the Appellant's explanation in his witness  statement,
    at paragraph 20 in which he explained that he had consulted a solicitor
    in relation to his application for an EEA residence card but  he  could
    not afford to pay the solicitor, so "just didn't get back to him".  The
    Appellant explained that he thought his solicitor had lodged an  appeal
    on his behalf but claimed that he did not know about it and he did  not
    go to the hearing.

19. It is clear that the Appellant did not go to  the  appeal  hearing.   A
    copy of the appeal decision made by Judge Griffith was before  the  FtT
    in which Judge Griffith recorded that there was no  appearance  by  the
    Appellant or his representatives.  After  the  hearing  some  documents
    were  sent  to  Judge  Griffith  by  the  solicitors  representing  the
    Appellant asking for the matter to be dealt with on  the  papers.   The
    documents included a witness statement from the Appellant, unsigned and
    undated.  Judge Griffith recorded at paragraph 20 , that  the  decision
    by the Appellant and Sponsor not to  appear  at  the  hearing  to  give
    evidence and be cross-examined did not assist  the  Appellant's  claim.
    Judge Griffith  described  a  paucity  of  documentary  evidence.   The
    marriage was found not to be valid.

20. The Appellant's own evidence therefore appears to be that he instructed
    a solicitor, but thereafter failed to give that solicitor instructions,
    and it would appear that Judge Griffith did in fact find the appeal  to
    have no merit.  I do not find  that  the  description  by  the  FtT  at
    paragraph 29(iii) of  "an  opportunistic  and  meritless  claim"  is  a
    material error of law.

21. Miss Besso also challenged the finding at paragraph 29(iv) in which the
    FtT described  the  Appellant's  conviction  for  possession  of  false
    identity documents, with intent, which was "compounded by his obviously
    false evidence as to having only obtained those documents on the day of
    his arrest".

22. It  was  common  ground  that  the  Appellant  had  been  convicted  of
    possession of false identity documents,  and  received  a  sentence  of
    imprisonment.  Miss Besso complained that as the Appellant had  pleaded
    guilty, it was wrong of the FtT to refer to him giving "obviously false
    evidence".

23. I do not find the FtT materially erred on this point.   The  judge  who
    sentenced the Appellant to imprisonment stated in passing sentence;

         "I deal first with the offence  involving  the  identity  card.   I
         reject any suggestion that you obtained it  that  very  evening  in
         order to use it to gain entry to nightclubs.  In any event, you  no
         longer persist in that absurd basis of plea".

24. While the Appellant may not have given oral evidence because he pleaded
    guilty, it is clear that he attempted  to  plead  guilty  on  what  the
    sentencing judge described as an absurd basis which was  not  accepted,
    and which  the  Appellant  subsequently  did  not  pursue.   Therefore,
    although it is correct that the Appellant may not have  given  evidence
    on oath, his basis  of  plea  was  found  to  be  obviously  false  and
    described as absurd, and the FtT did not err in law on this point.

25. In my view the FtT did not err in paragraph  29(v)  in  describing  the
    Appellant's exaggeration of the events of his arrest in Egypt in  2008,
    when describing these to Dr Briffa,  who  prepared  a  medical  report.
    Neither did the FtT  err  at  paragraph  29(vi)  in  referring  to  the
    conflicting  nature  of  the  Appellant's  current  asylum  claim   and
    subsequent  further  submissions.   It  is  clear  that  the  Appellant
    initially agreed to return voluntarily to Egypt and  then  changed  his
    mind, and made an asylum application on the basis of fear of  his  late
    partner's family, and when that was rejected, made a claim on the basis
    of fear of the Muslim Brotherhood.

26. The FtT go on, in paragraph 30  to  specifically  consider  police  and
    court documents and explain why no weight was  attached  to  them.   At
    paragraph 31 the FtT accept that events in relation to the  Appellant's
    late partner may have occurred.  At paragraph 32 the FtT do not  accept
    that the Appellant has criminal convictions in  Egypt,  or  is  on  any
    watch list  for  the  authorities  there,  and  conclude  that  he  has
    fabricated this assertion.

27. At paragraph 33 the FtT consider Dr Briffa's medical  report  attaching
    limited weight to it, due to concerns as to Dr Briffa's reliance on the
    Appellant's  self-reporting,  a  lack  of  overview  of   his   medical
    treatment, his exaggeration of events in Egypt, and taking into account
    that the report was almost a year old.

28. My view is that the FtT properly considered  credibility,  taking  into
    account all material matters, and  attaching  what  weight  was  deemed
    appropriate.  The FtT did not reject the entirety  of  the  Appellant's
    account.  The FtT was entitled to  find  the  Appellant  not  to  be  a
    credible witness, and sustainable  reasons  for  that  conclusion  were
    given.  In relation to the aspects of  the  Appellant's  account  which
    were not accepted, adequate and  sustainable  reasons  were  given  for
    those conclusions.

29. The second ground relates to  the  approach  of  the  FtT  to  internal
    relocation and sufficiency of  protection.   The  FtT  deal  with  this
    briefly.  The FtT accept  the  submissions  made  in  the  Respondent's
    refusal decision in relation to sufficiency of protection and  internal
    relocation.  Sufficiency of protection is considered at paragraphs  64-
    78.  At paragraph 76 the Respondent contends  that  the  Appellant  has
    failed to demonstrate that the Egyptian authorities would be unable  or
    unwilling to offer protection and there is evidence available that  the
    authorities are able to offer protection.  At  paragraph  77  there  is
    reference to non-state agents, which  relates  to  the  late  partner's
    family,  and  the  Respondent  contends  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    demonstrated that they would have any influence over  the  State.   The
    Respondent contends at paragraph 78 that the Appellant had provided  no
    new or compelling evidence which would suggest that he would be  unable
    to seek the protection of the police or unable to internally relocate.

30. It is of course correct  that  the  FtT  must  take  into  account  the
    personal circumstances of the Appellant.  In my view they have done so.
     They have made  findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    credibility.  I do not find that there was  any  satisfactory  evidence
    before the FtT to indicate that  protection  from  the  authorities  in
    Egypt would not be available.  I therefore do not  find  that  the  FtT
    erred in law in finding that there would  be  a  sufficiency  of  State
    protection in Egypt.

31. Internal relocation is dealt with at paragraphs 79-84  of  the  refusal
    decision.  It is not correct as contended at paragraph 7 of the grounds
    that the  submissions  consisted  of  generic  observations  about  the
    geographical  size  of  Egypt  and  no  named  or  specific  place  was
    contemplated  in  relation  to  internal  relocation.   The  Respondent
    specifically referred to Cairo at paragraph 79.  At  paragraph  83  the
    Respondent contended that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate  that
    his late partner's  family  would  have  the  capacity  to  locate  him
    anywhere in Egypt.  There is a further reference to relocating to Cairo
    at paragraph 83 although the Respondent does contend that the Appellant
    could relocate to any part of Egypt away from where his late  partner's
    family live.

32. I do not find that  evidence  was  before  the  FtT  to  indicate  that
    internal relocation would be unduly harsh for the Appellant.  There  is
    reference in the Appellant's witness statement to him no longer  having
    the support of his family.  The evidence  does  not  indicate  that  he
    would need the support of his family.

33. While the FtT has dealt  very  briefly  with  internal  relocation  and
    sufficiency of protection, in the  circumstances,  given  the  evidence
    that was before the FtT, I do not  find  that  they  erred  in  law  in
    accepting the  submissions  made  in  the  refusal  decision  that  the
    Appellant would have a sufficiency of state protection in Egypt, and  a
    reasonable internal relocation option which would not be unduly harsh.

34. Turning to the third Ground of Appeal, which in the grounds is referred
    to as being in paragraph 30, but it is  in  fact  paragraph  29(vi)  in
    which the FtT makes the reference to "inherently  implausible"  in  the
    context of the Appellant being convicted in his absence in  Egypt.   In
    my view, the FtT are not stating that it is inherently implausible that
    an individual would be convicted in absence.  What the FtT are  saying,
    is that it is inherently implausible, that if the  Appellant  had  been
    convicted in absence in 2014, that his family would not have been aware
    of this.  The FtT point out that in evidence the Appellant agreed  that
    his family had been approached by the authorities,  and  therefore  the
    Appellant would have been aware of this issue much earlier than when he
    first raised it in February 2017.  The FtT was entitled  to  point  out
    that even on the Appellant's own evidence he was aware of these matters
    during his imprisonment in the first half of 2016.  The point that  the
    FtT make, is that if this had occurred, the Appellant would have raised
    it far earlier than he did.

35. I conclude that the FtT considered all relevant evidence, made findings
    open to make on the evidence and gave  sustainable  reasons  for  those
    findings.  The grounds disclose a  disagreement  with  the  conclusions
    reached by the FtT but do not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         7th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date         7th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




