
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08615/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons promulgated  |
|On 22 January 2019                         |On 08 February 2019             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 FUTILA [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Worthington of Parker Rhodes Hickmotts Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon  who  on  23  January  2018  dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal on all grounds.









Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo  (DRC)
        born on 28 January 1995, entered the United Kingdom on 24  February
        2017 and  applied  for  asylum  the  same  day.  The  Judge  having
        considered the evidence sets out findings of fact  from  [41].  The
        Judge notes there is little documentary evidence other than a  copy
        of a UDPS membership card for the appellant. No original  card  has
        been produced despite  the  Judge  noting  at  [45]  the  appellant
        indicated in  her  asylum  interview  that  she  could  obtain  the
        original membership card. On 22 May 2017 the appellant's solicitors
        forwarded an original identity card showing the  appellant  was  of
        the UDPS although this was not the original  membership  card,  the
        Judge noting a translation of the card referred to the  appellant's
        address in Rotherham in South  Yorkshire  and  was  clearly  issued
        after the appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom.
     3. The Judge  considers  the  provisions  of  paragraph  399L  of  the
        Immigration Rules.  At  [50]  the  Judge  concludes  there  was  no
        evidence to suggest the appellant had taken any form of  office  in
        the UDPS and that although the appellant's answers  and  interviews
        indicated some knowledge of  this  group,  and  that  there  was  a
        reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant was a member  of
        the UDPS, it was not found there  was  any  evidence  to  show  the
        appellant was a leader or officer of that organisation.
     4. The appellant claimed to have been arrested in the DRC  five  times
        between 2011 and 2016. The Judge finds an element of  inconsistency
        in the appellants evidence across the screening  interview,  asylum
        interview and her oral evidence, referred to between [51 - 53]. The
        Judge at [54] found  the  appellant's  escape  from  prison  lacked
        credibility and did not find it  to  be  true  even  to  the  lower
        standard of proof. Other issues causing the Judge to have doubts as
        to the appellant's credibility are referred to from [55]. The Judge
        considered the medical evidence provided to support the appellant's
        case, dated 22 January 2018, which the Judge found to be  an  even-
        handed  report  which  found  some  of  the  appellant's   injuries
        consistent with her account [58].  The  Judge  draws  together  the
        threads of the assessment between [59 - 62] in the following terms:

             59.  Having considered all the evidence in the round, I do not
                  find there is a reasonable likelihood of  the  Appellant's
                  account being true. Although I accept  the  Appellant  may
                  have been a member of the UDPS I find that as a result  of
                  the   vagueness   of   the   Appellant's   account,    the
                  inconsistencies in her evidence which I have  pointed  out
                  outweigh any factors including the  Medical  Report  which
                  supports the Appellant's account and I do  not  find  that
                  there is a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the  Appellant's
                  account is credible. In the light of that  finding,  I  do
                  not find that the Appellant has a genuine subjective  fear
                  on return to the DRC.


             60.  Although I have found  the  Appellant  may  have  been  a
                  member of UDPS on the basis of the case AB  and  DM  (Risk
                  Categories Review) DRC CG [2005] UKAIT I  find  that  mere
                  membership of the UDPS would not bring  the  Appellant  to
                  the attention of the authorities. As previously indicated,
                  I do not find that the Appellant was a leader of the  UDPS
                  and in accordance with the case of BM and  Others  DRC  CG
                  [2015] which found that, as a general rule, mere rank-and-
                  file  members  are  unlikely  to  be  at  real   risk   of
                  persecution for a Convention reason and I  find  that  the
                  Appellant falls into this category.


             61.  Mr Worthington did not  address  me  on  Article  8  ECHR
                  issues but for the sake of completeness, I find that there
                  has been no evidence put before me that the Appellant  has
                  a partner or child and  therefore  does  not  satisfy  the
                  requirements for leave to remain under Article  8  on  the
                  basis of family life, Mr Worthington did not address me on
                  paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and I find  that
                  the Appellant cannot  show  that  she  meets  any  of  the
                  criteria set out therein, nor did Mr  Worthington  try  to
                  persuade me that there were any  compelling  circumstances
                  which might warrant consideration outside the Rules  under
                  Article 8 of the ECHR. In all of the circumstances, I find
                  that the Appellant has not shown the Respondent  that  she
                  qualifies for leave to remain on  any  private  or  family
                  life grounds.


             62.   Similarly,  although  the  Medical  Report  referred  to
                  suggest that the  Appellant  has  the  medical  conditions
                  referred to therein, Mr Worthington did not address me  on
                  any medical issues and I find that the Appellant does  not
                  suffer from sufficiently  serious  medical  conditions  in
                  accordance with N v  SSHD  2005  AC  291  to  satisfy  the
                  requirements for leave to remain under the ECHR.

     5. The Judge finds at [63] that the appellant had not  discharged  the
        burden of proof upon her to show she has  a  well-founded  fear  of
        persecution for a Convention Reason, at [64] that the appellant had
        not  established  an  entitlement  to  a  grant   of   Humanitarian
        Protection, and at [65] that the appellant cannot succeed on  human
        rights grounds.
     6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by another judge of  the
        First-Tier Tribunal but granted on a  renewed  application  by  the
        Upper Tribunal in the following terms:

             1. Although the detailed decision of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
                has been carefully drafted in many respects, it is arguable
                that the First-Tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make  any  clear
                assessment of the claim that the appellant is a  vulnerable
                witness and suffers from a combination of depression, PTSD,
                the effects of childhood and detention related sexual abuse
                and a tendency to somatise,  as  set  out  in  the  medical
                foundation report.


             2. The First-Tier Tribunal appears to have accepted the report
                as cogent at [58]  but  has  arguably  not  approached  the
                appellant's evidence with this evidence  in  mind  and  has
                arguably  failed  to  apply  the   relevant   guidance   on
                vulnerable appellants.








Error of law


     7. I accept the term 'Mental disability' is taken to encompass  mental
        ill health. The degree of disability in each individual's case will
        vary enormously and only in a small number of cases  will  it  mean
        there is lack of mental capacity. It was not suggested  before  the
        Judge that the appellant lacked capacity to take an active part  in
        the appeal process, which she did.
     8. There are a range of mental health conditions,  e.g.  depression  /
        anxiety,  post-traumatic  stress  syndrome,  obsessive   compulsive
        disorder, personality disorders, eating  disorders,  schizophrenia,
        bipolar disorder, some of which are noted to affect  the  appellant
        in the medical report considered by the Judge.
     9. It is accepted that difficulties may arise at a hearing  for  those
        with mental health  disability,  which  may  include  communication
        difficulties, difficulty absorbing information; understanding  what
        is being asked; providing focused answers;  explaining,  difficulty
        focusing;  limited  concentration  span,  and  in  certain   cases,
        auditory / visual hallucinations. It is not recorded by  the  Judge
        or part of the grounds that the Judges attention was drawn  to  any
        of these issues, such as to deny the appellant a fair hearing.
    10. If issues arise a court or tribunal is  expected  to  consider  the
        need for reasonable adjustments. The 'Child, Vulnerable  Adult  and
        Sensitive Witnesses Practice Direction'  applicable  to  the  First
        Tier and Upper Tribunal says that a vulnerable witness will only be
        required to attend as a witness and give  evidence  at  a  hearing,
        where the tribunal determines that the  evidence  is  necessary  to
        enable the fair hearing of the case, and that their  welfare  would
        not be prejudiced by doing  so.  In  deciding  this,  the  tribunal
        should  have  regard  to  all  the  available  evidence   and   the
        representations  of  the  parties.  There  is  no   indication   of
        representations being made to the  Judge  that  the  appellant  was
        unfit to give oral evidence and no indication in the Judges summary
        of such evidence at [21-34] that any adverse issues arose.
    11. Mr Worthington confirmed that no submissions were made  during  the
        hearing or at  the  Case  Management  Reviews  which  preceded  the
        hearing before the Judge of any  reasonable  adjustment  that  were
        required to enable the appellant to give her evidence  and  partake
        in the proceedings.
    12. In relation to the question of whether the Judge took into  account
        the appellant's presentation when assessing the weight to be  given
        to the appellants evidence from all sources, it is not made out the
        Judge did not consider all the  available  material.  At  [48]  the
        Judge specifically finds  "Paragraph  399L  (iii)  requires  me  to
        consider the coherence and plausibility of the Appellant's account.
        Coherence and plausibility of an account is at  the  heart  of  the
        assessment of the Appellant's credibility. In doing so, I  need  to
        examine all the evidence in the round including the evidence of the
        Medical Report of Dr Jillian  Creasey  of  The  Medical  Foundation
        dated 2 January 2018." The Judge at  [53]  writes  "Throughout  her
        evidence there have been other examples of errors  in  dates  being
        made by the Appellant. For example, the Appellants evidence at  the
        Hearing was that she was arrested on 28 November  2016  whereas  in
        her asylum interview she had stated that she  was  arrested  on  19
        December 2016. Mr Worthington re-examined  the  Appellant  on  this
        point and initially the Appellant has confirmed that the date of 28
        November 2016 was  definitely  correct.  Considering  the  position
        further, the Appellant then changed her response and confirmed that
        the last arrested had been on 19 December 2016. I  appreciate  that
        the Appellant was giving evidence in what must have been,  to  her,
        stressful  conditions  and  that  she  may  therefore  have  become
        confused with dates but her evidence  on  re-examination  that  her
        arrested on 28th November was in 2011 not 2016 was an inconsistency
        which casts doubt upon the credibility of her account overall". The
        Judge records at [34] that the appellant had stated that  the  date
        of 28 November 2016 for her final arrest was correct but  that  she
        change the response stating that the last arrest was on 19 December
        2016 and that the arrest which took place on 28th November  was  in
        2011 not 2016. The Judge was clearly aware of  the  pressures  upon
        the appellant which are similar  those  to  facing  many  who  come
        before the First Tribunal on appeal. It is not made out the  Judge,
        having  considered  the  Medical  Report  and  with  the  extensive
        training judges are given in relation to the Presidential  Guidance
        on Vulnerable Witnesses, then proceeded to fail  to  take  it  into
        account when assessing the  weight  that  could  be  given  to  the
        appellants evidence.
    13. A further difficulty for the appellant in relation to the assertion
        that this matter should have meant a different decision being  made
        is that the Judge notes from [55] that it was not only the evidence
        of the appellant but also from other  witnesses  which  caused  the
        Judge to doubt the credibility of the appellant's  account.  It  is
        not made out that the problems arising from that other sources  are
        in any way affected by the issues recorded as being relevant to the
        appellant in the medical evidence.
    14. It is also not made out that there was  any  degree  of  artificial
        separation in the Judge assessing the weight that could be given to
        the appellants evidence. This is not a  case  in  which  the  Judge
        found the appellant lacked credibility and then use this to  attach
        little or no weight to  the  medical  evidence.  The  evidence  was
        clearly considered in the round and  it  is  not  legal  error  if,
        having considered the evidence, the Judge failed mention  each  and
        every aspect in  the  determination.  As  noted  in  the  grant  of
        permission this is a carefully written decision. I do not accept Mr
        Worthington has made out his argument  that  the  Judge  failed  to
        "grapple with the medical evidence". Mr Worthington accepted  there
        are inconsistencies as outlined by the Judge and that the issue was
        the explanation for such inconsistencies. I do not find it made out
        that the explanation relied upon by the appellant is sufficient  to
        establish arguable legal error in that found by the Judge.
    15. In relation to the second ground, alleged flawed  approach  to  the
        witness evidence, I find no arguable legal error is made  out.  The
        Judge had the benefit of both seeing and hearing the witnesses give
        their evidence. The appellant may find that it  was  unsatisfactory
        that the Judge found that little weight could be  attached  to  the
        evidence of Mr Kengela but that is not  the  determinative  factor.
        The assertion that the witnesses evidence had  to  be  accepted  or
        rejected is arguably incorrect as the Judge was entitled to  assess
        the degree of weight that should be attached to any  evidence.  The
        Judge may find that little or substantial weight should be attached
        and then to assess that against  the  weight  given  to  the  other
        evidence to establish whether the required burden of proof has been
        discharged. The Judge clearly considered the evidence and, as noted
        above, has given ample reasons in support of the findings made. The
        weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge.
    16. I do not find it made out the Judge has erred in law  in  a  manner
        material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  sufficient  to
        warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.


Decision

    17. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson                      Date: 23 January 2019












