
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08626/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14th December 2017                 |On 22nd  January 2018                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                  MR B.A.M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Cleghorn, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on  4th  September  1996.   The
    Appellant arrived in the UK on 3rd February 2016  and  claimed  asylum.
    Thereafter he submitted an application for asylum claiming  to  have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution on the basis of his fear of ISIS.  The
    Appellant's application was refused by Notice  of  Refusal  dated  19th
    July 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Cope sitting at North Shields on 31st March 2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 4th May 2017 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 12th  May  2017.
    Those grounds contended:-

      1) The First-tier Tribunal Judge's conduct of his own research had led
         to a perception of bias.

      2) Failure of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to grant an adjournment.

      3) There had been an improper departure from country guidance.

 4. 6th September 2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Alis  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Alis noted the grounds asserted  that  the
    judges had erred in that he had produced and relied on a  map  that  he
    himself had obtained from the internet.  It is acknowledged by  Counsel
    that map was contained  in  the  latest  COIR  for  Iraq.   Judge  Alis
    concluded that the ground was misconceived in the sense that the  judge
    had quite properly brought to the attention evidence that he  felt  was
    relevant in the appeal before him and that if he had not brought it  to
    the parties' attention and relied on it later then that would have been
    procedurally unfair.  He noted that the mere introduction of a map that
    it is accepted is contained within the latest COIR is  not  a  material
    error (Secretary of State for the Home Department v Abdi [1994] Imm  AR
    402).

 5. Judge Alis noted that the second and third grounds were linked as  they
    concerned:-

      a) The judge's refusal to adjourn the case after the map was  produced
         to enable the Appellant to address the submission that  Kirkuk  was
         no longer a contested area

      b) and the fact that the judge departed from AA (Iraq) CG.

 6. Judge Alis noted that the Appellant's Counsel sought an adjournment  to
    obtain further evidence due to the changed position and that the  judge
    had refused  to  adjourn  as  he  felt  it  seemed  the  Appellant  was
    inadvertently seeking to reverse  the  burden  of  proof.   Judge  Alis
    considered that it was just arguable that the judge  had  not  followed
    the guidance set out in Nwaigwe (adjournment -  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
    418 (IAC).  He considered the decision to refuse to adjourn impacted on
    the Article 15(c) decision and it was on those issues that  he  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Alis noted  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    challenge the asylum decision.  An appeal was consequently  granted  in
    respect of Article 15(c) only i.e. Grounds 2 and 3 of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.

 7. On 3rd October 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response argues that  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 60 to 82 has made clear and properly reasoned findings as to
    why the Appellant's application for an adjournment was refused and that
    he has chosen to depart from the country guidance of AA  and  found  in
    relation to Kirkuk the Appellant is not entitled to claim  humanitarian
    protection.

 8. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Miss Cleghorn.  Miss Cleghorn is extremely familiar  with  this
    matter.  She appeared before the First-tier Tribunal  and  she  is  the
    author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Respondent appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Miss Pettersen.

Submissions/Discussion

 9. Miss Cleghorn notes the limited Grounds of Appeal that had been allowed
    but points out that there was no evidence provided  to  show  that  the
    judge should depart from country guidance  and  the  judge  had  merely
    turned up with a map.  However when challenged she  accepts  that  this
    was not a basis upon which a Ground of Appeal was lodged and she  takes
    me to paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Grounds of Appeal pointing  out  that
    the application to adjourn was made on the basis that  time  should  be
    given to the Appellant in order to  obtain  an  expert  report  on  the
    current status of Kirkuk.  She emphasised that had not previously  been
    sought because the Secretary of State  had  not  previously  sought  to
    identify Kirkuk as no longer being contested.  I pointed out  that  she
    had country guidance to rely upon (AA (Iraq)).   Consequently  for  the
    judge to have concluded at paragraph 66 that there was  a  real  danger
    granting the application in looking to reverse the burden of proof  was
    not a sustainable argument. She submits  consequently  that  the  judge
    materially therefore erred in law.  Further she  relies  on  the  basic
    principles set out in Nwaigwe and that the judge  had  failed  to  give
    consideration as to whether the Appellant would be deprived of  a  fair
    hearing.

10. In response Miss Pettersen takes me to paragraph  68  of  the  decision
    pointing out that the judge has considered the security  position  that
    the judge has not just considered the position as per  a  map  but  has
    also taken into account recent information.  She submits that the judge
    was entitled to conclude that there was no risk from the authorities in
    Kirkuk and that an objective conclusion as  to  the  situation  on  the
    ground was one that the judge was entitled  to  make  at  the  date  of
    hearing.

11. Miss Cleghorn points out that the  Home  Office  did  not  provide  any
    documentary evidence only merely a bold assertion  that  the  Appellant
    could return to Kirkuk and therefore it was  not  appropriate  for  the
    judge to provide the map without any opportunity being given to  rebut.
    She emphasises that this constitutes the predominant material error  of
    law.  She contends that the issue of fairness entitles the Appellant to
    a rehearing and asked me to remit the matter.



The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. The principal thrust of the appeal relates to the  issue  of  fairness.
    Nwaigwe is authority for saying that where an  adjournment  refusal  is
    challenged on fairness grounds it is important to  recognise  that  the
    question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge acted reasonably but rather the test to be  applied  is  that  of
    fairness; and was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
    to a fair hearing.  There is of course a suggestion in this matter that
    there has been at least an impression given of a lack  of  impartiality
    by the judge and the adjournment would have  at  least  diminished  the
    appearance of bias.  However it has to be  remembered  that  permission
    was not granted to appeal merely because the judge relied on a map  and
    indeed a map that was latterly approved by the Home Office.

15. What is of more importance is that the Secretary  of  State  failed  to
    provide any documentary evidence with regard to return to  Kirkuk  only
    relying on bold assertions.  Consequently in such circumstances it  was
    inappropriate for a map to be given to the  judge  without  giving  the
    opportunity to the Appellant's legal representatives to rebut that that
    is being put before them.  Where I consider there to be an error is  to
    be highlighted within paragraphs 62 to 64 of the  decision.   Whilst  I
    understand that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  believes  that  he  was
    being fair because he gave the parties the opportunity to comment on it
    the fact that he introduced it in the first place and relied upon it as
    the initial assertion could easily constitute an  element  of  bias  in
    that the documentary  evidence  was  produced  by  the  judge  and  not
    produced by the Secretary of State.

16. It is important  that  procedural  fairness  is  maintained.   In  such
    circumstances I am satisfied that what has happened - albeit  with  the
    very best of intentions - has created a material error of law  and  the
    correct approach is to set aside the decision and to remit  the  matter
    back for rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  There are  of
    course factual issues that flow from  this  matter.   The  position  in
    Northern Iraq is constantly changing.  As the matter is to  be  reheard
    it is appropriate that there be up-to-date objective and/or  subjective
    evidence filed that may have a material effect upon the outcome of  any
    appeal and not necessarily an outcome that would be favourable  to  the
    Appellant.  He has to be aware of  this.   Further  all  this  is  made
    against a background that at the present time there are  of  course  no
    enforced returns to Iraq.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law and is set aside.  The matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for rehearing.

Directions

 1) On the finding that there is a material error of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is set aside and the matter is remitted back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Bradford on the first available date 28 days  hence
    with none of the findings of fact to stand.

 2) That the rehearing be before any judge of the First-tier Tribunal other
    than Immigration Judge Cope.

 3) That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve the bundle  of
    objective/subjective evidence upon which  they  seek  to  rely  on  the
    Tribunal and on the other party  at  least  seven  days  prior  to  the
    restored hearing.

 4) That in the event that the Appellant requires  an  interpreter  at  the
    restored hearing it is the responsibility of his instructed  solicitors
    to notify the Tribunal of a language  requirement  and  to  request  an
    interpreter within seven days of receipt of this decision.

A  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted   the   Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary  that  order  and  the  anonymity  direction  is
maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 18.01.18

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award.


Signed                              Date 18.01.18

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris









