
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08999/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2019                  |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr P Nathan, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  AB  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  I  Howard  dated  13
    June 2019 which allowed the appellant's appeal on refugee grounds, that
    claim brought in the context of deportation.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department as the respondent  and  to  AB  as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The issue in dispute in this appeal is narrow and I  therefore  do  not
    set out in detail the appellant's immigration history or background  to
    the deportation order  made  against  him  on  16  July  2014.   It  is
    sufficient to indicate that he has two very  serious  convictions,  the
    first in 2011 when he was given  a  sentence  of  imprisonment  for  42
    months for  violent  disorder,  two  counts  of  arson  and  destroying
    property.  The second was for fraud in 2012 for which,  on  appeal,  he
    received a sentence of imprisonment of four years.  The respondent took
    deportation action against the appellant following  those  convictions.
    In a decision dated 20 May 2015 First-tier Tribunal Rothwell found that
    the Section 72 certificate made by the Secretary of State had not  been
    rebutted, that the applicant was therefore excluded from the protection
    of the Refugee Convention, that he had not shown a risk of a breach  of
    Article 3 on return and that his Article 8 rights would not be breached
    if he were to be deported.

 4. The appellant then made further protection and human rights submissions
    which were not found to amount to a fresh claim by the  respondent  but
    following judicial review proceedings, a further decision dated 2  July
    2018 refused his further protection claim, certified his  asylum  claim
    under s.72 and refused the Article 3 and 8 ECHR claims.

 5. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Howard on 27 March 2019.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard found in paragraphs 26 to  32  of  the
    decision that the appellant had rebutted the presumption  of  the  s.72
    certificate that he was someone who posed a danger to the community  of
    the UK.  In doing so he took into account the findings of the  previous
    judge following the ratio of Devaseelan (Second Appeals,  ECHR,  Extra-
    territorial Effect) [2002] UKIAT 702. The grounds of appeal  before  me
    do not challenge that part of Judge Howard's decision and  the  finding
    that the Section 72 certificate was rebutted stands.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard  went  on  to  allow  the  appellant's
    refugee claim.  The basis of the claim was that the  appellant  is  the
    son of an Afghan banker who has worked  outside  of  Afghanistan  since
    approximately 2003.  In paragraph 33 of  the  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal noted that this claim was the same as that argued before Judge
    Rothwell which had not been found  by  her  to  show  a  real  risk  of
    mistreatment on return. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Howard  noted  that
    Judge Rothwell had an expert report from Mr Foxley before her when  she
    made her decision. In paragraph 34 the judge sets out that in  addition
    to having the decision of Judge Rothwell and the earlier report  of  Mr
    Foxley before him, he had two further expert  reports  prepared  by  Dr
    Majidi dated 10 February 2016 and Dr Giustozzi dated 7 September  2016.
    These two reports both addressed the risk of kidnapping in  Afghanistan
    generally and the risk to the appellant in particular.

 8. Judge Howard said this in paragraph 36 of the decision:

         "36.     The two doctors' reports set out the material  upon  which
             they base their conclusion that there is a real risk  that  if
             returned to  Afghanistan  the  appellant  would  be  a  kidnap
             target.  The reality is that these activities are motivated by
             money  and  are  not  politically  or  religiously  motivated.
             Looking at the three case studies cited by Dr Majidi it  is  a
             fact that  the  children  of  those  working  in  the  finance
             industry are targeted.  Dr Giustozzi widens out  the  research
             to consider the volume of kidnapping directed against  similar
             individuals and sees  a  very  considerable  increase  in  the
             volume of  this  activity  in  the  years  up  to  2016.   The
             respondent points to the fact both  reports  were  written  in
             2016, reasoning they are now out of date and that for those at
             risk, should the appellant be found so to  be,  there  is  now
             sufficiency of protection. "

 9. The judge went on to state in paragraph 37:

         "37.     In Afghanistan family is king.  There is no doubt that  in
             certain circles the appellant's father,  BB,  is  known  as  a
             financier.  The appellant, AB, is readily  identifiable  as  a
             member of that  family.   He  would  be  living  in  Kabul  in
             circumstances where it is obvious to even the casual  observer
             that he is being funded  by  a  third  party.   Jobs,  without
             family connections are hard to acquire in Kabul.  Additionally
             his westernisation will be the subject of interest.  Even with
             financial support from his family it will not be possible  for
             the appellant,  with  his  family  name,  simply  to  live  an
             anonymous life.  Once identifies (sic) as a family  member  of
             the managing director of the London subsidiary of the [X] bank
             will (sic) there be sufficient protection for him."

10. The judge  went  on  to  assess  the  material  before  him  concerning
    sufficiency of protection.  He identified that parts of  that  evidence
    post-dated  the  country  guidance  case  of  AS  (Safety   of   Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 0018 (IAC).  He indicated in paragraph 42 of
    the decision that the more recent documents from the  UNHCR  and  EASO,
    prepared in late  2018  and  in  2019  showed  that  the  situation  in
    Afghanistan was deteriorating.  In paragraph 43  of  the  decision  the
    judge sets out an extract from the UNHCR report  which  concluded  that
    matters had deteriorated so much across the country and in  Kabul  that
    "UNHCR considers that an IFA/IRA is generally not available in  Kabul".



11. Judge Howard then concluded in paragraphs 44 to 47 as follows:

         "44.     Based upon this material I consider the characteristics of
             the appellant.  He is 31 years old.  He  has  acquired  skills
             that have proved to be of assistance in his  finding  work  in
             the UK.  I am satisfied  that  his  family  is  of  sufficient
             collective  wealth  as  to  be  able  to  provide  more   than
             adequately   for   his   financial   needs   in   Afghanistan.
             Notwithstanding the findings of the UNHCR about  the  scarcity
             of the basic necessities for life, his age and lack of support
             I am not satisfied to the requisite standard that the struggle
             he would encounter in order to  survive  in  Kabul  is  unduly
             harsh.  However, it is the fact the support he  would  receive
             from the UK that would mark him  out  against  the  background
             portrayed in the most recent material from UNHCR.

         45.  He would stand out as a returnee from the west.  He would have
             means not derived from his labours.  He has the family name of
             a senior Afghani financier.  He has no family living in Kabul.
              These factors collectively mean there is a risk that he  will
             be the victim of a criminal kidnap.

         46.  I have considered whether being the son of a  financier  is  a
             particular social group.  It is an  immutable  characteristic.
             The fact those who target him are criminals  who  most  likely
             are not ideologically motivated is not relevant.

         47.  The appellant is a refugee."

12. The respondent challenges the finding that the appellant is  a  refugee
    on the basis of the risk of a kidnapping as follows:

         "5.  Given the father's absence from Afghanistan since  2003  apart
             from a visit in  2009,  there  is  no  objective  evidence  to
             support the proposition that the son of a small subsidiary  of
             [X Bank] would be identified and be at risk of kidnapping  for
             financial gain.

         6.   It is respectfully submitted that the  expert  reports  of  Dr
             Majidi and Dr Giustozzi are not sufficient to  go  behind  the
             findings of FtTJ Rothwell.

              Dr Majidi refers to Heart (sic) as the kidnapping  capital  of
             Afghanistan  (page  9).    Although   useful   as   background
             information the focus needs to  be  on  Kabul,  the  point  of
             return and the individual circumstances of the appellant.

         8.   Again reference to three family members of the DA  Afghanistan
             Bank (two in Kabul, one in Jalalabad) being kidnapped (page 9)
             may be more relevant but is largely background and that  three
             case studies from 2015 is  not  sufficient  to  demonstrate  a
             current risk to this appellant.

         9.   In a similar way  Dr  Giustozzi  (sic)  report  is  useful  as
             background evidence but fails  to  deal  with  the  individual
             circumstances  of  the  appellant  as  to  how  he  would   be
             identified as the son of a bank official, when his  father  is
             not in Afghanistan working in a small subsidiary,  the  expert
             fails to identify why  the  appellant  would  be  individually
             targeted given the obvious differences with  those  identified
             in his report.

         10.  As identified in AS Afghanistan [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC) 120 that
             can still be relied on currently with  the  exception  to  the
             question of extended risk to returned asylum seekers  (190-9),
             that would include paragraph 187

                  187.     We do not find a person on return  to  Kabul,  or
                  more widely to Afghanistan to be at risk on the  basis  of
                  'Westernisation'.

13. The respondent was granted permission to appeal against the decision of
    Judge Howard in a decision of the Upper Tribunal dated 2  August  2019.
    The grant of permission specified that  permission  was  granted  on  a
    limited basis and only on the "westernisation"  point.   The  grant  of
    permission stated:

         "Arguably, the Judge should have engaged with the country  guidance
         concerning  the   lack   of   risk   upon   return   arising   from
         'Westernisation' before concluding that such  the  appellant  would
         face risk upon return  on  that  basis.   In  the  absence  of  any
         analysis  of  the  relevant  extracts  from  the  country  guidance
         concerning westernisation, the judge arguably fell into a  material
         error of law.  The findings of the Upper Tribunal in AS  concerning
         westernisation were not impugned by the Court of  Appeal  in  AS  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]  EWCA  Civ  873."



14. It is not my conclusion that the  grounds  are  capable  of  showing  a
    material error in the finding of First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard  that
    the appellant was a refugee.  Read fairly, it is clear  from  paragraph
    37 that the judge found the appellant to be  at  risk  of  mistreatment
    because of his profile as the son of a  financier.  The  issue  of  his
    "westernisation" was a factor  which  would  give  rise  to  "interest"
    rather than being a risk factor in itself.

15. The grounds are not correct in stating  that  there  was  no  objective
    evidence to support the claim that the appellant would be identified as
    the son of a banker. The judge was provided  with  the  reports  of  Dr
    Majidi and Dr Giustozzi from 2016 and also an updated report  dated  23
    January 2018 from Mr Foxley.

16. Dr Majidi's report set out her view  on  the  risk  of  kidnappings  in
    general in Afghanistan.  She found that the risk  was  relatively  high
    and that they were "a common occurrence and a business in Afghanistan".
     On page 8 of her report she stated as follows:

         "Specifically, they are a threat  to  those  tied  to  the  banking
         sector and in high profile commercial ventures,  including  in  the
         construction sector.  Indeed, certain  sectors  are  more  targeted
         than others but the end goal remains criminal in  nature:  to  gain
         financial leverage by kidnapping those more likely to  pay  ransom.
         The banking sector  is  specifically  targeted  as  employees  hold
         direct access to funds and can also provide bank details that allow
         kidnap gangs to prey on business tycoons."

17. Dr Majidi goes on on page 9 of her report to state:

         "Kidnappings of family members of employees in the financial sector
         and of businessmen are the most common occurrence.  AB's father  is
         linked to three individuals from DA Afghanistan Bank  whose  family
         members were kidnapped and held in ransom over the last two  years.
         AB is in fear of reprisals as a result of this affiliation  and  of
         his father's job in the banking sector.  Indeed, it is  rarely  the
         senior level bank officials who get kidnapped but their sons."

18. Further down page 9 of her report Dr Majidi states:

         "According to statistics given  by  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  and
         Industries (ACCI) in 2010, in two months alone, 38  businessmen  or
         sons of businessmen were kidnapped from  various  provinces  around
         the country.  In the last three years, 173 were  kidnapped  with  a
         number of them having been killed. "

19. In Section 3 of her report on page 15 Dr  Majidi  identifies  that  the
    social information networks amongst the Afghan community made it likely
    that AB's family background would become known.  She states:

         "There is truth to the fact that someone  with  associations  to  a
         state owned bank in Afghanistan would be  at  the  centre  of  much
         gossip, especially if return is forced and against his will, as  it
         would cause fears, uproar and general talk, among  Afghans  in  the
         UK.  These conversations would then be relayed to Afghans at  home.
         Through such channels of information, and because of a  success  of
         kidnappings depend on the solidity of  information  channels,  this
         would put him at a visible threat if AB were to return."

20. Dr Majidi sets out her conclusions on page 23 of her report stating  as
    follows:

         "a.  There has been a trend  of  increasing  attacks  and  targeted
             killings and kidnappings aimed at both  high  profile  targets
             (police, army, government) and civilians (bank  officials  and
             wealthy Afghans).  The risk on  return  -  both  in  terms  of
             recruitment  and  physical  insecurity  -  is  therefore  high
             especially at a time where the local security forces are being
             targeted and weakened by opposition groups.

         b.   Should AB be returned to Afghanistan, his trace will be found,
             through informal networks.  This time, they will know  of  his
             time spent in the UK and might accuse him of being an infidel,
             of being contaminated, accusations that have led in  the  past
             to murder and torture.

         c.   Protection by authorities is not plausible - whether  physical
             or social protection given the limited  capacity  and  funding
             available to the government of Afghanistan to  implement  such
             programmes effectively."

21. The report of Dr Giustozzi was in very similar  terms  to  that  of  Dr
    Majidi.  Dr Giustozzi comments  in  paragraph  4  of  his  report  that
    "kidnapping in Afghanistan has turned into an industry after 2001".  He
    considered the numbers officially reported concerning kidnappings to be
    much higher in reality as not all families would report an incident for
    fear of reprisals or complications. In paragraph 6  of  his  report  he
    states:

         "6.  Since the years discussed above, the kidnapping  industry  has
             expanded dramatically.  Kabul police now receives 2-3  reports
             of kidnappings a week, corresponding to 10-15 reports a month.
              Not long ago, in 2015, only 2-3   kidnappings  a  month  were
             being  reported.   The  biggest  increase  in  the  number  of
             kidnappings took place in Kabul, followed by Nangarhar,  Herat
             and Balkh.  More and more businessmen are leaving  Afghanistan
             out of concern with the kidnappings.  According to  the  Kabul
             Chamber  of  Commerce,  45   businessmen   or   relatives   of
             businessmen were kidnapped between the beginning  of  May  and
             mid-July, not only in Kabul but also in  Jalalabad,  Kandahar,
             Herat and Mazar-e-Sharif."

22. In paragraph 9 he sets out:

         "9.  In total  the  police  estimates  that  150  kidnapping  gangs
             operate in Kabul, with about 6,000 members.   The  NDS  has  a
             higher estimate: more than 200 kidnapping gangs, of  which  30
             are big gangs each with more than 500 members, for a total  of
             more than 4,000 active gangsters.  Just a year ago the  number
             of members of these gangs was estimated by the police at  just
             3-3,500 and by the NDS at 1,500 (active  members  only).   The
             NDS also confirms that in 2014-15 there  were  just  80  gangs
             operating in Kabul.  Most of these gangs enjoy various degrees
             of political protection within the state apparatus."

23. In paragraph 10 of his report Dr Giustozzi identifies  that  the  "most
    active and notorious gangs operate in and around Kabul".  In  paragraph
    11 he  identifies  that  "the  gangs  are  well  connected  with  Kabul
    politicians and with the police".  In paragraph 17 he  identifies  that
    children of people perceived as being wealthy  are  preferred  targets.
    He identifies that approximately "80-90% of kidnappees are relatives of
    wealthy men".  In paragraph 18 he identifies that  the  "gangs  have  a
    well organised intelligence system, with informers in  the  police,  in
    the banks and in government offices".  In  paragraph  23  Mr  Giustozzi
    identifies that the deteriorating security conditions  in  the  country
    allowed these gangs to operate more easily.

24. In paragraph 24 Mr Giustozzi comments on the risk to the  appellant  in
    particular:

         "24.     Given that AB's family owns a property in  the  UK,  their
             wealth is  certainly  large  enough  to  turn  Mr  AB  into  a
             potential  target  for  kidnapping.   If  AB  was  to  display
             strongly westernised attitudes once back in Afghanistan,  that
             might be a more serious source of trouble for  him,  depending
             on the location.  ... however, as explained above,  the  large
             information gathering apparatus of the gangs is very likely to
             find out about AB's family  wealth.   Given  that  AB  has  no
             family, assets or property in Afghanistan,  he  will  have  to
             rely on support provided by  the  family  abroad,  or  earn  a
             livelihood himself."

25. Dr Giustozzi concludes his report in paragraph 26 as follows:

         "26.     In sum, Mr AB is highly likely to be at risk of kidnapping
             in Afghanistan, because  of  his  family  background.   It  is
             likely that the position of his father will be  known  and  it
             might also become known that he owns a property in the UK.  BB
             is the managing director of [X Bank] and as such is likely  to
             relatively easily identifiable by the  kidnappers.   A  single
             property of average value in the UK would constitute already a
             worthy capital for kidnappers to go after an easy target  like
             AB".

26. In addition, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had before him  the  updated
    2018 report from Mr Foxley. In  his  further  report  Mr  Foxley  gives
    evidence which is almost entirely consistent with that of Dr Majidi and
    Dr Giustozzi.  In paragraphs 43 to 48 he considers the current risk  of
    kidnapping because of the appellant's family background.   He  comments
    in paragraph 43 that the appellant "will  remain  at  risk  of  violent
    kidnapping because of his family connections".  Mr Foxley  states  that
    "this risk has not certainly decreased since my original  report."   He
    makes a similar comment to the other  expert  witnesses  regarding  the
    underreporting of such incidents because of the risk this  would  bring
    to the families concerned.  He refers in paragraph 43 to the kidnapping
    of a professional money changer and to other incidents  of  kidnapping.
    In paragraph 44 Mr Foxley comments on Dr Giustozzi's  analysis  of  the
    breakdown of criminal gangs and finds it to be "highly  credible".   He
    makes a similar comment on the report of Dr Majidi in paragraph 45.  In
    paragraphs 46 and 47 he comments on how criminal gangs  would  identify
    the appellant, setting out a number of ways that this is carried out.

27. There was highly cogent  and  consistent  evidence  from  three  expert
    sources before the First-tier Tribunal on a relatively high risk of the
    appellant's background being identified on return and his being at risk
    of kidnapping thereafter. The  judge  was  clearly  entitled  to  place
    weight on that evidence.  The comment in paragraph  6  of  the  grounds
    that the reports of Dr Majidi and Dr Giustozzi "are not  sufficient  to
    go behind the findings of FtTJ Rothwell"  is  disagreement.  The  other
    criticisms of the expert reports in the  grounds  are  equally  without
    force.

28. It is therefore my conclusion that the finding in paragraph 37 that the
    appellant would be at risk of kidnapping as he would be identified as a
    family member of a banker was sustainable. This finding was independent
    of any additional  risk  from  the  appellant  having  a  "westernised"
    profile, a factor the judge  found  would  add  to  the  likelihood  of
    identification rather than acting as a risk factor in itself.  This  is
    clear when paragraph 45 is read together with paragraph 37.

29. For these reasons, it is my conclusion that there is no  error  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]                               Date: 10 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt



