
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08582/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 09.02.18                                   |On 23.02.18                    |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               AH (BANGLADESH)
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Ms P. Glass, Counsel instructed by
Blackrock Solicitors
For the Respondent:             Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Telford sitting at Hatton Cross on 3 October
    2017) dismissing his protection and human  rights  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a
    political refugee, or, in the alternative, to grant him leave to remain
    on private life grounds under Rule 276ADE (1)(vi). Although the alleged
    error of law by the First-tier Tribunal for which permission  has  been
    granted only relates  to  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim  under
    Article 8 ECHR, I was not asked to discharge  the  anonymity  direction
    made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  In  the  circumstances,   it   is
    appropriate that the appellant continues to be accorded  anonymity  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, whose date of birth is  [  ]
    1992.  He entered the United Kingdom as a student in January 2012.   In
    2014 he made an out of time  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student, which was refused with no right of appeal on 27 May 2015.  The
    appellant eventually claimed asylum on 21 May 2017. His claim was  that
    he could not go back because his past political opponents in Bangladesh
    were now in power, and he thereby faced  a  threat  of  persecution  at
    their hands. He also advanced a sur place claim based on his activities
    for the BNP in the United Kingdom.

 3. On 21 August 2017 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for  refusing
    the appellant's protection and human rights claims. He was not credible
    in his account of (a) being a member of the student wing of the BNP  in
    Bangladesh; (b) being  active  for  the  BNP  in  the  UK;  (c)  facing
    prosecution in Bangladesh  on  criminal  charges  engendered  by  false
    allegations made against him by Awami League activists; or  (d)  facing
    persecution by the state for an alleged failure by him and  his  father
    to repay a business loan which his father had taken out. On  the  issue
    of risk on return, even if he was a member of the student wing  of  the
    BNP in the past, he had not held a high position within the party,  and
    so there was no real risk of him  being  of  adverse  interest  on  his
    return.

 4. With regard to a claim under Rule 276ADE(1)(vi),  there  would  not  be
    very  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration   into   life   in
    Bangladesh. He had lived there for most of his life,  and  his  mother,
    father, sisters and brothers were still there.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. Both  parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Telford.  The
    appellant  gave  oral  evidence,  and  he  was  cross-examined  by  the
    Presenting Officer.

 6. Judge Telford found that the  appellant  had  not  shown  that  he  was
    involved in anti-government opposition in Bangladesh, or  that  he  had
    been involved in politics in the UK in such a way as  to  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities in Bangladesh.

 7. Judge Telford found at paragraph [22] that he had failed  to  establish
    that Rule 276ADE(1)(vi) applied. His case under this Rule was not  made
    out on the evidence:

         "It was based on his political profile coupled with  the  loan  and
         the debt which  would  have  made  him  known  to  those  political
         opponents he claims would target him.  I  found  his  claim  to  be
         incredible and those insurmountable obstacles do not exist."

 8. The Judge made further findings on the appellant's claim under  Article
    8 ECHR at paragraphs [23], [74] and [82]-[86].

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. On 23 November 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on Grounds 4 and 5 only:

         "Grounds 4 and 5 submit  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give  proper
         consideration to the Appellant's private life claim under paragraph
         276ADE and outside the Immigration Rules. This is  arguable.  There
         is no consideration or finding in the Decision as to whether  there
         are very significant obstacles to the  Appellant's  integration  in
         Bangladesh. There is arguably  no  adequate  consideration  of  the
         proportionality of the Respondent's decision."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Glass, who did not appear below, developed Grounds 4 and 5.  Mr
    Kotas adhered to the Rule 24 Response opposing  the  appeal  which  had
    been settled by a colleague.

Discussion

11. The format of the Judge's decision is that he  briefly  summarised  his
    findings at paragraphs [17] to [23] - one page of A4 - before going  on
    to provide an in-depth analysis of  the  reasoning  underpinning  these
    findings at paragraphs [24] to [86] - 12  pages  of  A4.  In  assessing
    whether there is any real merit in the error of  law  challenge  it  is
    thus essential not to overlook the Judge's detailed discussion  of  the
    Article 8 claim at paragraphs [82]-[86].

12. The Judge misdirected himself at paragraph [22]  in  referring  to  the
    test of "insurmountable  obstacles"  rather  than  the  test  of  "very
    significant obstacles".  However, his error was not material.  In  view
    of the Judge's primary findings of fact on the  protection  claim,  the
    appellant could not satisfy either test. Counsel for the appellant made
    a crucial concession which is recorded by the Judge at  paragraph  [10]
    of his decision:

         "It was accepted on his behalf that article 2 and 3 stood  or  fell
         with the credibility of his asylum claim and it was also eventually
         accepted that this  was  the  case  for  his  article  8  case  (my
         emphasis). Outside the Rules he  claimed  to  have  an  exceptional
         case."

13. In short, it was common ground that the claim under Rule  276ADE(1)(vi)
    stood or fell with the asylum claim. If the appellant was not  credible
    in his asylum claim, he also necessarily failed to qualify for leave to
    remain on the basis that there were very significant obstacles  to  his
    reintegration. Absent a credible asylum claim, there  were  clearly  no
    obstacles at  all  to  his  reintegration  into  life  and  society  in
    Bangladesh, for the reasons given in the refusal letter and also having
    regard to the guidance given by the Tribunal in Kamara [2016] EWCA  Civ
    813.

14. It is pleaded in Ground 4 that the Judge failed to ask himself  whether
    the appellant could build a meaningful private life in  Bangladesh,  as
    opposed to simply being "able to sustain his life" there. But this  was
    not a distinction which was drawn  by  Counsel  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant in the First-tier Tribunal. Moreover, there was no evidential
    platform for the proposition that the appellant would be  an  outsider,
    or that he would not have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted  back
    into society, "so as to be able to operate on a day  to  day  basis  in
    that society and to build up within a  reasonable  time  a  variety  of
    human relationships to give substance to the  individual's  private  or
    family life".

15. Accordingly, the Judge gave adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  Rule
    276ADE(1)(vi) did not apply.

16. With regard to the appellant's Article 8 claim outside the Rules, it is
    pleaded in Ground 5 that the proportionality  assessment  at  paragraph
    [86] was inadequate as no weight was attached to factors which favoured
    the appellant in the balancing exercise.

17. Neither the pleader nor Ms Glass identified any factor  which  actually
    favoured the appellant in  the  proportionality  assessment.  Ms  Glass
    mentioned the life which the appellant has enjoyed here  as  a  student
    and as a political activist. However, in  the  light  of  the  domestic
    jurisprudence on Article 8 claims by former students,  it  was  clearly
    open to the Judge not to treat these aspects of the appellant's private
    life in the UK as justifying a departure from  the  general  rule  that
    private life developed or established during  periods  of  unlawful  or
    precarious  residence  should  be  accorded  little  weight.    Indeed,
    arguably it would have been an error of law if the Judge  had  attached
    more than little weight to these aspects  of  the  appellant's  private
    life, or more than little weight to the multiple friendships  which  he
    claimed to have built up in the UK.

18. Nasim and Others (Article  8)  [2014]  UKUT  0025  (IAC)  is  the  most
    pertinent of the pre-section 117B authorities.  At paragraphs [14]  and
    [15] of Nasim, the Tribunal observed that the concept of a private life
    for the purposes of Article 8 is inherently less clear.  At one end  of
    the continuum stands the concept of moral and physical integrity as  to
    which, in extreme circumstances, even the State's interest in  removing
    foreign  criminals  might  not  constitute  a  proportionate  response.
    However, as one moves down the continuum,  one  encounters  aspects  of
    private life which, even if engaging Article 8(1), are so  far  removed
    from the core of Article  8  as  to  be  readily  defeasible  by  State
    interests, such  as  the  importance  of  maintaining  a  credible  and
    coherent system of immigration control. On this point on the continuum,
    the essential elements of the private life relied upon will normally be
    transposable, in the sense of being capable  of  replication  in  their
    essential respects, following a person's return to their home  country.
    A student here on a temporary basis has no expectation of  a  right  to
    remain in order to further his social ties and relationships in the  UK
    if the criteria of the points-based system are not met.

19. The Tribunal went on  in  paragraph  [16]  to  cite  with  approval  MG
    (assessing interference of private life) Serbia Montenegro [2005] UKAIT
    00113 as follows:

         "A person's job and precise programme of studies may  be  different
         in the country to which he is to be returned  and  his  network  of
         friendships and other acquaintances is likely to be different  too,
         but his private life will continue in respect of all its  essential
         elements."

20. The Tribunal at paragraph [20] reached the following conclusion:

         "We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and Others is
         a  significant  exhortation  from  the  Supreme  Court  to  refocus
         attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,   in
         particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
         one has moved along the continuum, from that Article's core area of
         operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
         The limitation arises, both from what will at that  point  normally
         be  the  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
         interference and the fact that, unless there are particular reasons
         to reduce the public interest of  enforcing  immigration  controls,
         that  interest  will   consequently   prevail   in   striking   the
         proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached)."

21. The Tribunal went on to address the scope of CDS (Brazil)  [2010]  UKUT
    305 (IAC).  At paragraph [41], they declined Mr Jarvis's invitation  to
    find that the obiter remarks in CDS regarding Article 8 were no  longer
    good law in the light of Patel and Others.  But the Tribunal in CDS did
    however expressly knowledge that it was unlikely a person would be able
    to show an Article  8  right  by  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  for
    temporary purposes:

         "The chances that such a right  will  prevail  have,  we  consider,
         further diminished, in the light of  the  judgments  in  Patel  and
         Others.  It would, however, be wrong to say that the point has been
         reached where an adverse immigration decision  in  the  case  of  a
         person was here for study or other temporary purposes can never  be
         found to be disproportionate.  What is clear is that, on the  state
         of the present law, there is no  justification  for  extending  the
         obiter findings in CDS, so as to equate a person  whose  course  of
         study has not yet ended with a person who,  having  finished  their
         course, is precluded by the Immigration Rules from staying on to do
         something else."

22. The Judge found that the appellant was supposed to have left the UK  at
    the end of July 2013 after completing his studies: paragraph [46].  The
    Judge found that he had failed to attend college, with the result  that
    a curtailment notice had been served on him. But even though he was not
    attending a college, he was still in the UK in October 2013:  paragraph
    [46]. The Judge found that he was in the UK  as  an  economic  migrant:
    paragraph [71]. The Judge found that part of the appellant's motivation
    in coming to the UK was to make money from working: paragraph [72]. The
    Judge correctly directed himself that the appellant  had  no  right  to
    choose where to exercise a private life: paragraph [85]. On the Article
    8(2)  side  of  the  equation,  the  Judge  treated  as  "serious"  the
    appellant's unlawful presence in the UK since  the  exhaustion  of  his
    appeal rights as a student "and lack of compliance with the life in the
    UK test and his lack of evidence of the necessary qualification to show
    the appropriate command of [the] English language."

23. On a holistic assessment of the decision, I  consider  that  the  Judge
    gave adequate reasons for finding that the  interference  consequential
    upon the refusal decision was proportionate, and hence that an  Article
    8 claim outside the Rules was not made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands. This appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date:  17 February 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




















