
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08148/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On February 5, 2019                          |On February 25, 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  RABAR [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On October 18, 2017 the appellant entered the United Kingdom  illegally
    and claimed asylum.  He had previously claimed  asylum  in  Romania  on
    August 14,  2017  but  had  left  that  country  after  seventeen  days
    travelling through Austria, Germany and France where he stayed a  total
    of 48 days.  The respondent refused his application for  protection  on
    June 16, 2018 under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision on June 28, 2018  and  his  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Juss on August 3, 2018 and
    in a  decision  promulgated  on  October  16,  2018  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought on October 30, 2018 on  the  basis  the
    Judge had provided inadequate reasoning for his  decision.   Permission
    to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Buchanan  on
    November 12, 2018 on  the  basis  that  it  was  arguable  the  Judge's
    conclusion failed  to  take  into  account  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant which it was arguable was consistent with objective evidence.




 4. No anonymity direction is made.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 5. The matter came before me on the above date  and  at  that  hearing  Mr
    McVeety accepted there was a material error as that there had not  been
    any real findings  about  the  appellant's  claim.   Mr  Brown  further
    pointed out there had also been a factual error in  paragraph  20  when
    the Judge had suggested that the appellant had claimed that Raymar  had
    been captured when in fact he was the person  who  had  introduced  the
    person who was captured to him.

 6. Having considered the content of the decision and the grounds of appeal
    together with the grant of permission I accept there is  merit  to  the
    argument advanced in  the  grounds  of  appeal  (as  recognised  by  Mr
    McVeety) and consequently as the findings in respect of credibility are
    core to the issue of risk, I find there has been an error  of  law  for
    the reasons given in the permission to appeal.

 7. I considered whether to retain jurisdiction in this matter or to  remit
    the matter back to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Bearing  in  mind  full
    credibility findings and reasons will be required, it seems appropriate
    that this matter be remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
    Section 12(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  to  be
    heard by a Judge other than Judge Juss.

    NOTICE OF DECISION


 8. I allow the appeal.  I set aside the decision and remit the matter back
    to the First-tier Tribunal as set out above.  No findings are retained.




Signed                              Date 20 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
