
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08329/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2019                            |On 13 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    M T T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, Counsel, instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S J Clarke (the judge), promulgated on 31 October  2018,
    in which she dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's decision  of
    29 July 2016, which had in turn refused his protection and human rights
    claims.

 2. The reason why the decision is so old is that this appeal  has  already
    been through the appellate process in the Upper Tribunal  once  before:
    the hearing before the judge was a remittal  following  a  decision  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge Southern, promulgated on 24 October 2017,  that  a
    previous First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision was flawed.

 3. The central thrust of the Appellant's claim has  always  been  that  if
    returned to Vietnam he would be subject not simply to prosecution under
    the criminal law of that country, but also to persecutory treatment for
    the Convention reason of imputed political opinion.  The Respondent had
    accepted that he had intervened when police officers had  attempted  to
    extort money from another individual.  It was also  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was then mistreated by the  police  officers,  arrested,  and
    then charged.  He was able to leave the country, but on return would be
    prosecuted for the offence of obstructing police officers in the course
    of their duties.




The judge's decision

 4. In a relatively brief decision, the judge sets  out  her  findings  and
    conclusions as follows.

 5. At [6] she concludes that the  Appellant  feared  prosecution  and  not
    persecution.  At [7] she deals with the issue of arrest warrants in the
    context of an expert report.  The judge makes reference to the expert's
    use of the term "might", and concludes that this indicated a  state  of
    affairs that was less than a real risk.  Thus, at least by implication,
    the judge concludes that the expert evidence did not greatly assist the
    Appellant's case.  At [8] and [9] and then  [12]  to  [14],  the  judge
    deals with what was said to be an anti-government  profile  established
    by the Appellant  on  social  media.   This  aspect  of  the  claim  is
    rejected.  At [11] the judge concludes that the Appellant has sought to
    embellish his claim by saying that the police were visiting his family.
     In the same paragraph reference is made to  what  was  said  to  be  a
    newspaper article in a Vietnamese publication.  At [15] the Appellant's
    credibility was said to be damaged by his delay in claiming  asylum  in
    this country.  Finally, at [16] the judge brings  all  of  the  matters
    together  and  concludes  that  the  Appellant  will  be   subject   to
    prosecution based on the summons  produced,  and  that  alone.   It  is
    concluded that he was not otherwise of any interest to  the  Vietnamese
    authorities.









The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds of appeal are succinct.  Ground 1 asserts  that  the  judge
    has failed to explain why  she  concluded  that  the  Appellant  feared
    prosecution only.  Ground 2 attacks the judge's view  of  the  expert's
    use of the word "might" in the report, it being said that at the end of
    the report the expert had in fact stated that  the  Appellant  faced  a
    "serious risk" of torture.  In ground 3 it is said that no reasons were
    given as to why the judge believed the Appellant  to  have  embellished
    his account in any way.

 7. Permission to appeal on all grounds was granted  by  Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 21 November 2018.



The hearing before me

 8. Mr Wilford relied on his grounds of appeal.   He  emphasised  the  fact
    that the police officers had been acting outside of their  powers.   In
    respect of the expert report, it was accepted  that  the  term  "might"
    would not be sufficient to meet the real risk  threshold,  but  if  the
    report  was  viewed  as  a  whole,  including  references  to   country
    information, it had  been  supportive  of  the  Appellant's  case.   In
    respect of any embellishments,  it  was  entirely  plausible  that  the
    authorities would have been looking for the Appellant given that he was
    wanted by them for an offence.

 9. Mr Clarke submitted that there were no material errors in  the  judge's
    decision.  The judge had firmly rejected the claim that  the  Appellant
    had any political profile of any sort.  The Appellant was  only  wanted
    on the basis of the summons, as presented.  Nothing  relating  to  that
    stated offence had any political connotations,  the  Appellant  had  no
    political profile, and there had been no  evidence  to  show  that  the
    Vietnamese authorities believed him to have had any such  profile.   It
    could not be right that anybody facing criminal proceedings in  Vietnam
    would be regarded as having an actual or imputed political opinion.  Mr
    Clarke submitted  that  the  expert's  use  of  the  term  "might"  was
    significant, this term appeared repeatedly throughout  the  report  and
    the terminology was only changed at the very end.

10. In reply Mr Wilford accepted that it would be  difficult  to  challenge
    the judge's findings in respect of the claimed political  profile.   He
    submitted that the Appellant's act in  intervening  when  the  officers
    were trying to extort money was itself seen as  a  political  act.   He
    also submitted that if there were no Convention reason, Article 3 would
    still be in issue.  There was no real leap between the use of the  term
    "might" and that of "serious risk" in the expert report.

11. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision on error of law.







Decision on error of law

12. Having thought about the competing arguments with care and having  read
    the judge's decision sensibly and in the round, I conclude  that  there
    are no material errors of law.

13. In my view it is important to bear in  mind  the  judge's  findings  in
    respect of the claimed political profile.  It is quite clear to me that
    the judge was fully entitled to reject this aspect of  the  Appellant's
    claim for the reasons set out  in  her  decision.  There  has  been  no
    express challenge to  these  findings  and  Mr  Wilford  quite  rightly
    accepted that such a challenge would face an  uphill  struggle  in  any
    event.

14.  Therefore,  with  this  in  mind  and  reading  the  judge's  decision
    holistically,  she  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  in  essence  the
    Appellant had no political profile either  at  the  time  at  which  he
    intervened  with  the  police  officers'  actions  or  at   any   stage
    thereafter.

15. There was nothing in  the  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  Vietnamese
    authorities would regard any person charged with any offence under  the
    criminal law to be inherently anti-regime or political  in  some  other
    way.  The summons itself makes no reference to any political or pseudo-
    political offences.  This is in my view an important context  in  which
    the judge's other findings and conclusions need to be read.

16. I appreciate the reference to paragraph  339K  of  the  Rules  made  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy when granting  permission
    to appeal.  It is not clear whether this particular provision was cited
    to the judge.  In any event, there is no finding that any  mistreatment
    meted out to the Appellant by the  police  officers  at  the  time  was
    actually  persecutory.   Although  ill-treatment  of   any   sort   may
    nonetheless may be an indicator of future repetition, the point has not
    been raised in the grounds themselves and in any event I must view this
    particular point in the context of the decision as a whole.

17. I turn to the expert report.  When reading the papers in advance I  saw
    merit in the Appellant's challenge: it is certainly the case  that  the
    term "serious risk" is used by the  expert  at  the  very  end  of  her
    report.

18. However, having reflected on the report as a whole and in light of  the
    representatives' submissions, I  have  concluded  that  the  judge  was
    entitled  to  conclude  that  this  evidence  did  not  in  fact   lend
    significant weight to the Appellant's case after all.

19. The expert has in fact used the term "might" repeatedly throughout  her
    report, and the only change in terminology does indeed come at the very
    end.  One could potentially speculate as to why  different  words  were
    used at different times, but that is not really the task  of  a  judge,
    either in the First-tier Tribunal or on appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The fact is that this is what the expert has said.

20. It is also the case that Mr Wilford has quite rightly accepted that the
    term "might" is not sufficient to be supportive of a  "real  risk".   I
    note, with reference to perhaps the most relevant part of the  body  of
    the report at page 13 of  the  Appellant's  bundle  (that  relating  to
    criminal proceedings for  the  offence  in  question),  that  the  term
    "might" is utilised without any qualification.  Taking the report as  a
    whole and indeed the judge's decision as a whole, it  was  in  my  view
    open to her to conclude as she did.

21. The references to the Human Rights  Watch  reports  makes  no  material
    difference to my  conclusion  on  this  point.   Although  the  reports
    contained generalised information and which was potentially  supportive
    of the Appellant's claim, such information must always be  assessed  in
    the context of the particular circumstances of any given  case  and  of
    course these reports do not themselves set out  relevant  standards  of
    proof applicable to appeals.

22. Turning to ground 3 and the issue of  embellishments,  again  at  first
    blush Mr Wilford's grounds disclosed merit.  Yet the context  in  which
    the comment on embellishment is made in [11] is that  he  had  provided
    apparently supporting evidence in the form of a newspaper article which
    the judge viewed as being unreliable.  This  has  to  be  seen  in  the
    context of other adverse matters relating  to  both  the  social  media
    evidence and the delay in claiming asylum.  For these  reasons  it  was
    open to the judge to conclude as she did.

23. Specifically, she was entitled to find  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    subject to prosecution only and without  the  risk  of  persecution  or
    Article 3 ill-treatment during the process, that he had never  had  any
    political profile,  and  that  the  Vietnamese  authorities  would  not
    perceive him as having any such profile.

24. For these reasons, the Appellant's challenge to  the  judge's  decision
    must fail.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law and it shall therefore stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





Signed   [pic]                  Date: 29 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

