
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08193/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2018                            |On 17 April 2018              |


                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     MB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [ ]  1991.  She  is  from
    northern Albania. She appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Chana promulgated on 2 October 2017. In that decision Judge Chana
    refused an appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 10
    August 2017 refusing her appeal for asylum and humanitarian  protection
    in the UK.

 2. The appellant entered the UK on a student visa on  3  April  2015.  The
    visa was valid until 26 March 2016.  That  visa  was  curtailed  on  12
    October 2015 to expire on 11 December 2016. Further  submissions  under
    article 8 were made and refused on 25 January 2017.  She  then  claimed
    asylum.

The First-tier Tribunal's decision

 3. The appellant's claim was that she had come to the UK to study. She was
    paid for by her parents who  supported  her.  They  were  well  off  in
    Albania. When she was here she met and started a  relationship  with  a
    man AI from Kosovo. That was in June 2015. In about November that  year
    she told her parents about the relationship. They  disowned  her.  They
    told her that they had arranged a marriage with someone in Albania  and
    she had not kept her promise to return to Albania. She claimed that she
    was fearful of her family and in particular her father and brother. She
    believed that she would come to harm if she  returned  to  Albania  and
    that there was insufficient protection for her from state  authorities.
    The appellant had had no contact with her family since November 2015.

 4. In late November 2016 AI went to Albania and  sought  to  make  contact
    with the  family  through  the  Peace  Reconciliation  Missionaries  of
    Albania (also referred to as the commission)  as  intermediaries.  That
    was unsuccessful. The family had made it clear that they did  not  wish
    to speak to him.

 5. Judge Chana did not believe either the appellant  or  AI.  She  gave  a
    number of reasons. First she said that the there  was  a  contradiction
    between the appellant's evidence and  AI's.  The  appellant  said  that
    Nicoll (sic) (the name is actually Nikoll Shullani) from the commission
    had telephoned her parents. AI said that Nikoll Shulani had gone to her
    parent's house. In any event the message was the same; they refused  to
    see AI.

 6. Secondly the appellant had claimed  that  AI  went  to  Albania  on  27
    November 2015 and made contact with  the  commission  on  13  November.
    However Judge Chana said that  the  documentary  evidence  was  to  the
    effect that he arrived in Albania on 27 October.  Judge  Chana  further
    found that he had gone to Albania for a  month  before  making  contact
    with the commission. She said that there was no credible reason why  he
    would wait a month before contacting the commission.

 7. Thirdly Judge Chana said it  was  not  credible  that  the  appellant's
    parents would allow her to leave Albania and genuinely believe that she
    would  marry  someone  that  they  had  arranged  in  Albania.  If  the
    appellant's parents were as traditional as the appellant made out  they
    would not have sent her to the UK in the first place.  They  must  have
    known that she could meet somebody and start a relationship.

 8. Fourthly Judge Chana said that the appellant had not told  her  parents
    about the relationship for five months because she wanted  to  be  sure
    about him. Yet Judge Chana said that she had moved into the  flat  with
    AI after two weeks. She would not have moved in with him if she was not
    sure about the relationship. The Judge also pointed to an inconsistency
    in the timeline of when she said she met him and moving in with him. In
    any event there was no credible evidence that the  appellant  had  been
    living with AI since June 2015.

Permission

 9. The appellant lodged four grounds of appeal. Permission was granted  by
    First-tier Judge Saffer on 14 December  2017.  He  noted  that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge may have materially erred  in  not  considering
    the evidence from the appellant when rejecting her credibility  and  in
    misapplying cultural views and guessing what her parents would think or
    do. All grounds were arguable.

Grounds of Appeal

10. The first ground is to the effect that Judge Chana had made credibility
    findings without fully considering the evidence. She had found that  AI
    had gone to Albania on 27 October on the basis  of  evidence  from  the
    hotel in Tirana which said that he had arrived on that date. However in
    her witness statement the appellant  had  explained  that  this  was  a
    mistake and she produced the flight tickets in his name  which  vouched
    that he had travelled out on 27 November returning on 4 December  2016.
    This error was carried over into the next paragraph where the Judge had
    made adverse comments about him staying in Albania for a  month  before
    he contacted the commission.

11. The second ground was  a  failure  to  consider  material  evidence  in
    particular a letter from  the  chairman  of  the  Peace  Reconciliation
    Missionaries of Albania which corroborated AI's account of his trip  to
    Albania. Further, Judge Chana had failed to consider material from  the
    media which the appellant had submitted to show a  lack  of  protection
    for victims of domestic violence in Albania. Although she had relied on
    country guidance she had  not  explained  why  she  had  rejected  this
    evidence.

12. Thirdly at paragraphs 28 and 29 Judge Chana had found that it  was  not
    credible that the appellant's parents would have allowed her to  go  to
    the UK to study when they had arranged a marriage for her  in  Albania.
    She had found that if the parents wanted her to return and  marry  they
    would have explicitly forbidden her from having a relationship  in  the
    UK. This approach was flawed because the judge considered  plausibility
    from a western perspective; Ibrahim Ali v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2002] UKIAT 07001, para 3. She failed  to  distinguish
    between  plausibility  and  incredibility;  MM  (DRC  -   plausibility)
    Democratic Republic of Congo [2005]  UKIAT  00019,  para  19.  Ms  Reid
    explained that it was important to see this evidence  in  the  cultural
    context. The parents clearly thought that they had  a  high  degree  of
    control over her as a  result  of  her  upbringing.  It  would  not  be
    necessary to give explicit instructions forbidding her  from  having  a
    relationship.

13. Fourthly the Judge had found that there was no credible  evidence  that
    she had been  living  with  AI  since  June  2015.  The  appellant  had
    submitted evidence in support of her claim but no reason was given  for
    rejecting the evidence. That evidence came from her and her partner.





The respondent's response

14. There was no rule 24 response. Mr Duffy submitted that the decision was
    one which was open to the judge and was  adequately  reasoned.  It  was
    clear that the appellant had been inconsistent in her evidence. So  far
    as plausibility was concerned she came from a tribal culture from north
    Albania. She had a conservative family which believed in  chastity  and
    honour. The idea that they would allow her to go to the UK to study did
    seem implausible. So far as the lack of reasons were concerned the fact
    was that there was no documentary evidence that the  appellant  and  AI
    were living together.

Decision

15. The UT should be slow to interfere with findings of credibility made by
    the First-tier Tribunal. However the appellant's credibility  and  that
    of her partner is central to her case. Judge Chana relies  on  evidence
    from the hotel in Albania for the finding that AI travelled to  Albania
    on 27 October. However the appellant explained in her witness statement
    that this was an error. Moreover she produced the Ryanair boarding pass
    in IA's name showing that he travelled to Podgorica in Montenegro on 27
    November 2016 returning on 4 December 2016. The airport is not far from
    northern Albania.

16. Moreover the appellant produced a letter from the Peace  Reconciliation
    Missionaries of Albania (the commission) dated 3  March  2017  together
    with a translation which confirmed that AI had appeared in their office
    on 30 November 2016. It confirmed many of the details of AI's  account.
    He had told them that he was of Kosovan origin living in London. He had
    met the appellant and they loved one another very much. They were happy
    to live together. However as soon as  she  had  told  her  family  they
    disowned her as their daughter. The appellant had become depressed  and
    for that reason he travelled to meet  the  family.  He  had  asked  the
    commission for help. They had made contact with the appellant's  father
    on AI's behalf but on 2 December had got a very curt answer. The father
    told them that the family had sent their daughter to England  to  study
    but she had betrayed them by entering a relationship with a  foreigner,
    a  thing  that  in  their  tradition  was  categorically  unacceptable.
    Moreover she had caused them  another  problem;  they  had  promised  a
    family with the same traditions and customs as theirs that as  soon  as
    the appellant returned from London  she  would  marry  their  son.  The
    family had lost face twice because of her. If the encountered either AI
    or the appellant they would not be responsible  for  the  consequences.
    They had done everything for the daughter but she had  repaid  them  in
    the worst possible  manner.  The  honour  of  the  family  stays  above
    everything.

17. Mr Duffy said that there was no documentary evidence that the appellant
    and AI were living together. That is incorrect.  The  bundle  shows  an
    electricity bill from Eon dated 1 October 2015 in both names as well as
    two Council Tax bills from the London Borough of  Bexley  covering  the
    periods from 1 October 2015 to 31 March 2017.

18. Judge Chana's failure to consider the explanation about the hotel dates
    together with the supporting evidence from the  boarding  pass  is  the
    start of a failure to properly assess the evidence  before  her.  There
    was evidence that AI had travelled to the region and spent only  a  few
    days there; that during his stay he had approached the  commission  for
    help; that they approached the appellant's father on AI's behalf;  that
    the father had rejected the approach in curt terms; in doing so he gave
    reasons  which,  if  accepted  corroborated  much  of  the  appellant's
    account. Moreover the father had made a comment  which  could  well  be
    taken as a threat of harm against AI and his daughter.

19. Against that background  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  deal  with  the
    appellant's third ground of appeal. Nevertheless I agree with Ms Reid's
    submission that the parents of a girl from a  traditional  conservative
    culture might well consider that  they  do  not  require  to  expressly
    forbid their daughter to enter into a relationship  while  studying  in
    England. She may well be expected to know what behaviour  was  expected
    of her. Indeed, if the account from the commission is accepted then  it
    gives the context in which the parent's decision to send their daughter
    to England to study and their expectations of her is  set.  In  Ibrahim
    Ali the Tribunal warned that decision makers must take  great  care  in
    not allowing their  own  perceptions  and  values  to  influence  their
    judgement (para 3).

20. Finally Judge Chana finds that  the  appellant  has  not  provided  any
    credible documentary evidence that she is living with AI in  his  flat.
    It is of course open to the First-tier Tribunal to reject the  evidence
    that has been provided but the electricity and council  tax  bills  are
    prima  facie  evidence  that  they  are  living  together.   In   these
    circumstances  she  should  have  given  reasons  for  rejecting   that
    evidence.

21. For these reasons I find there is a material error of law and  I  shall
    allow the appeal. Since the appeal relates to findings  of  credibility
    in respect of both the appellant and AI I shall remit the case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be reheard. No findings are preserved.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and the case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 10 April 2018

Lord Boyd of Duncansby
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
