
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08340/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th May 2017                               |On 14th June 2017             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                 Rawand Azad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Loughran, Loughran & Co Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.   He  appealed
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 22nd July 2016 refusing to
    grant him asylum or humanitarian protection and refusing his  claim  on
    human rights issues.  The appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Green on 24th January 2017.  The appeal  was  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 31st January 2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused on 2nd March 2017 by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Dineen.
    Further grounds  were  lodged  and  permission  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker on 4th April 2017.  The  grounds  state  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge impermissibly sought corroborative  evidence.
    The judge refers to the lack of documentation produced  in  support  of
    the appellant's assertion that he bought and  sold  cars  but  he  also
    refers to the lack of evidence about the appellant's claimed adulterous
    relationship and it is this latter issue on which permission  has  been
    granted.  The permission goes on to state that the  Appellant  must  be
    aware that his credibility is undermined for the other reasons given by
    the judge, so the error may not be material.

 3. A Rule 24  response  was  lodged.   This  states  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal directed itself appropriately.  It states that the  First-tier
    Judge appreciated the standard of proof as recorded at paragraph  7  of
    the decision.  Reference is made to the case  of  TK  (Burundi)  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 40.  This states that independent supporting  evidence  should
    be provided wherever possible and the Immigration Judge should adopt  a
    cautious approach where supporting evidence which was readily available
    was not provided and held that where a judge in  assessing  credibility
    relies on the fact that there is  no  independent  supporting  evidence
    where there should be supporting evidence  and  there  is  no  credible
    account for its absence, the judge commits no  error  of  law  when  he
    relies on that fact for rejecting the account  of  an  Appellant.   The
    response states that in this case there has been no explanation for the
    lack of supporting evidence  as  considered  at  paragraph  10  of  the
    decision.

The Hearing

 4. The applicant's  representative  submitted  that  with  regard  to  the
    corroborative evidence it is not contested  that  it  would  have  been
    reasonable to provide evidence about the Appellant's  car  business  in
    Iran.  She  submitted  however  that  with  regard  to  the  adulterous
    relationship an error has been made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    when he sought corroborative evidence about this and she submitted that
    he used too high a standard of proof.

 5. She referred to paragraph 10 of the decision in which the judge  states
    that the Appellant's  statement  is  coherent  but  finds  that  it  is
    implausible and fundamentally self-serving.   She  submitted  that  the
    judge has not made  it  clear  why  he  finds  the  Appellant  has  not
    established the core of the claim.  She submitted that if the judge was
    not satisfied with issues  at  the  hearing  he  should  have  put  his
    questions to the Appellant at that time.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that evidence could  have  and  should
    have been provided relating to the Appellant's car business in Iran.

 7. With regard to the judge requiring  corroborative  evidence  about  the
    adulterous relationship, the  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's representative has misunderstood what the judge  was  doing
    and I was referred to paragraph 339L of the  Immigration  Rules.   This
    states that it is the duty of the person  to  substantiate  the  asylum
    claim or establish that  he  is  a  person  eligible  for  humanitarian
    protection or substantiate his human rights claim.   Where  aspects  of
    the person's statements are  not  supported  by  documentary  or  other
    evidence those aspects will not  need  confirmation  when  all  of  the
    following conditions are met:

    (i)  the person has made a genuine effort to substantiate his claim  or
         establish that he is a person eligible for humanitarian  protection
         or substantiate his human rights claim;

    (ii) all material factors at the person's disposal have been  submitted
         and a satisfactory explanation regarding any lack of other relevant
         material has been given;

    (iii)    the person's statements are found to be coherent and plausible
         and  do  not  run  counter  to  available  specific   and   general
         information relevant to the person's case;

    (iv) the person has made an asylum claim or sought to establish that he
         is a person eligible for humanitarian protection or  made  a  human
         rights claim at the earliest possible time unless  the  person  can
         demonstrate good reason for not having done so; and

    (5)  the general credibility of the person has been established.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that documentation does not require to
    be provided if the above conditions are met.  The judge finds that they
    have not been met.  At paragraph 10 of the decision he  refers  to  the
    appellant's statement being implausible and  states  that  his  general
    credibility has not been established.  He also points out that  Section
    8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004
    applies, which goes against his credibility.  This Appellant could have
    claimed asylum in Germany or France on his way to  the  United  Kingdom
    but did not do so.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that although the judge appears to  be
    asking for corroborative evidence about the adultery when Rule 339L  is
    visited the judge has to decide  whether  to  give  the  Appellant  the
    benefit of the doubt and in this case the judge found that he could not
    give him the benefit of the doubt.  I was referred to the  case  of  HA
    and TD [2010] CSIH 28.  He submitted that our Appellant, based  on  the
    refusal letter, knew his credibility was in issue and the burden was on
    him to make out his case.  He could have provided evidence but  he  did
    not do so and he submitted that there is no error of law.  He submitted
    that this is not a Koca [2005] SC487 case and the judge  was  right  to
    dismiss the appeal.

10. The Appellant's  representative  referred  to  paragraph  339L  of  the
    Immigration Rules and submitted that the general Rule in  asylum  cases
    is that corroboration is not required and  this  stands  regardless  of
    paragraph 339L.  She submitted that what the judge  in  this  case  was
    doing at paragraph 10 of  his  decision  was  looking  for  documentary
    evidence which would corroborate the appellant's claim.  She  submitted
    that  a  request  to  provide  supporting  documents  relating  to  the
    Appellant's adultery is impermissible  and  unreasonable.   (The  judge
    also refers to the fact that there are no  police  reports  and  states
    that the Appellant has not established the core facts of the claim.)

11. I was again referred to the said case  of  HA  and  TD,  in  particular
    paragraph 14, which states that circumstances can arise  in  which  the
    Tribunal cannot fairly adopt the  passive  role  which  a  judge  would
    normally adopt.  She referred to the said case of Koca where the  judge
    rejected the credibility of an aspect of the Appellant's account on the
    basis of what she considered to be discrepancies between  the  evidence
    given by the Appellant at the hearing and his earlier  statements.   In
    that case the reasoning was found to be inadequate and  obiter  remarks
    were made relating to procedural fairness.  In that case the Respondent
    was not represented, as in this case.  The case of HA and TD refers  to
    circumstances where the Tribunal cannot fairly adopt  a  passive  role.
    She submitted that that is the case here and that this is a Koca  case.
    She submitted that the  judge  should  have  questioned  the  Appellant
    relating to the issues he was not satisfied with and  I  was  asked  to
    allow the appeal.

12. The issue in this case is whether the judge used too high  standard  of
    proof  when  he  sought  corroboration  of   the   claimed   adulterous
    relationship.  I have to decide if this placed an impermissible  burden
    on the Appellant.  I have to decide if this is a Koca case.

13. The relevant paragraph of  the  decision  is  paragraph  10.   In  this
    paragraph the judge mentions  the  absence  of  cross-examination,  and
    states that because the Appellant  was  not  represented  it  would  be
    tempting to conclude that the appeal should stand.   Hethen  refers  to
    the witness statement being implausible and self-serving.  He refers to
    paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules.  It has been accepted by  both
    parties that evidence could have been produced  and  should  have  been
    produced relating to the Appellant's car business in Iran.   The  judge
    goes on however, to state that  the  Appellant  has  not  provided  any
    supporting evidence of  his  alleged  adulterous  relationship  or  the
    threats made against him.   The  judge  refers  to  the  only  evidence
    produced relating to this aspect of the case being what  the  appellant
    states in his witness statement and the scar on his  back.   He  states
    that as there is no medical evidence the provenance of the scar is  not
    clear.  As the only other evidence he  has  of  the  adultery  and  the
    threats is the Appellant's own evidence he finds that the appellant has
    not established that he is entitled to humanitarian protection or leave
    to remain based on his human rights.

14. The Appellant in his evidence made reference to police reports and text
    messages between him and Mina relating to their relationship.  It seems
    as  if  evidence  could  have  been  produced  about   his   adulterous
    relationship and the threats. It could be considered that the judge  by
    seeking this has made an error but it is not a material error when  the
    other credibility issues are considered.

15. The judge has considered all the evidence in the round.  He  finds  the
    Appellant's evidence to  be  lacking  in  credibility.   He  refers  to
    Section 8 of the 2004  Act  and  states  that  he  does  not  find  the
    Appellant generally to be credible.  He  has  clearly  weighed  up  the
    evidence for and against the  appellant  when  making  his  credibility
    findings and he has explained properly why he finds the  Appellant  has
    not established the core facts of his claim.

16. This is a case where paragraph 339L applies.   Although  there  was  no
    Presenting Officer at the hearing the Appellant was represented and his
    representative could have questioned the appellant  about  any  matters
    which she felt were not being  clarified  because  of  the  lack  of  a
    Presenting Officer.  This is not a Koca case.

17. The judge has referred to the case of BA Iraq [2017] UKUT  00018  (IAC)
    and finds that the Appellant  does  not  fall  into  any  of  the  risk
    categories mentioned in this case.  He also finds  that  based  on  the
    case of AA [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) there is  no  15(c)  risk  to  him  on
    return.



Notice of Decision

I find that there is no material error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Judge's
decision and that First-tier Tribunal Judge Green's decision promulgated  on
31st January 2017 must stand.  This Appellant's appeal is dismissed  on  all
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 13 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray



