
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08134/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 22 January 2020                  |On 27 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                DMA (AKA AM)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Heybroek, counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Samimi, promulgated on 9 October 2019. Permission to appeal was granted
    by Resident Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Zucker on 12 December 2019



Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is  reiterated  below  because
    this is a protection matter and there is  evidence  of  the  respondent
    suffering from a mental health condition.

Background

 3. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom from  Iraq  on  2  October
    2008, aged 16 and applied for asylum  on  that  date.  This  claim  was
    refused on 8 February 2010 and his appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed following an appeal in a decision promulgated on 28 July 2010
    (AA/02814/2010). The respondent returned  voluntarily  to  Iraq  on  20
    March 2012. He returned to the UK, entering illegally  on  19  December
    2017. The respondent made further submissions on 26 October 2018. It is
    the refusal of those submissions, in a  decision  dated  20  May  2019,
    which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The respondent's previous claim was based on  him  being  from  Kirkuk,
    that his brother was killed in an explosion and that he was at risk  of
    being killed in retribution for his father reporting to the police that
    weapons had been hidden by terrorists on  their  family  farmland.  His
    current claim is focused on the respondent being divorced and  becoming
    a victim of an "honour" crime and that  he  was  a  part  of  a  police
    brigade to protect Iraqi  oil  facilities  and  natural  resources  but
    abandoned his post and faced punishment as a deserter.

 5. In refusing those further submissions, the Secretary of State took  the
    findings of the  judge  who  considered  his  previous  appeal  as  the
    starting point, it being noted that the respondent's claims were  found
    to lack credibility. The Secretary of State also referred to the latest
    Country Guidance, concluding that there was no Article  15(c)  risk  in
    Iraq and that the respondent could obtain a CSID with the assistance of
    his family members who remained in Iraq.  It  was  noted  that  he  had
    provided his marriage and divorce certificates and had  lived  in  Iraq
    between 2012 and 2017, which indicated that he was able to  obtain  the
    appropriate documentation to allow his residency and travel. There  was
    said to be no evidence that the respondent's divorce would subject  him
    to a crime, his departure from duty was a matter of prosecution  rather
    than persecution and there was no evidence of him having any  political
    involvement.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the  protection  claim  primarily  on
    credibility grounds, but allowed  the  appeal  "under  the  Immigration
    Rules", with reference to paragraph 276ADE (vi). The judge  found  that
    the  respondent's  mental  health  condition   (PTSD)constituted   very
    significant obstacles to his integration in  Iraq.  She  further  found
    that the respondent was at risk of prosecution and that he was "at risk
    of harm on account of being a deserter" from the police brigade.



The grounds of appeal

 7. There was one ground of appeal, namely that there had been a failure by
    the judge to give adequate reasons on a material  matter.  That  matter
    being her conclusion  that  the  respondent  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE (vi) of the Rules.  It was argued that the judge  gave
    no clear findings as to what mental health difficulties the  respondent
    was facing and how they might be exacerbated if he faced punishment  in
    Iraq.

 8. The grounds also stated that there was a dearth of findings as to  what
    the likely punishment for desertion might be or why it  was  likely  to
    constitute very significant obstacles to integration and that there was
    a failure to consider whether medical treatment was  available  or  the
    prognosis of his condition. It was said that the judge failed  to  take
    into  account  the  findings  from  the   previous   appeal,   applying
    Devaseelan.

 9. Resident First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker was  initially  of  the  view
    that this was a decision which ought to be set aside under Rule  35  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Procedure  Rules  2014  and  remitted  to  that
    Tribunal because it appeared that there was an error of law. The  judge
    set out additional issues with the decision and reasons  which  related
    mainly   to   the   psychiatric   evidence.   He   therefore    invited
    representations from the parties in a notice dated  26  November  2019.
    The respondent objected to the  proposed  set  aside  and  remittal  in
    representations dated 9 December 2019.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds  by  Judge  Zucker  who
    said the following:

         "It is arguable the judge erred in failing (to) adequately consider
         the previous findings, the psychiatric evidence, or the evidence of
         the  availability  of  treatment,  likely  punishment,  or   prison
         conditions in Iraq."

11. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 9 January  2020,  argued
    that there were no errors of law and that the only objection raised  to
    the psychiatric evidence by the Secretary of State's representative  at
    the hearing was that there was no assessment of how the appellant would
    cope if he were returned to Iraq.

The hearing

12. Ms Cunha made the following points. The respondent was not treated as a
    vulnerable witness; the judge did  not  give  reasons  why  his  health
    condition would amount to very significant obstacle to his integration.
    That error was material as this was the only basis on which the  appeal
    was allowed. The judge's findings at [22] were not what Dr Hajioff  had
    said in his report. There was  no  evidence  of  the  respondent  being
    prescribed medication despite Dr Hajioff recommending  antidepressants.
    The judge failed to explain why the PTSD diagnosis was  linked  to  the
    punishment for desertion or how it would amount to a  very  significant
    obstacle to integration.  The judge failed to address the flaws  within
    the expert report, that it was based on what the appellant says he  was
    exposed to. This was raised in the hearing, but not  addressed  by  the
    judge and therefore there was a failure to resolve conflicts of  facts.
    There was no exploration as to whether the symptoms of  PTSD  might  be
    negated by medication on return to Iraq. The Secretary of State did not
    know why the appeal was allowed.

13. In response Ms Heybroek said the following. The respondent was assessed
    by Dr Hajioff on 16 September 2019, which  post-dated  the  last  entry
    from the GP records and therefore it was no surprising that  there  was
    no reference to medication in those records. The psychiatrist had  full
    knowledge of the respondent's previous  decision  and  the  reason  for
    refusal letter.  As an expert, he was entitled to form the  opinion  he
    did. Dr Hajioff did not accord a cause to the PTSD, so the Secretary of
    State cannot go behind it. While  careful  not  to  stray  into  giving
    evidence, Ms Heybroek reiterated that there was  no  challenge  to  the
    diagnosis during the First-tier hearing, only to the lack of  reference
    to prognosis.

14. Ms Heybroek summarised  the  respondent's  case  thus.  The  respondent
    deserted his post and his details will be on a database. Upon  applying
    for a  CSID,  his  desertion  would  be  drawn   to  the  attention  of
    authorities  and  it  is  likely  that  he  would  be  interrogated  or
    imprisoned and it is at that point that the  respondent  would  not  be
    able to integrate into life in the IKR.  Any punishment imposed (up  to
    3 years' imprisonment) would amount to a very significant obstacle.  Ms
    Heybroek conceded that the psychiatric report said nothing  about  what
    the consequences for the respondent's mental health would be  in  these
    circumstances.

15. Ms Cunha added that there was  a  lack  of  exploration  by  the  judge
    regarding the issue of desertion. Furthermore, the  psychiatric  report
    did not say that the respondent could not be questioned, in fact he was
    cross-examined during his hearing and the report did  not  address  how
    his current state of mind would have an impact on his ability to answer
    questions in Iraq.

16. At the end of the hearing, I concluded that the judge made  a  material
    error of law in failing to give adequate reasons for finding  that  the
    appellant would face very significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  in
    Iraq.

Decision on error of law

17. The First-tier Tribunal  rejected  the  majority  of  the  respondent's
    claims and did not depart from the findings of the judge who previously
    heard his appeal. What was accepted, apparently  without  reasons,  was
    that the respondent had joined the police and that he had abandoned his
    post. At [22] the judge found  that  the  respondent's  "mental  health
    issues" in the context of punishment  for  desertion  constituted  very
    significant obstacles to his integration. There is a  complete  absence
    of reasons provided for these findings. Again, at [28] the judge  finds
    that chronic PTSD "is a factor that will mean any punishment will cause
    an insurmountable obstacle to his integration" and also that he is  "at
    risk of harm on account of being a deserter." There is no  analysis  of
    the medical evidence which includes Dr Hajioff's  report.  Nor  is  any
    reasoning provided to support these findings.  Dr Hajioff's  report  is
    silent on the consequences for the respondent's mental health on return
    to Iraq in circumstances where he is said to face potential arrest  and
    imprisonment for  desertion,  or  in  general.  The  report  recommends
    medication and talking therapy, yet the judge did not consider  whether
    this medical treatment would be available to the  respondent  in  Iraq.
    The preceding matters amount a material error of law  and  a  different
    conclusion might have been reached without such an error.

  18. While mindful of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
      Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that there has  yet  to
      have been an adequate consideration of this appeal at  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and it would  be  unfair  to  deprive  the  parties  of  such
      consideration. This appeal is therefore  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to be heard afresh, with  none  of  Judge  Samimi's  findings
      preserved.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Samimi.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  Date: 22 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


