
                               [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: PA/08525/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 July 2021                              |On 05 August 2021             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     SF
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. In an 'error of law' decision promulgated on 17 March 2020 I  found
         that  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Rae-Reeves'   decision,
         promulgated on 10 October 2019, dismissing the appellant's  asylum,
         humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  appeal  against   the
         respondent's decision of 23 August 2019 refusing his protection and
         human rights claim  and  his  claim  for  humanitarian  protection,
         failed  to make any material findings in respect of the appellant's
         claim to  have  used  an  agent  to  leave  Iran,  his  country  of
         nationality, and that the judge failed to take account of  relevant
         evidence relating to this issue.  I  additionally  found  that  the
         judge erred  in  law  in  his  approach  to  some  of  his  adverse
         credibility findings.


      2. I indicated in my 'error of law' decision that  Judge  Rae-Reeves's
         decision would be set aside  and  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  would
         retain jurisdiction to consider the protection appeal  afresh.  The
         appellant was given permission to adduce further evidence  for  the
         remaking hearing. Following the  onset  of  the  Covid-19  pandemic
         several directions were issued resulting in the appeal being listed
         for a remote hearing to remake the appeal decision  on  a  de  novo
         basis.


Summary of the appellant's  account  of  events  supporting  his  protection
claim

      3. The appellant, an ethnic Kurdish national of Iran born in  Sardasht
         in 1993, arrived in the  UK  illegally  on  18  February  2019  and
         claimed asylum.


      4. The appellant worked as a  trader  (a  kolbar)  at  the  Iran/Iraqi
         border, operating from the Kileh market on  the  Iranian  side.  He
         become a member of the Kurdish Democratic  Party  of  Iran  (KDP-I)
         around 2015/2016, which is a proscribed organisation in Iran.  Once
         or twice a month he smuggled items for the party across the  border
         such as food, money, letters, flags, books, flash memory cards  and
         pamphlets amongst the produce he lawfully traded (usually  lime  or
         rice or tea).

      5. In approximately June or July 2018 the  appellant  was  preoccupied
         with his work and became complacent and forgot that KDP-I  material
         had been hidden in boxes that had just crossed the border.  Without
         thinking  the  appellant  placed  the  boxes,  including  the   box
         containing the hidden material, in a taxi and sent the taxi  driver
         to his village as he still had other jobs to do and was focusing on
         those jobs. The taxi was however stopped  at  a  checkpoint  and  a
         customs guard discovered the hidden material. The taxi driver,  who
         was  well  known  to  the  customs  guards,  gave  the  guard   the
         appellant's name and his father's name and then the guard contacted
         the security services. Before the intelligence services arrived the
         taxi driver had an opportunity to telephone the appellant's  father
         and informed him of what had occurred. The appellant's father  then
         contacted the appellant who fled to Iraq and remained for  a  short
         period with his aunt before an agent was arranged to  take  him  to
         Turkey from where he travelled  in  the  company  of  an  agent  to
         Europe.  The  appellant's  father  was  detained  by  the  security
         services for 3 nights and interrogated. As a  consequences  of  the
         appellant's activities his father was no longer able to work in the
         border market. The appellant's brother was  also  interrogated  and
         was ejected from university as a  consequence  of  the  appellant's
         activities.


      6. After  arriving  in  the  UK  the  appellant  attended  some  KDP-I
         demonstrations against  the  Iranian  authorities  and  some  KDP-I
         meetings and posted content on his own Facebook account critical of
         the Iranian authorities, and then, after being  informed  that  the
         Iranian authorities were  aware  of  his  Facebook  posts  and  had
         threatened his father and brother with imprisonment, the  appellant
         started using another Facebook account in an anonymous name (BS) to
         post political content.


      7. The respondent accepted the  appellant  was  an  Iranian  Kurd  but
         rejected his account of having transferred and smuggled  goods  and
         material across the Iran/Iraq border, and rejected his  claim  that
         the authorities had  discovered  KDP-I  material  in  a  taxi.  The
         respondent did not consider  that  "pass  cards"  provided  by  the
         appellant in support of his application entitled him to  cross  the
         Iraq/Iran border and noted, in reliance on an August  2019  Country
         Policy and Information Note (CPIN) report  that  the  Iranian/Iraqi
         border had been closed in October  2017.  The  respondent  did  not
         accept the appellant's claim that he forgot about  the  content  of
         the boxes given the serious  consequences  for  him  if  they  were
         discovered. Nor was the respondent satisfied that the  taxi  driver
         would have an  opportunity  to  phone  the  appellant's  father  if
         smuggled material was uncovered. The respondent was  not  satisfied
         the Facebook account in the appellant's name contained any material
         that would cause him to be ill-treated by the Iranian  authorities,
         and there was no  evidence  that  the  appellant  was  in  any  way
         associated with the Facebook account in the identity of BS.

The hearing to remake the decision

      8. The appellant served  a  consolidated  bundle  of  documents  which
         included, inter alia, the appellant's statement dated 19  September
         2019 and his supplementary statement dated 1 July 2021, photographs
         of him at three KDP-I demonstrations on 13 and 23 July 2020  and  8
         September 2020, a selection of KDP-I Facebook  account  screenshots
         and   photographs   showing   the   appellant   participating    in
         demonstrations outside the Iranian Consulate in London on  11  July
         2021, and 2019 printouts of his Facebook page in his name and  2019
         printouts of a Facebook account in the name of BS (a pseudonym used
         by the appellant). The bundle additionally contained a letter dated
         10 October 2019 from Qadir Wirya of the Organisation Department  of
         the KDP-I based in Iran.


      9. The respondent's bundle contained some photographs of the appellant
         attending demonstrations, a completed "Application form to  support
         asylum seekers, The Committee in Great Britain" issued by the KDP-I
         in the UK (the appellant's signature is dated 23 July 2019)  and  a
         completed "membership application form headed  "Kurdish  Democratic
         Party, Formation Committee Abroad".

     10. At the outset of the hearing Ms Everett helpfully indicated,  after
         having a pre-hearing discussion with Mr Gayle, that she  considered
         the central issue for consideration was the appellant's  sur  place
         activities. I indicated to the parties that  I  did  want  to  hear
         evidence regarding the appellant's account of  events  that  caused
         him to leave Iran. I  additionally  informed  both  representatives
         that I had found three documents following an Internet search  that
         suggested that the Kileh border crossing had  been  open  since  at
         least April 2018. I provided the details of  an  article  from  the
         Financial Tribune dated 23 September 2019, an Iranwire report dated
         28 May 2021 and an article published by the Kurdistan Human  Rights
         Network dated 12 May 2021. I informed the parties of the content of
         the documents, and in particular references  to  the  Kileh  border
         crossing  being  open  since  April  2018,  and  explained  that  I
         considered  the  documents  of  some  relevance  given   that   the
         respondent maintained that the border crossings  between  Iran  and
         Iraq had been closed since October 2017. Neither party objected  to
         my consideration of the documents and Ms Everett indicated that she
         was happy for me to take judicial notice of  the  porosity  of  the
         Iran/Iraq border and that the borders open and close regularly.

     11. The appellant gave his evidence at the remote hearing via  a  Farsi
         interpreter. He was asked  no  questions  in  examination-in-chief.
         There was no questions put  to  the  appellant  by  way  of  cross-
         examination.  I  asked  the  appellant  some  brief   clarificatory
         questions concerning his claim to have worked as a kolbar  and  the
         'pass cards'. The  appellant  indicated  that  the  pass  cards  he
         provided did not relate to his crossing of the border and only gave
         him  permission  to  enter  Kileh  village,  in  respect  of  which
         individuals without the requite pass were excluded.  In  brief  re-
         cross-examination the appellant stated that his trade in items such
         as lemons and tea was legal.

Submissions

     12. In her customary even-handed manner Ms Everett noted the  level  of
         uncertainty surrounding the issue as to how the  appellant  may  be
         perceived by the Iranian authorities in  light  of  his  sur  place
         activities. She accepted that she was in difficulty in  relying  on
         some of the adverse credibility points raised in  the  Reasons  For
         Refusal Letter, such as the closure of the border. She did not  add
         anything further to the Reasons For Refusal Letter in terms of  the
         appellant's account  of  events  in  Iran.  Having  regard  to  the
         appellant's particular circumstances and his particular  sur  place
         activities Ms Everett again indicated that there  had  to  be  some
         degree of uncertainty as to how the Iranian authorities would treat
         the appellant on return,  particularly  given  the  'hair  trigger'
         approach by the authorities to those suspected of or  perceived  to
         be involved in Kurdish political activities or support for  Kurdish
         rights, as set out in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018]  UKUT  00430  (IAC)
         ("HB").


     13. Mr Gayle relied on his skeleton argument  and  submitted  that  the
         appellant would be at real risk of persecution if removed to  Iran.
         I indicated to both parties that I had already carefully considered
         all of  the  documents  in  the  bundles,  and  in  particular  the
         appellant's Facebook account which, in  my  judgment,  did  contain
         posts of a clearly political nature. I indicated that I  found,  on
         the lower standard of proof, that the appellant's account of events
         in Iran was credible and consistent with  the  background  evidence
         and that he was a genuinely supporter of  the  KDP-I.  I  indicated
         that I would allow the appeal.

Findings of fact and conclusions

     14. The burden of proof in protection claims rests on the appellant,
         and the standard of proof is whether there is a 'real risk' of the
         appellant being subjected to treatment sufficiently serious to
         amount to persecution and/or Article 3 ill-treatment.

     15. The appellant has provided a relatively detailed account of his
         claim to have worked as a kolbar in a border market called Kileh.
         The articles referred to at paragraph 10 above confirm the
         existence of a border crossing at Kileh near Sardasht. This aspect
         of the appellant's claim has been consistently made. The Pass Cards
         provided by him appear prima facie reliable and are consistent with
         his claim that he was authorised to work in the border village. The
         respondent noted that the translation of the Pass Cards indicated
         that they were "only for service provision in the market area" and
         she drew an adverse inference on the basis that the Pass Cards did
         not authorise the appellant to approach or cross the border. The
         appellant however made it clear in his oral evidence that the Pass
         Cards were not authorisation for him to approach or cross the
         Iran/Iraq border but simply to enable him to enter the market area
         at Kileh. It was never the appellant's case that the Pass Cards
         related to his activities at the actual border. Moreover, the same
         articles at paragraph 10 above indicate that, while the border may
         have been temporarily closed in October 2017, it had reopened by
         the latest April 2018. There is therefore no inconsistency in
         respect of this aspect of the appellant's account.

     16. In his asylum interview the appellant was asked a number of
         questions relating to the KDP-I (see questions 70 to 88). His
         answers were relatively detailed (he knew, for example, when the
         party was formed, who founded it, where its headquarters were
         located, and  he was able to name a number of prominent KDP-I
         individuals including Mustafa Moloudi, the chair of the party). The
         appellant gave a generally accurate explanation of the party's aims
         and objectives  and he gave a plausible explanation of how and why
         he became involved in the party (through an introduction by a
         cousin, against the background of his grandfather having been
         tortured by the Iranian authorities for helping the party and his
         desire for Kurdish self-government). This aspect of the appellant's
         claim is also supported to some degree by the letter dated 10
         October 2019 issued by Qadir Wirya of the Organisation Department
         of the KDP-I, which certifies that the appellant was a member of
         the party. The letter is however brief and does not explain how the
         appellant's membership was confirmed and so can attract only
         limited weight. The appellant's claim that he was a member in Iran
         is however consistent with his subsequent involvement with the
         party in the UK following his arrival.

     17. I find the appellant has again provided a detailed and plausible
         account of the method by which the KDP-I would get in contact with
         him regarding material that was to be smuggled, how the material
         would be smuggled, and what the appellant would usually do with the
         material once he gained possession of it and how he would then pass
         on those materials to the KDP-I in Iran (see in particular the
         appellant's answers in his asylum interview at questions 102, 103
         and 104). In respect of his involvement with the KDP-I in both Iran
         (and indeed in the UK) the appellant has not sought to exaggerate
         or expand the level or degree of his involvement. For example, he
         never suggested that he ever distributed leaflets in Iran himself
         and he rejected any involvement that related to weapons. In this
         regard the appellant's evidence has been measured. The appellant's
         account of the Iranian authorities' attitude to the KDP-I is
         consistent with the background material (for example, the Kurdistan
         Human Rights Network documents provided by the appellant in the
         consolidated bundle) and the decision in HB (see in particular the
         evidence consider by the Tribunal in paragraph 32 and the summary
         of the oral expert evidence at Annex B). His account of his father
         being detained and interrogated for 3 days and losing his job as a
         kolbar is therefore consistent with the Iranian authorities'
         approach to those suspected of being involved with an illegal
         organisation.

     18. The respondent did not find it plausible that the appellant would
         become complacent and forget that boxes he received from Iraq
         contained the KDP-I materials when he placed them in a taxi to be
         delivered to his home village. Whilst I acknowledge the
         respondent's observation that the potential consequences to the
         appellant if he was caught smuggling illicit materials would be
         severe, it is only too human to forget about even important matters
         when one's mind is pre-occupied with other matters, as claimed by
         the appellant. I do not find this aspect of the appellant's claim
         to be inherently implausible. Nor do I find it implausible, in
         light of the appellant's full explanation, that the taxi driver
         would have been able to make a phone call to the appellant's
         father. The appellant explained that the taxi driver and his father
         were well known at the customs post (see his 2019 statement at
         paragraph 11) and it is plausible that the customs guard, who was
         not part of the intelligence agencies, may not have prevented the
         taxi driver making a phone call. The respondent has not identified
         or relied upon any other inconsistency in the appellant's account
         to undermine his credibility.

     19. The appellant's decision to flee to Iraq on hearing that the
         smuggled KDP-I material had been discovered is credible given that
         the party is proscribed in Iran and given the background evidence
         relating to the prevalence of torture facing those detained in Iran
         (see, for example, section 1(a) to (c) of the US State Department
         Human Rights report 2020, contained in the consolidated bundle).
         His account of using an agent to illegally flee Iran is plausible,
         as is his account of his journey to Turkey and then to Europe,
         including his description of the violence inflicted on him by the
         agent that caused the appellant's leg to break.

     20. I have considered with care the appellant's sur place activities in
         the UK. I note that he has attended a number of KDP-I
         demonstrations in this country, including those outside the Iranian
         Consulate. The photographs show him holding flags and placards
         critical of the Iranian regime. The unchallenged evidence relating
         to the KDP-I Facebook account, screenshots of which were included
         in the appellant's consolidated bundle, confirm that photographs of
         demonstrations that include him have been posted. The appellant is
         not identified by name but his face is clear. I have additionally
         considered the photographs of the appellant next to prominent KDP-I
         members at KDP-I meetings in the UK, although there is no evidence
         that these photographs have been published.

     21. I have additionally considered the posts made by the appellant in
         respect of his own Facebook account in his name, the screenshots of
         which are contained in the consolidated bundle. I do not share the
         respondent's view that there are no political posts. A number of
         the posts are clearly political and critical of the Iranian
         authorities. For example, at page 50 of the consolidated bundle
         there is a poster of a man making a 'V for victory' sign with the
         words "Freedom Kurdistan" underneath. At pages 54 and 55 there are
         posts showing photographs of Rahman Ghassemlou, a Kurdish leader
         assassinated in 1989. At pages 61 and 62 there are disturbing
         photographs of individuals hanged by the Iranian authorities and a
         post demanding that the Iranian authorities stop executing
         children. If these posts were viewed by the Iranian authorities I
         have no doubt that the observer would conclude that the appellant
         is a person who holds and shares views that are critical of the
         Iranian regime.

     22. For the reasons given above, and having applied the lower standard
         of proof, I am persuaded that the appellant has given a truthful
         account both of the events that caused him to flee Iran and of his
         sur place activities in the UK. I find that he was a member of the
         KDP-I in Iran and that he smuggled non-military items for the party
         into Iran under cover of his activities as a kolbar. I accept the
         appellant's account that he complacently placed boxes containing
         illicit materials in a taxi, that the taxi was searched at a
         customs post, and that the illicit materials were discovered. I
         find that the Iranian authorities considered the appellant to be a
         member of the KDP-I and that his father and brother were
         interrogated concerning the appellant's activities and that his
         father was detained for three days, although eventually released. I
         find that the appellant did leave Iran illegally having obtained an
         agent to facilitate his journey. I accept that the appellant is a
         genuine supporter of the KDP-I in its manifestation in the UK and
         that his posts on his Facebook account in 2019 were genuinely made
         based on his support for the KDP-I.

     23. I must now consider whether these facts would expose the  appellant
         to a real risk of persecution if he were removed to  Iran.  I  have
         been assisted by the observations made by Ms Everett on  behalf  of
         the respondent relating to  the  uncertainty  surrounding  how  the
         authorities may view the  appellant's  sur  place  activities.  The
         decision in HB, which held that SSH and HR  (illegal  exit:  failed
         asylum seeker) Iran  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00430  (IAC)  remains  valid
         country guidance, indicates, inter alia,  that  although  Kurds  in
         Iran face discrimination this, in general, is not at such  a  level
         as to amount to persecution or Article 3  ill-treatment,  and  that
         the mere fact of being a returnee  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  with  or
         without a valid passport, and even if combined with  illegal  exit,
         does not create a risk of persecution or Article  3  ill-treatment.
         Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have however become increasingly
         suspicious of, and sensitive to,  Kurdish  political  activity  and
         those of Kurdish ethnicity are regarded with even greater suspicion
         than  hitherto  and  are  reasonably  likely  to  be  subjected  to
         heightened  scrutiny  on  return  to  Iran.  Kurdish  ethnicity  is
         therefore a risk factor which, when combined  with  other  factors,
         may create a real risk of persecution or Article  3  ill-treatment.
         The Tribunal found that Kurds involved in Kurdish political  groups
         or activity are at risk of arrest, prolonged detention and physical
         abuse by the Iranian authorities. Headnote 10 reads,  "The  Iranian
         authorities demonstrate what could be described as a 'hair-trigger'
         approach to those suspected of  or  perceived  to  be  involved  in
         Kurdish political activities or  support  for  Kurdish  rights.  By
         'hair-trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion is low and
         the  reaction  of  the  authorities  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
         extreme." Headnote 9 reads, "Even 'low-level'  political  activity,
         or activity that is perceived to be political, such as, by  way  of
         example only, mere possession of leaflets espousing  or  supporting
         Kurdish  rights,  if  discovered,  involves  the   same   risk   of
         persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. Each case however,  depends
         on its own facts and an assessment will need to be made as  to  the
         nature of the material possessed and how it would be likely  to  be
         viewed by the Iranian authorities in the context of  the  foregoing
         guidance."


     24. I am satisfied that the Iranian authorities regard the appellant as
         someone involved with the KDP-I and that he has been actively
         sought by the authorities. The fact that he smuggled illicit KDP-I
         materials creates a real risk that he will be subject to a real
         risk of serious ill-treatment if returned to Iran. Moreover, as the
         appellant's posts on his Facebook account were made because of his
         genuine support for the KDP-I, applying the principles established
         in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 10, [2011] AC 596, which were
         applied in the context of political opinion in RT (Zimbabwe) v SSHD
         [2012] UKSC, [2013] 1 AC 152, and having regard to the assessment
         made in AB and Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran
         [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC) relating to inquiries the Iranian
         authorities may make into a returnees internet activities (applied
         in HB specifically in respect of Facebook), I find that the
         appellant will also be at real risk of persecution if removed to
         Iran based on his sur place activities.


Notice of Decision

The protection and Article 3 human rights appeals are allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



D.Blum                              23 July 2021

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
