
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08351/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at MANCHESTER CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th January 2020                 |On 7th February 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                            mr hawre imad rasool
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing. I shall refer  to  the  parties  using
    the titles in the First tier Tribunal. The respondent  appeals  against
    the  decision  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Buckwell)  (FtT)
    promulgated on 9th October 2019 in  which  the  appellant's  protection
    claim was dismissed and  his  human  rights  claim  was  allowed  under
    Article 3 ECHR.



Background

2.   The appellant claimed asylum on the grounds that  he  was  at  risk  on
    return to Iraq because he was wanted by HAS and by the Peshmurga.   The
    FtT found his account not to be credible [95] and there is no challenge
    thereon.

3.   The FtT considered the issue of relocation and referred to AA  Iraq  CG
    [2017] UKUT 544 (IAC), AAH Iraq and BA Iraq [23].  The  FtT  considered
    the issue of obtaining a CSID and in that context considered Article  3
    [84 & 96].

4.   The FtT considered that the appellant's return to Baghdad gave rise  to
    significant difficulties because he  did  not  have  the  documentation
    (CSID or other) needed to live in Iraq and he  would  face  significant
    challenges in travelling out of the city and through checkpoints.  As a
    Kurd he could not relocate to Baghdad [98].  At  [100]  the  FtT  found
    that the appellant would not reasonably be able to secure the issue  of
    a replacement CSID and would find himself in significant difficulty  in
    Iraq.  The FtT relied on caselaw  in  concluding  that  Article  3  was
    engaged in such circumstances.

5.   There was evidence before the FtT that the appellant had a  brother  in
    Iraq, that he had close friends who he remained in contact with and who
    had provided him with documents obtained from his  family  home,  where
    his old CSID was kept.  The appellant had previously  lived  in  Erbil.
    He had friends in IKR.



Grounds of appeal

6.   In grounds of appeal the  respondent  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    failing to give adequate reasons as to the engagement of Article 3 ECHR
    by reference to the issue of documentation [104].   No  assessment  was
    made of the relevant caselaw AAH and AA, in  particular  where  the  UT
    found that as a general matter "it will not be unreasonable  or  unduly
    harsh for a person from a contested area... to relocate to Baghdad".

7.   The FtT failed to  assess  all  relevant  factors  including  that  the
    appellant could seek assistance from his brother to obtain or renew his
    CSID or even why the appellant could not approach the Iraqi Embassy  in
    the UK, and/or why the appellant could not approach his friends in  his
    home area to obtain the old CSID from his family home.  Further it  was
    argued that the FtT  failed  to  consider  that  it  was  open  to  the
    appellant to use the process involving a power of attorney.

8.   The FtT's finding that the appellant's return would  not  be  voluntary
    was irrelevant in the light of his claim being found not credible.  The
    FtT failed to properly considered return to IKR.

9.   The FtT failed to explain the relevance  of  Article  3  in  particular
    where it dismissed the asylum and humanitarian protection claims.



Permission to appeal

10.  Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by
    Designated First tier  Tribunal  Judge  Woodcraft  on  19.11.2019.   He
    considered that given the credibility issues it was arguable  that  the
    FtT ought to have explained in more detail why the appellant could  not
    obtain a CSID, particularly when it had been submitted that his friends
    had been willing to assist the appellant to obtain documentation  [71].
    The FtT's focus was on return to Baghdad when arguably that was not the
    main issue.  The appellant's reluctance to return was not a good reason
    to allow the appeal either [97].



Rule 24 response

11.  The FtT adequately considered the evidence under  Article  3  and  made
    findings that were open  to  him  to  make.   The  appellant  would  be
    returned to Baghdad without documentation and could not obtain  a  CSID
    which would lead to a breach of Article 3.



Submissions

12.  At the hearing before me Mr Tan representing  the  respondent  expanded
    on the grounds of appeal. He submitted that the FtT failed to  consider
    return to IKR, that the appellant had previously  lived  in  Erbil  and
    there was evidence that he was educated and had worked in IKR.  The FtT
    had not explored all possible avenues  by  which  the  appellant  could
    either have obtained his old CSID or a new  CSID.    The  FtT  had  not
    provided detailed reasons for supporting his decision  that  Article  3
    was engaged and that it was following Country guidance.

13.  In response Mr Howard relied on the  Rule  24  response  and  submitted
    that the FtT had fully considered all the evidence and  found  that  it
    was not possible for the appellant to access his old CSID or to  obtain
    a new one.  The approach to focus on return via  Baghdad  was  correct.
    The Article 3 threshold was met.



Discussion and conclusion

14.  As to error of law I found that there was a material error  of  law  by
    the FtT in terms of its failure to consider  all  the  evidence  as  to
    avenues open to the appellant to obtain a CSID and to that  extent  did
    not follow the country guidance cases of AA and  AAH.   The  FtT  dealt
    with the issues largely at [100]  which  was  inadequate  in  terms  of
    giving reasons to the respondent as to why the appeal was allowed.

15.  The FtT heard evidence from the appellant  that  he  had  contact  with
    family and friends who had obtained documents for him for  the  appeal.
    Given that evidence the FtT ought to  have  considered  return  to  IKR
    rather than to focus solely on a return to  Baghdad.  Further  the  FtT
    failed to look at all factors relevant to consideration of  whether  or
    not there  were  sufficient  difficulties  so  as  to  reach  the  high
    threshold under Article 3.

16.  There is a material error of law disclosed in the decision which  shall
    be set aside.  The decision under Article 3 will  be  remade  following
    submissions.



Re making the decision & submissions

17.  At the outset Mr Howard considered whether there was  further  evidence
    that he wished to adduce but made no  application.  He  relied  on  the
    recent country guidance in SMO.

18.  Mr Tan submitted  that  notwithstanding  that  there  was  new  country
    guidance (SMO) the position remained that the appellant would  be  able
    to obtain the old CSID or a replacement.  The appellant would be  in  a
    position  to  recall  personal  details  to  enable  him  to  obtain  a
    replacement.  He  provided  documentary  identity  evidence  from   the
    authorities to show that he was employed which would reasonably support
    his identity.  He had not shown that he had taken any  steps  to  apply
    from within the UK. SMO did not change that situation - CSID were still
    issued and so  there  was  no  requirement  to  return  to  Iraq.   The
    appellant faced no risk factors in his home area;  he  lived  in  Erbil
    previously, was employed and had a friend N who was resident in IKR who
    could provided assistance of a financial and practical nature.

19.  Mr Howard relied on the skeleton argument before the FtT and  SMO.   He
    contented that the appellant would not be able to  return  to  Baghdad.
    He would not be  able  to  rely  on  assistance  from  his  brother  or
    otherwise gain access to his old CSID.  SMO confirmed that there  would
    be difficulties  where  a  person  did  not  have  the  CSID  or  other
    documentation.  There was no evidence of family support.  The fact that
    the appellant had been educated and  employed  was  not  sufficient  to
    reduce the risk of ill treatment.  The appellant would not  access  the
    basic  necessities  and  therefore  Article  3  was  engaged.   Counsel
    appearing at the FtT cited the court of appeal judgment  in  SS  (2019)
    EWCA 1402 in support of the Article 3 argument and  with  reference  to
    AA.



Discussion and decision

20.  The FtT dismissed the appellant's claim under  the  Refugee  Convention
    and on humanitarian protection grounds having found  the  core  of  the
    appellant's claim  to  be  lacking  in  credibility.   The  key  issues
    thereafter were risk on return and the ability to obtain a CSID card.

21.  It was in the context of  the  negative  findings  that  the  appellant
    faced no risk on return to his home area that the  FtT  ought  to  have
    considered return and relocation.  In other words  the  feasibility  of
    return to IKR rather than to focus on  return  to  Baghdad  only.   The
    evidence before the FtT was that the appellant's CSID was at the family
    home.  There was evidence that he had approached a  friend  S  who  had
    obtained some documentation for him which had been sent to the UK [37 &
    71].  There was evidence that  the  appellant  had  been  educated  and
    worked in IKR. There was evidence that he had a brother in Iraq but  he
    had not contacted the Red Cross as he believed that his  brother  would
    not want to be contacted. He last had contact with him  before  leaving
    Iraq [38]. He had an ID document that had been sent to him  by  another
    friend NA [42 &43] who lived in Tahkoha village Zago city  in  the  IKR
    area [44].  He had not been to the Iraqi Embassy or Consulate  and  was
    not aware that there was one in Manchester [53].  He previously held  a
    passport.  He claimed that he had no close friends [54].

22.  I am satisfied that the evidence that was before  the  FtT  established
    that it was reasonably likely that the appellant would have  been  able
    to take steps to obtain either his old CSID or a replacement.  In those
    circumstances he would not have to return to  Baghdad  where  he  would
    face significant difficulties in the event that he  had  no  CSID.   He
    would have been able to request further assistance from his friend  NA,
    make efforts to contact his brother and or approach the Embassy in  the
    UK and utilise his ID documentation and use the  process  to  obtain  a
    power of  Attorney  with  assistance  from  friends.   Given  that  the
    appellant has close friends in IKR he would be able to  secure  support
    and practical assistance such that  he  would  not  be  destitute.   He
    previously lived in Erbil. He is a young educated man who faces no risk
    in his home area. There is no difficulty in return to IKR for those who
    previously came from that area.  I  conclude  that  overall  there  was
    sufficient evidence to show that the appellant would be able to  return
    safely to IKR and/or that he would be able  to  obtain  his  old  or  a
    replacement CSID and would not be at risk at checkpoints on his way  to
    the KRG area where he would face ill treatment contrary to Article 3.

23.  I have taken into account SMO, KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c)  ;  Identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400  (IAC)   -  see  headnote  7,9  in
    respect of return to IKR (20 - 29) and 11-16  as  to  replacement  CSID
    which can still  be  obtained  through  Iraqi  Consular  facilities  at
    headnote 13.  It is acknowledged that the use of a  proxy  has  reduced
    due to the introduction of the INID system.



Decision

24.  Accordingly I have allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  and  remade  the
    decision and I dismiss the appeal.




                               Signed                     Date 17.1.2020


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                     Date 17.1.2020


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




