
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08385/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th November 2018                         |On 27th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     DDN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Oyemike of Samuel & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Cameron  (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 23rd August 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a  Vietnamese  national  born  4th  January  2001  and
    therefore is a minor.  The Appellant made an asylum  and  human  rights
    claim in the UK on the basis that he would be at risk  if  returned  to
    Vietnam because of his membership  of  the  Viet  Tan  Party  which  is
    opposed to the Vietnamese government.

 3. The application was refused on 19th June 2018.  The appeal was heard by
    the FtT on 1st August 2018.  The Appellant claimed that he  had  become
    involved with the Viet Tan Party in Vietnam at the beginning  of  March
    2017.  He distributed leaflets and because of this was detained by  the
    police in March 2017 for one day.  Another reason for his detention was
    that he was caught writing graffiti  on  a  gate  near  to  the  police
    station.  The Appellant was released from detention  after  his  mother
    paid money.

 4. The judge did not accept  that  the  Appellant  had  given  a  credible
    account of events in Vietnam.  It was not accepted  that  he  had  been
    detained.  It was not accepted that  the  authorities  had  an  adverse
    interest in him.

 5. The judge accepted that the Appellant had undertaken activities in  the
    UK in support of the Viet Tan.  The Appellant had produced  photographs
    of himself attending demonstrations and meeting party  officials.   The
    judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  could  clearly  be  seen  on  the
    photographs holding placards.

 6. The judge concluded at paragraph  100  of  his  decision  that  he  was
    "satisfied to the lower standard of proof that the Appellant  has  been
    involved in the Viet Tan Party in this country as  a  supporter".   The
    judge also accepted that the Appellant had placed posts on Facebook  in
    relation to the Viet Tan Party, and it was accepted that his photograph
    had appeared on  the  party  website  as  a  result  of  him  attending
    demonstrations.

 7. The judge found at paragraph 108 that the  Appellant  is  a  low  level
    supporter of the Viet Tan Party, but did not accept  that  would  bring
    him to the adverse attention of the authorities.  The  judge  therefore
    concluded that the Appellant would  not  be  at  risk  if  returned  to
    Vietnam,  and  dismissed  the  appeal   with   reference   to   asylum,
    humanitarian protection, and human rights.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission to appeal was granted by Designated First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy in the following terms;

         "1.  On 6th September 2018, the Tribunal received  the  Appellant's
             application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
             against the  decision  and  reasons  statement  of  FtT  Judge
             Cameron that was issued on 23rd August 2018.

         2.   The application was received within the relevant fourteen  day
             period and is in time.

         3.   The grounds make several allegations which  allege  the  judge
             applied the wrong standard of proof.   These  allegations  are
             not made out.  It was open to the judge when  considering  all
             the evidence in the round to draw the  adverse  inferences  he
             did regarding parts of the Appellant's  evidence.   Similarly,
             the arguments relating to 'anxious scrutiny' cannot succeed.

         4.   Permission to appeal on these grounds is refused.

         5.   However it is arguable Judge Mayall failed to properly  assess
             the risks facing the  Appellant  on  return  as  a  low  level
             supporter of the Viet Tan Party, as submitted at  paragraph  8
             of the grounds.  It is arguable that  the  assessment  carried
             out  by  Judge  Mayall  from   [101]   to   [109]   does   not
             satisfactorily explain why the Appellant's involvement in  the
             Viet Tan Party is not sufficient to establish  a  well-founded
             fear of persecution.

         6.   Permission to appeal is granted on the issue of whether  there
             has been a proper assessment  of  the  country  situation  the
             Appellant would face on return to Vietnam."

 9. The reference to Judge Mayall in the grant of permission is  an  error,
    and it is clear that the judge granting permission meant  to  refer  to
    Judge Cameron.

10. Following the grant of  permission  the  Respondent  did  not  lodge  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

11. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. Mr Oyemike accepted that the  grant  of  permission  was  limited,  and
    confirmed that there had been no application for permission  to  appeal
    in relation to the grounds upon which permission had  been  refused  by
    Judge McCarthy.

13. Miss Kiss stated that the Respondent conceded that the judge had  erred
    in law by failing to properly assess the risks facing the Appellant  on
    return as a low level supporter of the Viet Tan Party.  It was accepted
    that the judge had not satisfactorily  explained  why  the  Appellant's
    involvement in the Viet Tan Party was not  sufficient  to  establish  a
    well-founded fear of persecution, and it was accepted  that  there  had
    been an inadequate assessment of the country situation in Vietnam.

14. Miss Kiss submitted that the appropriate course would be to  set  aside
    the decision of the FtT, but to preserve the finding that the Appellant
    is a low level supporter of the Viet Tan Party,  and  it  was  conceded
    that the decision should be remade by the Upper Tribunal and allowed.

15. Miss Kiss confirmed that the Respondent's position is  that  background
    evidence shows that the Vietnamese government had in 2016 declared  the
    Viet Tan Party to be a terrorist organisation.  It  was  accepted  that
    individuals who supported that party would be at risk of persecution if
    returned to Vietnam.

16. In view of the  concessions  made,  Mr  Oyemike  had  no  further  oral
    submissions to make, but helpfully submitted a translated copy  of  the
    declaration made by the Vietnamese government, declaring the  Viet  Tan
    Party to be a terrorist organisation, which is dated 4th October 2016.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. I accept that the Respondent has rightly conceded that the judge  erred
    in law.  I set aside the decision of the FtT.  The findings made by the
    judge in relation to activities undertaken by the Appellant in the  UK,
    in relation to the Viet Tan Party, are preserved.  These  findings  are
    that the Appellant has been involved in the Viet Tan Party in the UK as
    a supporter.  He has undertaken posts on Facebook  and  his  photograph
    has appeared on  the  party  website  as  a  result  of  him  attending
    demonstrations.  The Appellant  can  clearly  be  seen  in  photographs
    attending a demonstration in  December  2017,  holding  placards.   The
    Appellant is a low level supporter of the Viet Tan Party.

18. The error of law is as set out in paragraphs 5 and 6 of  the  grant  of
    permission.  The judge failed to properly assess the risks  facing  the
    Appellant on return as a low level supporter of the Viet Tan Party, and
    did not satisfactorily explain why his involvement in  that  party  was
    insufficient to establish a well-founded fear  of  persecution.   There
    was not an adequate assessment of the country situation in Vietnam.

19. I was invited by both representatives to remake the decision and  found
    it appropriate to do so.

20. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.  The  appeal  is  allowed
    because it has been conceded by the Respondent that the Appellant would
    be at risk of persecution  if  returned  to  Vietnam.   The  Respondent
    accepts that the Vietnamese government has declared the Viet Tan  Party
    to be a terrorist organisation.  I find that this declaration was  made
    in October 2016.

21. The Respondent accepts that there is a real risk that the Appellant, as
    a low level Viet Tan supporter, would be at risk of persecution and ill-
    treatment if returned to Vietnam.

22. Therefore I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof,
    to show that he has a well-founded fear of persecution by reason of his
    political opinion, and he is entitled to a grant of asylum.

23. It is also conceded by the Respondent that the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk of treatment that would breach Article  3  of  the  1950  European
    Convention, and therefore the appeal is also allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds with reference to Article 3.  Mr Oyemike indicated that he  did
    not wish to pursue an appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.

I remake the decision.  The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds with reference  to  Article  3
of the 1950 European Convention.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 16th November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because I have allowed the appeal Mr Oyemike applied for  a  fee  award.   I
make no fee  award.   The  appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
considered by the Tribunal that was not before the original decision  maker.
 The Home Office Country Policy and Information Note  on  Vietnam  regarding
opposition to the  state,  relied  upon  by  Miss  Kiss,  was  published  in
September 2018 after the refusal of the claim, and after the FtT hearing.






Signed                              Date 16th November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
