
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08471/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7 February 2018                    |On 1 March 2018                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    [H d]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Counsel, Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McLaren dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent refusing to grant him asylum in  the  United
    Kingdom  and  leave  to  remain  under  the   humanitarian   protection
    provisions.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on [  ]  1998.   He  entered
    the United Kingdom on 26 October 2016 under a Tier 4 Student visa.   On
    30 September 2016, he was granted further leave  to  remain  under  the
    same capacity until 30 August 2017.  Prior to its  expiry,  he  claimed
    asylum on 20 February 2017.

3.   The appellant's evidence is that he is currently a political  activist.
     This is due to the physical abuse received by  his  grandfather  at  a
    protest that his grandfather and the rest of  the  family  attended  in
    order  to  protest  against  family  land  being  confiscated  by   the
    authorities.  The family believed that  the  injuries  his  grandfather
    suffered from the police on that day in 2012 caused  his  grandfather's
    death.  This early experience gave him a desire to seek justice for his
    family.

4.   He confirmed to the judge that in February 2015 he was introduced to  a
    party called the Assembly of Vietnamese Youth  Democracy  (AVYD).   The
    party's aim is to promote democratic principles in Vietnam and  promote
    human rights by organising demonstrations,  creating  and  distributing
    leaflets and spreading the word about the party.

5.   He became a supporter in April 2015.  He distributed leaflets  four  to
    five times a month at various places.   In  his  witness  statement  he
    explained that on 2 October 2015 the friend who first  told  him  about
    the organisation took him to meet a group of people from the AVYD.   He
    took an oath in front of the group and on that day became  an  official
    member.

6.   The appellant explained that he attended three demonstrations  in  2015
    on 8 November, 15 November and 10 December.   He  produced  photographs
    showing him with various individuals holding what  were  stated  to  be
    slogans protesting variously about state  acquisition  of  individual's
    land and protests against the death penalty for one individual.

7.   The appellant said on 20 March 2016 an event  took  place  in  the  Mai
    Xuan Thuong flower garden in Ha Noi.  On  that  occasion,  he  was  not
    involved with any demonstration, which was again by those who had  lost
    their land, but he brought food and water to these people.  He was seen
    talking to people in the garden and two non-uniformed  police  officers
    saw him and arrested him.  He was  taken  to  the  police  station  and
    detained for a week during which  he  was  interrogated  two  to  three
    times.  He was threatened and hit when he did not  cooperate.   He  was
    not charged with any offence but he was accused of being  a  member  of
    the AVYD.  Upon his release,  he  was  told  not  to  attend  any  more
    demonstrations and he was banned from the flower garden.

8.   Despite this warning on  15  May  2016  the  appellant  and  his  group
    attended another demonstration against the  Chinese  taking  Vietnamese
    islands.  They went on from this to  a  second  demonstration  held  to
    demand the release of political prisoners.  He produced photographs  of
    this event.

9.   On 20 June 2016, the appellant obtained a student  visa  and  travelled
    to the United Kingdom.  He had no difficulties in  leaving  Vietnam  or
    obtaining the visa.

10.  While at university in the UK the appellant  joined  demonstrations  in
    front of the Vietnamese Embassy.  He was asked at his asylum  interview
    whether he had continued working for the AVYD since coming to  the  UK.
    He said he had tried to find other members of this group but could  not
    find any in the UK and had therefore joined demonstrations organised by
    other groups or parties in the UK, in particular Viet Tan and Con Duong
    Viet Nam.  He explained in his  witness  statement  that  he  met  with
    members and supporters of AVYD at these demonstrations, that  they  had
    joined other groups and participated in other group's  activities.   It
    was later submitted by the appellant's Counsel that the group no longer
    existed.

11.  The appellant said in evidence that no issues had  arisen  after  March
    2016 while he remained in Vietnam.  He was contacted by his parents  in
    February 2017.  His parents told him that on  1  February  2017  police
    went to their house and searched it because one of the members  of  the
    AVYD had been arrested and had  disclosed  that  the  appellant  was  a
    member of that group.  The police search uncovered what  the  appellant
    described in answer to cross-examination questions  was  a  locked  box
    that he had left on the desk of his bedroom at his parents' home.  Once
    opened it contained material relating to the political organisation and
    photocopied sections of a book on human rights which was a banned  text
    in Vietnam.  The appellant explained that a copy of the book  had  been
    sent to the leader of the group and that he had made copies  from  that
    person.  The judge noted that this detail  was  not  contained  in  his
    witness statement.

12.  The appellant explained  that  until  this  point  the  police  had  no
    evidence to connect him to the AVYD but following  a  tip  off  from  a
    member of the group they searched and produced evidence that he  was  a
    supporter and this put him at  risk  on  return  to  Vietnam.   It  was
    following this incident that  he  applied  for  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 20 February.

13.  The appellant explained that since this  visit  his  parents  had  been
    subject to persecution and harassment.  They had been arrested  by  the
    police, albeit subsequently released.  The appellant confirmed that the
    copy of the document had been left with his parents but he had not been
    able to produce a copy of it to the court.

14.  The judge noted  that  the  appellant's  bundle  contained  photographs
    which the appellant said showed him attending demonstrations in the  UK
    on 11 December 2016, 30 April 2017, 21 May and  20  August  2017.   The
    photographs showed the appellant in front of what  appeared  to  be  an
    embassy building with other protestors.

15.  In the appellant's bundle the judge noted  was  an  article  about  the
    demonstration in London on 30 April and shows that it was reported in a
    Vietnamese newspaper.  It did not name the appellant.

16.  The judge found that  it  was  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  had
    attended demonstrations while in Vietnam on three occasions in 2015 and
    on  15  May  2016.   It  was  also  not  disputed  that   he   attended
    demonstrations in the UK, one in December 2016 and on four occasions in
    2017.  He had produced some evidence in  the  form  of  photographs  to
    support his position.  The dispute was whether he  was  or  was  not  a
    member of the ADKY (I believe it to be the AVYD)  and  whether  he  had
    come to the attention of the authorities.

17.  The judge noted that  the  respondent's  own  policy  set  out  in  the
    country guidance makes it clear that where a  person  is  perceived  to
    have taken part in opposition political parties and  has  come  to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities, they would face a  real  risk  of
    persecution.  It  was  accepted  that  such  persecution  would  be  on
    political grounds and carried out by a state actor so that if  it  were
    to  be  established,  it  was  accepted  that  the  issues  of  country
    protection and internal relocation would not be relevant.

18.  The judge went on to assess the  appellant's  credibility.   She  noted
    that on the appellant's own account his need for asylum did  not  arise
    until 1 February 2017 and had made the application  for  asylum  on  20
    February 2017.  He did so while he had a legitimate immigration  status
    which had not expired.  She found that he had in fact made a claim  for
    humanitarian protection at the earliest opportunity.

19.  The judge noted what the respondent said were  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence.  She found that there was no inconsistency at the
    date on which the appellant stated he became a member of the  political
    group.  She accepted that the  appellant  gave  information  about  the
    group's activities and gave some weight to this.

20.  The judge did not find the issue raised by the  respondent  as  to  the
    answer at the screening interview at 5.3 and in a more detailed  asylum
    interview as to whether the appellant  has  ever  been  accused  of  an
    offence to be an  inconsistency.   The  apparent  inconsistency  as  to
    whether he described the document produced by the police in February as
    an arrest warrant or invitation letter was, she found, partly caused by
    the way in which the interview questions were  put  to  the  appellant.
    The discussion of it being an arrest warrant was introduced by the Home
    Office questioner.  The appellant referred to it as a search warrant.

21.   The  judge  said  the  respondent  also  questioned  the   appellant's
    credibility on the basis that his description of the human rights  book
    that he had apparently read was vague and one would have  expected  him
    to have a better knowledge of human rights.  The judge found  that  the
    appellant had given a reasonable explanation of what was  in  the  book
    and why he was not able to have a detailed recollection of it.

22.  The judge accepted the appellant's evidence that  he  was  detained  by
    the police in March 2016.  The description he gave was consistent  with
    the information available.  His account of the incident has not  varied
    throughout the asylum process.  The judge noted  however  that  on  the
    appellant's own case he could not be in fear of  persecution  following
    this detention.  He  continued  his  political  activity,  attending  a
    demonstration on 15 May and even on his own account that did not  bring
    him to the attention of the police.  Furthermore, he was able to obtain
    a proper visa in June without any issues.  She found that  he  was  not
    subject to police  scrutiny  because  of  his  activities  despite  the
    detention in March.  The judge found that at the time of his  entry  to
    the UK the appellant had every intention of returning to Vietnam.

23.  The judge concluded therefore that none of the events that occurred  in
    Vietnam prior to his departure put the appellant at risk of persecution
    by the state.  While there may have been some suspicion  of  connection
    with a political movement, on the appellant's own evidence, the  police
    had no proof of his involvement and he clearly was not being  monitored
    by them.  His  activities  had  not  in  reality  brought  him  to  the
    attention of the state such that there was a real risk of  persecution.



24.  The judge  then  considered  the  incident  which  the  appellant  said
    occurred on 1 February which caused him to  claim  asylum.   The  judge
    said the Immigration Rules at 339L provide that the duty of the  person
    to substantiate the asylum claim and that where aspects of  a  person's
    statement are not supported by documentary  or  other  evidence,  those
    aspects will need confirmation if all of a  number  of  conditions  are
    met.  This includes the  condition  that  all  material  factors  at  a
    person's disposal had been submitted  and  a  satisfactory  explanation
    regarding a lack of material has been given.  The judge said it appears
    from the evidence given by the appellant in  cross-examination  that  a
    copy of the document left by the police was still held by his  parents.
    He has not provided this and his explanation was  that  they  were  not
    sufficiently technology savvy to be able to send documents to him.  The
    judge did not find it a satisfactory explanation since his parents  are
    able to use FaceTime and he would be well-able to explain how  to  send
    him a document.  The judge therefore found that  he  has  not  provided
    appropriate  corroboration  for  this  incident.   Applying  the  lower
    standard of proof, the judge did not find that this incident  occurred.



25.  Turning to the London activity, the  judge  did  not  accept  the  Home
    Office position that the screenshot of the  television  appearance  was
    inadequate evidence because no original was provided.  The  judge  said
    it is difficult to see what original could be provided of this  moment.
    Based on her finding however that the appellant has  not  come  to  the
    notice of the Vietnamese authorities as a member of a political  group,
    the judge did not accept that a brief appearance on a TV screen  and  a
    newspaper article were sufficient to bring him to the attention of  the
    authorities.  Whilst she accepted that  he  has  taken  part  in  these
    activities, as he has not come to the attention of the authorities, she
    found that there was no risk of persecution at this time.

26.  For all these reasons the judge was not satisfied  that  the  appellant
    has established to the required standard that  he  has  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution.  It follows that no claim arises under  Article  2
    or Article 3.

27.  Permission to challenge the  judge's  decision  was  given  on  grounds
    which argued that having accepted that the appellant  was  involved  in
    political activities both in Vietnam in the UK,  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the position of the appellant on return to Vietnam pursuant to
    RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.  It was based  on  the  argument  in  the
    grounds that a proper assessment of the appellant's  case  should  have
    included an assessment as to whether the appellant  would  continue  to
    engage in political activities or human rights advocacy  on  return  to
    Vietnam and if he did, whether this would draw the adverse attention of
    the authorities.   By  failing  to  make  this  assessment,  the  judge
    arguably erred in law.

28.  Mr Khan relied on these grounds.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  made
    positive findings in the appellant's favour.  She rejected his evidence
    that the police visited his home in Vietnam in 2017.

29.  Mr Khan drew attention to the judge's  finding  at  paragraph  58  that
    while she accepted that the appellant has taken part in  activities  in
    London, he has not  come  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  and
    therefore there was no risk of  persecution  at  this  time.   Mr  Khan
    submitted that given the appellant's past behaviour, it was  imperative
    on the judge to find that the appellant was a  political  activist  who
    could potentially come to the attention of the authorities were  he  to
    return to Vietnam.   It was therefore likely that in the light  of  the
    respondent's own policy which was noted by the judge  at  paragraph  50
    that the appellant was likely to be at risk of persecution  on  account
    of his past activities.  Furthermore, the appellant  said  in  evidence
    that he would engage in political  activities  on  return  to  Vietnam.
    Therefore, if in doing so he came to the attention of the  authorities,
    he was likely to be at risk of persecution.

30.  Mr Wilding said that the judge noted that the  appellant  was  arrested
    in March 2016 before he left Vietnam to come  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    There was no indication that the authorities had an interest in him  at
    the time.  He said the effect of this finding is that  the  authorities
    do not have an ongoing interest in  the  appellant  and  that  was  the
    finding made by the judge.

31.  As to his activities since coming to the UK, these do not appear to  be
    of a particularly high level.  There was nothing to  indicate  that  he
    would be of heightened interest to the  authorities  in  Vietnam  as  a
    result of these activities in the UK.

32.  Mr Wilding said the appellant left Vietnam two to  three  months  after
    his arrest.  He left the country with no difficulty  which  means  that
    there  was  no  particular  profile  on  him.   There  was  little   to
    demonstrate that he would be at risk for his limited activities in  the
    UK.

33.  Mr Wilding submitted that the background material  in  the  appellant's
    skeleton argument shows that in recent years there has been a  decrease
    in arrests in Vietnam.  This is confirmed  in  paragraph  6.3.3  of  an
    Amnesty International Report at page 14 of the appellant's bundle.  Mr.
    Wilding submitted that it  is  for  the  appellant  to  demonstrate  an
    ongoing risk and he has  not  done  so.   At  paragraph  56  the  judge
    concluded that none of the events that occurred in Vietnam prior to his
    departure put the appellant at risk of persecution by the state.  While
    there may have been some  suspicion  of  connection  with  a  political
    movement, on the appellant's own evidence the police had  no  proof  of
    his involvement and he clearly was not being monitored  by  them.   His
    activities had not in reality brought him to the attention of the state
    such that there was a real risk of persecution.

34.  Mr Khan replied by saying that the test is in respect of  future  risk.
    If the appellant goes back to Vietnam  and  participates  in  political
    activities, he would be at risk of persecution.  This is sufficient for
    him to seek international protection.

35.  Having considered the submissions made  by  the  parties,  I  found  Mr
    Wilding's arguments persuasive.

36.  I found that Mr. Khan was making a narrow point, which was this,  given
    the appellant's past behaviour, it was imperative on the judge to  find
    that the appellant was a political activist who could potentially  come
    to the attention of the authorities in Vietnam, if he were to engage in
    further political activities.  I find that this argument  goes  against
    the judge's finding at paragraph  56  that  none  of  the  events  that
    occurred in Vietnam prior to his departure put the appellant at risk of
    persecution by the state.  His activities had not  in  reality  brought
    him to the attention of the state.  This  means  that  the  appellant's
    activities were not of a particularly high level to lead to persecution
    of him by the state.  As stated  by  the  judge  at  paragraph  55  the
    appellant continued his political activity, attending  a  demonstration
    on 15 May and even on his own account that did not  bring  him  to  the
    attention of the police.  He was able to obtain  a  visa  to  come  and
    study in the United Kingdom and left Vietnam without any difficulty.

37.  The judge rejected the appellant's claim that his parents were  visited
    by the Vietnamese authorities.

38.  The objective evidence in the report by Amnesty International states:

         "While the number of arrests and prosecutions against human  rights
         defenders and government critics  decreased  from  previous  years,
         physical attacks and restrictions on movement  increased.   Several
         activists were confined to their homes.  Some of those  wishing  to
         travel overseas to attend human  rights-related  events  had  their
         passports confiscated; several others who  managed  to  leave  were
         arrested and interrogated by the police on their return."

39.  I find that it is for the appellant to demonstrate an ongoing risk.   I
    find that he has been unable to do so in the light of the findings that
    were made by the judge.  He did not suffer  any  of  the  ill-treatment
    identified by Amnesty International.  He has  no  particular  political
    profile.  He merely said in his witness statement that he  would  be  a
    political activist on his return to Vietnam without explaining what  he
    would do.  Therefore I find that if he returned to Vietnam and  engaged
    in the sort of activities he told the judge about,  there  is  no  real
    likelihood that he would be at risk of persecution by the  authorities.



Notice of Decision

40.  Accordingly, I find that the judge's  decision  does  not  disclose  an
    error of law.

41.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand


Signed                                  Date:  27 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun




















