
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08919/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (remotely by Skype)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2020                          |On 06 October 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                               Simbarashe [M]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tapfumaneyi, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    documents were available in paper format on the court file.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 5 March 2020, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kekic
    found an error of law in the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Joshi promulgated on 26 November 2019 allowing the  Appellant's  appeal
    on  human  rights  grounds.   The  Appellant's  protection  appeal  was
    dismissed and there has been no further challenge to that aspect of the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, which stands.  The hearing  before
    me was to  remake  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his human rights claim, in the context of deportation, dated
    4 September 2019.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on 28  August  1989,  who
    first arrived in the United Kingdom at the age  of  13  on  17  October
    2002, as the dependent of  his  mother,  a  work  permit  holder.   The
    Appellant was granted further leave to remain on  10  August  2005  and
    indefinite leave to remain on 30 November 2005.

 4. On 7 February 2009, the Appellant was  cautioned  for  taking  a  motor
    vehicle without consent.  On 19 April 2010, the Appellant was convicted
    of  possession  of  a  class  B  controlled  drug,  for  which  he  was
    subsequently sentenced to a supervision requirement and community order
    including an unpaid work requirement, subsequently varied to include an
    additional work requirement and curfew due to a failure to comply  with
    a community rehabilitation order.

 5. On 26 April 2010, the Appellant was convicted of burglary and theft  of
    a non-dwelling, to which he was sentenced to a community order, to  pay
    compensation and an unpaid work requirement; subsequently varied to add
    an additional work requirement and a curfew  with  electronic  tagging,
    due to a failure to comply with the community rehabilitation order.

 6. On 19 September 2012, the Appellant was convicted of  using  a  vehicle
    whilst uninsured and driving without a licence, for which he was fined,
    required to pay a victim surcharge and his licence  was  endorsed  with
    penalty points.

 7. On 3 September 2013, the Appellant was convicted  of  possession  of  a
    controlled class B drug, further to which  he  received  a  conditional
    discharge for two years.

 8. On 16 April  2014,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  two  counts  of
    possessing a class A controlled drug, for which he was sentenced  to  2
    years' imprisonment.   This  was  the  index  offence  which  triggered
    deportation action by the Respondent.

 9. On 25 April  2018,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  driving  whilst
    disqualified, using a vehicle while uninsured and possession of a class
    B controlled drug.  He received  a  suspended  sentence  of  six-weeks'
    imprisonment for the first offence and  no  separate  penalty  for  the
    others.

10. The Respondent served the Appellant with a notification of liability to
    deportation on 16 June 2014, followed by a decision to deport served on
    31 October 2014.  The Appellant made human  rights  representations  in
    response and also responded to the section 72  letter;  both  of  which
    were refused in the decision  dated  4  September  2019  which  is  the
    subject of this appeal.

11. The Respondent refused the Appellant's protection claim (upon which the
    appeal has been finally determined and no further detail is  needed  in
    relation to that aspect) and also his human rights claim.  In  relation
    to the family life exceptions to deportation, the  Respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    either with a partner or any dependent children in the United  Kingdom,
    there being a lack of evidence of either.

12. In relation to the private life exception  in  paragraph  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the Respondent accepted that the Appellant had  been
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life,  but  it
    was not accepted that he was  socially  and  culturally  integrated  in
    United Kingdom, nor that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    his  reintegration  on  return  to  Zimbabwe.    In   particular,   the
    Appellant's criminal history of 12  offences  being  committed  between
    2010 and 2018 indicated a lack of integration which was not  outweighed
    by any evidence of a positive contribution to British society  such  as
    voluntary  work  or  any  contribution  to  his  local  community.   On
    reintegration, the Respondent referred to the  Appellant's  information
    given in the context of his  OASys  assessment  that  he  has  extended
    family Zimbabwe, spent most of  2011  there  and  in  addition  it  was
    considered that he has substantial knowledge of life in Zimbabwe having
    lived there to the age of 13 and would be able to secure employment  on
    return.

13.  Finally,  the  Respondent  considered  whether  there  were  any  very
    compelling circumstances to outweigh the significant public interest in
    the Appellant's  deportation  but  having  considered  the  Appellant's
    criminal convictions, his family relationships, his length of residence
    in United Kingdom, his age on arrival and  the  perceived  strength  of
    connections that he has both to the United Kingdom and  Zimbabwe;  none
    were found.

The appeal

Applicable law

14. The requirements where a person claims that their deportation would  be
    contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under  Article  8  of  the
    European convention on Human rights in so far as they are  set  out  in
    the Immigration Rules and relate to this appeal are:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and


          a) ...


          b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or


          c) ... the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not,  the  public  interest  in  deportation  will   only   be
             outweighed by other factors where there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399
             and 399A.


         399.     This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
         applies if -


          a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


                i) the child is a British Citizen; or


             (ii)     the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case


                   a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and


                   b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported; or


          b) the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled
             in the UK, and


               i) the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and


              ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and


             iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
                  UK without the person who is to be deported.


         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -


          a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life; and


          b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."


15. By virtue of section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, Part V of that Act applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts breaches Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and
    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998.

16. Section 117A applies to the public interest considerations in all cases
    and section 117C applies additional considerations to  cases  involving
    foreign criminals.  So far as relevant to  this  appeal,  section  117B
    sets out factors to be considered  in  all  cases  and  the  additional
    consideration in cases involving foreign criminals provides as follows:

         "117C. Article 8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


          2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


          3) In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


          4) Exception 1 applies where -


               a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


               b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


               c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


          5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh."


17. In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53, the Supreme Court considered the test for and  factors  to  be
    taken into account when assessing the  meaning  of  'unduly  harsh'  in
    paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules  and  section  117C(5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In  paragraph  23,  Lord
    Carnworth held as follows:

          "On the other hand the expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   Further  the  word  "unduly"
         implies an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due"
         level of "harshness", that is a level which may  be  acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant context.   "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the deportation  of
         foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness  going
         beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced  with
         the deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in  my  view
         (and subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is
         a balancing of the relative levels  of  severity  of  the  parent's
         offence, other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the
         section itself by reference to length of sentence.   Nor  (contrary
         to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR
         240, paras 55, 64) can it be equated with the requirement  to  show
         "very compelling reasons".  That would be in  effect  to  replicate
         the additional test applied by  section  117C(6)  with  respect  to
         sentences of four years or more."


18. Within the Supreme Court's consideration of the specific appeal in  KO,
    further reference is made to the authoritative guidance on the  meaning
    of unduly harsh given in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), which held in paragraph 46:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something more severe,
         or bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  and  comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."


19. In HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2020]  EWCA
    Civ 1176, Lord Justice Underhill cautioned against a literal reading of
    paragraph 23 in KO (Nigeria) due to  the  difficulty  in  defining  the
    level of harshness that would "necessarily" be suffered by "any"  child
    and emphasises that the underlying concept is of an enhanced degree  of
    harshness sufficient to outweigh the public interest in deportation  of
    foreign criminals in the medium offender category.  Further guidance is
    given in paragraphs 50 to 53 below follows:

         "50.  What  light  do  those  passages  shed  on  the  meaning   of
         "unduly harsh (beyond the conclusion on the relative  seriousness
         issue)?


         51.    The   essential   point   is   that   the    criterion    of
         undue harshness sets a bar which is "elevated" and carries a "much
         stronger emphasis" than mere undesirability: see para. 27  of  Lord
         Carnwath's  judgment,  approving  the  UT's  self-direction  in MK
         (Sierra Leone), and  para.  35.  The  UT's  self-direction  uses  a
         battery of synonyms and antonyms:  although  these  should  not  be
         allowed  to  become  a  substitute  for  the  statutory   language,
         tribunals may find them of some assistance as  a  reminder  of  the
         elevated  nature  of  the  test.  The  reason   why   some   degree
         of harshness is acceptable is  that  there  is  a  strong  public
         interest in the deportation of foreign criminals (including  medium
         offenders): see para. 23. The underlying question for tribunals  is
         whether the harshness which the deportation will  cause  for  the
         partner and/or child  is  of  a  sufficiently  elevated  degree  to
         outweigh that public interest.


         52.  However,  while  recognising  the  "elevated"  nature  of  the
         statutory test, it is important not to lose sight of the fact  that
         the hurdle which it sets is not as high as that set by the test  of
         "very compelling  circumstances"  in  section  117C  (6).  As  Lord
         Carnwath points out in the second part of para. 23 of his judgment,
         disapproving IT (Jamaica), if that were so the position of  medium
         offenders and their families  would  be  no  better  than  that  of
         serious offenders. It follows that the observations in the case-law
         to the effect that it will be rare for the test of "very compelling
         circumstances" to be satisfied have no application in this context
         (I have already made this  point  -  see  para.  34  above).  The
         statutory intention is evidently that the hurdle  representing  the
         unacceptable impact on a partner or child should be  set  somewhere
         between the (low) level applying in the case  of  persons  who  are
         liable  to  ordinary  immigration  removal  (see  Lord   Carnwath's
         reference to section 117B (6) at the start of  para.  23)  and  the
         (very high) level applying to serious offenders.


         53.  Observations of that kind  are,  I  hope,  helpful,  but  they
         cannot identify an objectively measurable standard. It is  inherent
         in the nature of an exercise of the kind required by  section  117C
         (5) that Parliament intended that tribunals  should  in  each  case
         make an informed evaluative assessment of whether the effect of the
         deportation of the parent or partner  on  their  child  or  partner
         would be "unduly harsh" in  the  context  of  the  strong  public
         interest in the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals;  and  further
         exposition of that phrase  will  never  be  of  more  than  limited
         value."


20. In Kamara v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ
    813; [2016] 4 WLR 152, Sales LJ  commented  on  the  "very  significant
    obstacles" test, for the purposes of the third limb of the private life
    exception to deportation at paragraph 14 as follows:

         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c)... is a broad one. It is not confined to  the
         mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while living  in  the
         other country.  It  is  not  appropriate  to  treat  the  statutory
         language as subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient
         for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the  terms  that
         Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a
         broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the  individual
         will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life  in
         the society in that other country is carried on and a  capacity  to
         participate in it, so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
         accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
         society and to build up within a reasonable time a variety of human
         relationships to give substance  to  the  individual's  private  or
         family life."


The Appellant's evidence

21. In his written statement, dated 25 October 2019, the Appellant sets out
    his immigration and criminal history.  In  relation  to  Zimbabwe,  the
    Appellant states that he cannot remember where he used to  live  there,
    has no family or friends there and does not  eat  the  staple  food  in
    Zimbabwe.  The  Appellant  states  that  there  are  no  rehabilitation
    facilities in Zimbabwe which  may  cause  him  to  return  to  criminal
    activities, contrary to having built up an excellent relationship  with
    probation services in the United Kingdom.   Further,  there  is  a  90%
    unemployment rate in Zimbabwe and no opportunities for work.  There are
    also widespread human rights violations  in  Zimbabwe.   The  Appellant
    sets out his fear on return to Zimbabwe,  which  was  rejected  by  the
    Respondent and his appeal on this point  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

22. The Appellant sets out his relationship with  his  partner,  a  British
    citizen and her son, born in January 2014, also a British citizen.  The
    Appellant states that it would  be  impossible  for  them  to  live  in
    Zimbabwe and would face difficulties in not speaking  the  language  or
    having any knowledge of the culture there.  The Appellant's mother  and
    brother are in the United Kingdom and are also both British citizens.

23. The Appellant attended the oral hearing, remotely by  Skype,  confirmed
    his details and adopted his written statement.  In his  oral  evidence,
    he stated that he was unable to live in  Zimbabwe  because  he  had  no
    relatives there, would not know where to begin, how to get a job and he
    would have no support.  His family would face obstacles on return there
    because they only speak English, they would need accommodation  and  to
    organise education for the children and the Appellant does not know how
    he would support his family.

24. The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom  for  18  years,  went  to
    school and college here, studying for a  BTEC  diploma  in  IT  and  is
    gaining further IT  qualifications  through  the  Zenos  Academy.   The
    Appellant has been employed as a waiter for about a year, he has worked
    in a warehouse and as a driver for ING removals.  Throughout  his  time
    in the United Kingdom, he has made close friends, has god sons from two
    different friends who are a  significant  part  of  his  life  and  his
    friends provide him with continuous support.

25. The Appellant had a daughter with his partner who is  now  four  months
    old and the couple are engaged to be married.

26. In the United Kingdom, the Appellant has a close relationship with both
    his mother and brother, who support  each  other  and  have  pursued  a
    family business venture together.

27. When asked about his convictions, the  Appellant  stated  that  he  was
    previously in a bad place, he was young, not in a good  place  mentally
    and he is now trying to grow and become a better person for his  family
    and leave that part of his life behind.

28. In cross-examination, the Appellant stated that on paper he lives apart
    from his partner and children, but they have all been residing  at  his
    mother's address since their daughter was born and  pending  a  planned
    move to his partner's father's address.  The Appellant said that he  is
    not currently working in the  United  Kingdom  and  his  partner  is  a
    receptionist.  She has wider family in the  United  Kingdom,  including
    her mother, siblings, cousins, aunties and uncles.  Both  the  maternal
    and paternal grandmother's help out with the children.

29. The Appellant was asked about his employment and business ventures  the
    basis that there was discrepancies between what is contained in his  CV
    and evidence today compared with what he told his offender manager  for
    the purposes of the OAYSys report.  The Appellant stated that he wasn't
    aware of previously having said that his employment was only short-term
    in the past and he doesn't mention his gardening  business  on  his  CV
    because although it was something he was trying to do with his partner,
    it was a flop and never happened.

30. As to the convictions in 2018, the Appellant stated that he accepts  he
    shouldn't have been driving without insurance, but there was a  job  he
    needed to do, he needed to go and get shopping so used a  car.   As  to
    the drugs offence, he stated that he used to smoke a lot  but  this  is
    something that he has been working on.  He accepted that  he  had  been
    disqualified from driving at the time when he offended.  He  refers  to
    the convictions being a moment of poor decision-making but that  he  is
    trying not to continue making mistakes and to improve as a  person  and
    as a father.

31. The Appellant's partner has never been to Zimbabwe and his mother  last
    went in 2011 for  his  father's  funeral.   The  Appellant's  partner's
    oldest child's father is also from Zimbabwe, whom the Appellant  is  on
    good terms with but he has not asked if he could assist him if he  were
    to return there.

32. I asked further questions of the Appellant  given  that  there  were  a
    number of areas relevant to  my  consideration  of  the  exceptions  to
    deportation which had not been covered by his evidence in  chief.   The
    Appellant was in prison between February 2014  and  July  2015,  during
    which time he kept in touch with friends and family  who  visited  him.
    Since his release from prison, he has been helping  his  mum  with  her
    business, which is running a nursing agency and more  recently  setting
    up an agency for live in care, for which she gives him some money.   He
    has also been helping a friend in his business as a driver's mate  when
    he does deliveries, for  which  he  is  also  given  some  money.   The
    Appellant has been  living  with  his  mother  and  brother  since  his
    release.

33. I asked the Appellant what he  thought  the  impact  would  be  on  his
    partner and the two children if they remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without him.  He stated that he and his partner support each other  and
    the children and he does not know how his partner  would  manage  as  a
    single mum without him.  He is also just beginning  to  enjoy  being  a
    father and cannot imagine a day  without  seeing  his  daughter.   When
    asked if they could visit him in the future in Zimbabwe, he stated that
    it would be difficult at the moment  because  of  restrictions  due  to
    Covid-19 and he thinks that only those with a Zimbabwean  passport  are
    currently allowed into the country.

34. Neither the Appellant's partner,  nor  the  children  have  any  health
    conditions.  The older child has regular contact  with  his  biological
    father, staying with him every other weekend.  The  Appellant's  family
    in the United Kingdom would help him however they could if he  returned
    to Zimbabwe, but it might be difficult for them to do so.

35. The Appellant is no longer using drugs and last used them in 2019.   He
    undertook drug and alcohol awareness courses in prison but has not done
    anything similar following his release.

The Appellant's partner's evidence

36. In her  written  statement  signed  and  dated  25  October  2019,  the
    Appellant's partner details her family members in the  United  Kingdom,
    who are all British citizens, including her son born in  January  2014.
    She is employed on a part-time basis as  an  administrator  and  relies
    mainly on benefits for herself and her son.

37. The relationship between the Appellant and his  partner  began  in  May
    2016 and she has now moved in with him at his  mother's  address.   The
    Appellant has been in her son's life since he was  two  years  old  and
    they have a close relationship, with the  Appellant  dropping  off  and
    picking up from school, taking him to swimming  and  football.   It  is
    said that two share a special bond.

38. The Appellant's partner attended the oral hearing  remotely  by  Skype,
    confirmed her details and adopted her written  statement.   She  stated
    that she would be unable to relocate to Zimbabwe  because  she  is  not
    familiar with the language  or  culture  there,  because  of  the  poor
    economic situation in the country and because she did not know how  she
    would be able to find employment.  Further, her two children only speak
    English and the older child is in primary school with  regular  contact
    with his biological father  and  his  father's  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom and it would be very difficult for  her  to  adjust  to  a  new
    country and the education system.  If the Appellant were to be deported
    to Zimbabwe, it would have an adverse impact on the Appellant's partner
    and on the children because he is  an  active  father  who  makes  some
    financial  contribution  to  the  family  and  it  would  present  real
    challenges for her as a single mother to continue to be  able  to  work
    part-time without the Appellant  here.   The  Appellant's  partner  has
    extended family in the United Kingdom and she is  employed  here  as  a
    receptionist/administrator in the NHS.

39. In cross-examination, the Appellant's partner  stated  that  her  older
    child sees his biological father once a fortnight for the weekend,  his
    father being originally from Zimbabwe and with extended family there.

40. The Appellant and his partner started their relationship after  he  had
    been served with deportation papers and his partner was  aware  of  the
    chance of him being deported.  The Appellant had promised  his  partner
    that he would not be in trouble again and that  he  was  in  trying  to
    improve.  She was disappointed after his conviction in 2018 but  stated
    that he had not used drugs since that conviction.  When  challenged  by
    his evidence on this point that his last drug  use  was  in  2019,  she
    stated that maybe he had had a couple of relapses  but  was  not  using
    drugs to the same extent as before.

The documentary evidence

41. Written witness statements were also  available  from  the  Appellant's
    mother and brother, who previously gave oral evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal but not  before  me.   Those  statements  deal  with  the
    protection aspects of the Appellant's claim and also confirm details of
    the Appellant's history in the United Kingdom and the support he  gives
    his family.  There were also a  number  of  character  references  from
    friends in the United Kingdom,  including  the  parents  for  whom  the
    Appellant is a god parent to their children.  The Appellant's  evidence
    also included a number of photographs with family and friends.

42. On the day of the hearing the Appellant submitted  further  documentary
    evidence, including his CV and birth certificates for his daughter  and
    stepson.

Closing submissions

43. In closing on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tan relied  on  the  reasons
    for refusal  letter  and  also  the  adverse  credibility  findings  in
    relation to both the Appellant  and  some  of  his  family  members  in
    relation to his protection  claim.   The  Appellant  has  an  extensive
    criminal history between 2010 and 2018,  including  driving  and  drugs
    offences as well as the index offence in 2014.  It was  submitted  that
    it is clear that his  extensive  dealings  with  the  criminal  justice
    system have not been a deterrent to prevent future offending,  nor  has
    his relationship which predates his last offence in 2018.

44. On behalf of the Respondent it was accepted that the Appellant was in a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner, his stepchild and
    daughter even though there was limited documentary evidence about these
    relationships.  It was also submitted that  there  was  limited  detail
    about any of the relationships and it would be difficult to submit that
    the family could relocate to Zimbabwe without it  being  unduly  harsh,
    such that the focus of the submissions was that it would not be  unduly
    harsh on any of the family members to remain in the United  Kingdom  if
    the Appellant were  deported.   There  was  before  the  Tribunal  very
    limited evidence of the consequences of deportation and  in  particular
    it was highlighted that there were no medical  issues  for  any  family
    members, the Appellant's partner has employment and  accommodation  and
    the family unit are supported by extended family members on both sides.
     There was no compelling evidence of dependence by or on the  Appellant
    with his own extended family members.

45. In relation to private life, the Respondent accepts that the  Appellant
    has been residing in the United Kingdom lawfully for most of  his  life
    but it was not accepted that he was socially and culturally  integrated
    here given his history of repeat offending, all committed as  an  adult
    and even with family support and following  being  in  a  relationship.
    There was inconsistent evidence of the Appellant's employment  history,
    in particular between the CV relied upon and the information  given  in
    the OASys report.  The Appellant had continued to offend in April  2018
    despite making promises previously not to do  so  and  despite  already
    being aware of the prospect of his deportation from the United Kingdom.
     The character letters relied upon by the Appellant failed to make  any
    reference to his offending and therefore were of little assistance.

46. It was also not accepted by the Respondent  that  the  Appellant  would
    face very significant obstacles to reintegration in Zimbabwe, a country
    where he has extended family links, where he grew up and where he spent
    a long period of time  in  2011.   The  Appellant  could  benefit  from
    continuing  family  support  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  would  be
    returning to a country where English is widely spoken.  There are  some
    remaining links to Zimbabwe and the Appellant would not be an alien  on
    return there.

47. Finally, essentially the same submissions  were  made  in  relation  to
    whether there were very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  the
    exceptions  to  outweigh  the  significant  public  interest   in   the
    Appellant's deportation.  The  only  additional  factor  which  it  was
    anticipated the Appellant may rely on is his  extended  family  in  the
    United Kingdom, but there is a  lack  of  evidence  of  any  degree  of
    dependence between them and of any adverse consequences on them of  the
    Appellant being deported and again it was noted that his family was not
    a factor to prevent his offending.

48.  On  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  Mr  Tupfumaneyi  relied  on   written
    submissions made immediately prior  to  the  hearing  and  in  addition
    relied on what he described as a plethora of evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal on the contacts and family life of the Appellant  in  the
    United  Kingdom  which  evidenced  a  close   relationship   to   which
    significant weight should be attached.  It was further  submitted  that
    the adverse credibility findings made in  relation  to  the  protection
    claim are not relevant to an assessment of the human  rights  claim  or
    exceptions to deportation, particularly when the Appellant has  clearly
    been honest about his  offending,  not  bolstered  his  claim  and  has
    accepted pressure points in his history in relation to  drug  use.   He
    has been honest and sincere in addressing those problems and  has  been
    as clean as he can be since his last conviction in 2018.

49. The Appellant has had employment in the  United  Kingdom,  which  shows
    integration,  on  top  of  his  education  and   training   here,   his
    friendships, his role as a god father and  voluntary  work  within  the
    church.  The Appellant has had 18 years  of  lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom since the age of 13.  Overall, it was submitted that  he
    is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Appellant would face obstacles to reintegration in Zimbabwe because  of
    the  difficult  economic  situation  there  and  lack  of   access   to
    rehabilitation, which may cause the Appellant to return to drug use and
    offending behaviour.  It is not realistic that  the  Appellant's  step-
    son's father would be able to assist him in reintegration  in  Zimbabwe
    from within the United Kingdom.  Mr Tupfumaneyi confirmed that the only
    background country evidence available was  the  UN  Special  Rapporteur
    report about civil and political issues, which was relied upon to  show
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration.

50. In relation to the Appellant's family life, it was  submitted  that  it
    would be unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant's  family  to  relocate  to
    Zimbabwe with him and also unduly harsh them for them to remain in  the
    United Kingdom without him.  The best interests of two British  citizen
    children, with whom the Appellant has a close relationship need  to  be
    taken into account and it was stated that the Appellant's removal would
    have a devastating impact on his partner who would be left as a  single
    parent.  The impact on her in particular would be unduly harsh  because
    the Appellant would no longer be making a financial contribution to the
    United Kingdom and she would be unable to work  without  him  providing
    care for the children such that she would have to have recourse to  and
    be totally reliant on public funds.  The situation and  the  impact  of
    removal is made worse by the current restrictions caused by Covid-19 on
    the possibility of travel to and from Zimbabwe but also in  relying  on
    wider family members in the short term.

51. No additional submissions were made  as  to  whether  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions  to  deportation
    to outweigh the public interest, with reliance  placed  on  essentially
    the same facts and obstacles already referred to.

Findings and reasons

 1. The issues in this appeal are whether the Appellant  meets  either  the
    private or family life exception to deportation set out  in  paragraphs
    398 and following of the Immigration Rules  and  section  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002;  or  whether  in  the
    alternative there are very compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the
    significant public interest in his deportation to Zimbabwe.  It is  not
    in dispute between the parties that the Appellant is in a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his partner, step-son  and  daughter;  nor
    that he has been lawfully  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    majority of his life.

 2. The first issue is as to whether the Appellant meets  the  family  life
    exception to deportation, either on  the  basis  that  his  deportation
    would be unduly harsh on his partner and/or children if the family were
    to relocate together to Zimbabwe or if it would be unduly harsh on  his
    partner and children to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  him.
    There were no substantive submissions on behalf of the Respondent  that
    it would not be unduly harsh for the family  to  relocate  to  Zimbabwe
    together and for the following reasons I find that it  would  be.   The
    Appellant's partner and children are all British citizens and it is  of
    significant weight that the children should be entitled  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom and benefit from  their  citizenship  here  for  the
    purposes  of  education  and  healthcare,  as  well  as   to   maintain
    relationships between  the  Appellant's  step-son  and  his  biological
    father, and for both children to maintain extended family relationships
    here.   The  Appellant's  partner  and  children  have  never  been  to
    Zimbabwe, are unfamiliar with culture and society  there  and  although
    English is widely spoken, they do not know any other  local  languages.
    The impact on the family members of relocating to Zimbabwe,  a  country
    with  poor  economic  and  human  rights  conditions   would   in   the
    circumstances not only be harsh but unduly harsh.

 3. However, to meet the exception it would also have to be unduly harsh on
    the Appellant's partner and/or children to remain in the United Kingdom
    without the Appellant.  I consider both together  as  in  reality,  the
    Appellant's partner and children would not be separated from each other
    and would remain together in the United Kingdom (unless notwithstanding
    the assessment above and difficulties they have stated that they  would
    encounter, they choose to relocate to Zimbabwe, which is  of  course  a
    matter for them).  Whilst there is no dispute that  there  are  genuine
    and subsisting relationships between all of these family members,  very
    recently involving cohabitation since  the  birth  of  the  Appellant's
    daughter and it is not in dispute that the Appellant  plays  an  active
    role as a father to both children; there is very little evidence of any
    substance going beyond the basic existence of family life  between  the
    Appellant, his partner and the two children and almost  nothing  as  to
    the impact on them of the Appellant being deported.

 4. It is trite that it is normally in the best interests  of  children  to
    remain with both parents in the same country as a family unit and there
    is nothing to suggest on the facts of this case  that  that  would  not
    also be the case for these children, whose best interests would also be
    to remain in the United Kingdom for the reasons already set out  above.
    Although not specified or detailed by or on behalf of the Appellant, it
    is  reasonable  to  infer  that  there  would  be  an  adverse  impact,
    particularly on the children, of  the  Appellant's  deportation  as  it
    would deprive them of daily face-to-face contact  with  him.   Although
    the relationship could be maintained to a lesser extent through  modern
    means of communication and potentially through  visits  in  the  future
    (although I appreciate in the short term at least international  travel
    is subject to restrictions because of Covid-19).  There is  nothing  to
    suggest that the frequently referred to adverse impact on  children  of
    the removal of a parent to another country  would  not  apply  to  this
    family.

 5. The  impact  of  removal  of  a  parent  often  has  adverse  financial
    consequences  on  the  family  income.   However,  in  this  case,  the
    Appellant's partner is in receipt of public funds already to supplement
    her income from part-time employment and although there is reference to
    the Appellant making some financial contribution, this is not  detailed
    or specified, nor is there any evidence as to the  effect  of  loss  of
    this on the family income.  I find in circumstances where the Appellant
    has denied working at  all  at  the  moment  (albeit  also  stating  in
    evidence that he was given some money for helping out with his mother's
    and a friend's business) that any financial contribution  from  him  is
    likely to be limited and marginal  at  best.   I  reject  entirely  the
    submission on behalf of the Appellant that his partner would no  longer
    be able to work if he were deported to Zimbabwe, as no explanation  has
    been given as to why he is the only person who can provide childcare to
    enable her to do so and neither party gave any evidence at all on  this
    point.  There is no reason as to why informal childcare from family  or
    friends (given the evidence that the grandmothers already help out with
    the children now) or formal paid childcare could not be used.

 6. There was in essence, no evidence from or on behalf  of  the  Appellant
    about the consequences of his removal  upon  his  partner  or  children
    beyond a vague reference to  the  difficulties  encountered  by  single
    parents and specifically single parents who are in  employment.   There
    was no identification of any particular consequences on the Appellant's
    partner (save for in relation to employment dealt with  above)  or  the
    children which could be described as harsh in accordance with the  test
    set out above, let  alone  unduly  harsh.   There  was  no  independent
    evidence or assessment of the family  situation,  no  evidence  of  any
    medical or other needs and no evidence  of  any  particular  or  strong
    dependence on the Appellant  creating  any  specific  difficulties  for
    family members.  Any adverse impact on family members is only what  can
    be gleaned and inferred from what is generally known and accepted  from
    numerous authorities about the likely consequences of deportation of  a
    parent.  That is not to say that any direct comparison  is  being  made
    between this family and the impact on any other hypothetical family, it
    is simply that in this case there is an almost complete absence of  any
    relevant evidence on behalf of the  Appellant  to  show  even  a  harsh
    impact as a consequence of his deportation and the burden is on him, on
    the balance of probabilities, to establish that the exception  is  met.
    In this case, the Appellant has failed to  establish  an  unduly  harsh
    impact on his family members,  either  his  partner  or  his  children,
    remaining in the United Kingdom if he were deported.

 7. The second issue is whether the Appellant satisfies the three limbs  of
    the private life exception.  There is no  dispute  that  he  meets  the
    first requirement, to have resided lawfully in the United  Kingdom  for
    most of his life.  The Respondent does not accept  that  he  meets  the
    second requirement of being socially and culturally integrated  in  the
    United Kingdom, primarily due to his  extensive  criminal  history  but
    also that there is a lack of community or  other  positive  engagement.
    However,  I  find  that  the  Appellant  is  socially  and   culturally
    integrated in the United Kingdom for the following reasons.

 8. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom at the age of  13  in  2002
    and has resided here for 18 years, including the majority of his  adult
    life (save for an extended period in Zimbabwe in  2011).   During  that
    time he has completed secondary education and some further education by
    way of qualifications in IT  and  has  had  employment.   Although  the
    evidence of the Appellant's employment is inconsistent, both  in  terms
    of the duration for which he has been employed in particular roles (his
    CV stating longer periods of  employment  than  either  the  Sentencing
    Remarks refer to or  what  the  Appellant  himself  told  his  offender
    manager for the purposes of the OASys report) and  as  to  the  precise
    employment or business engaged in (again with  inconsistencies  between
    the information given for the purposes of  the  OASys  report  and  the
    Appellant's CV; as well as his own oral evidence  in  which  he  stated
    first that he was not working at all but then later that he  was  being
    paid by his mother and a friend for work in their businesses); there is
    sufficient information to show that the Appellant has had at least some
    employment in the United Kingdom. Further, the Appellant has a  network
    of friendships, including  being  a  god  parent  to  two  children  in
    different families, attested to by letters from those friends, as  well
    as his family relationships in the United Kingdom.

 9. I have taken into account the Appellant's criminal history as a  factor
    against the Appellant's social and cultural  integration  and  although
    extensive over a number of years and contrary to the values of society,
    it does not sufficiently undermine  the  matters  set  out  immediately
    above.  I have  also  considered  whether  the  Appellant's  period  of
    imprisonment has broken his integration or detracts from it, but do not
    find that it has given that  he  maintained  family  relationships  and
    friendships during this time and on release has been  living  with  his
    mother and brother.

10. The third requirement for  the  private  life  exception  is  that  the
    Appellant would face very significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  on
    return to Zimbabwe.  The Appellant's case in this  regard  is  that  he
    would face such obstacles because of the length of  time  he  has  been
    away from Zimbabwe, that he has no family or  connections  there,  that
    there is a  lack  of  support  for  rehabilitation  and  poor  economic
    conditions such that he would not be able to obtain employment.

11. There was no information before the Tribunal as to  any  rehabilitation
    or support for the Appellant on return to Zimbabwe for drug use  or  in
    relation to criminal offending, or, to the contrary,  of  the  lack  of
    such services.  The Appellant's claim to need further support  is  also
    undermined by his evidence that he is no longer  using  drugs  and  his
    continued assertion that he will not offend again.  For these reasons I
    attach no weight to this factor and do not find that it amounts to  any
    obstacle to reintegration.

12. The only background country evidence relied upon by the Appellant about
    conditions in Zimbabwe was the UN Special Rapporteur report from  2019,
    specifically on the rights to  freedom  of  peaceful  assembly  and  of
    association; which does not form any part of the Appellant's  claim  in
    relation to obstacles to reintegration.  There is no  evidence  on  the
    current  economic  situation   in   Zimbabwe,   the   availability   of
    accommodation,  employment  or  any  other  matters  relevant  to  this
    Appellant's ability (or otherwise) to reintegrate on return.

13. The Appellant left Zimbabwe as a young teenager in 2002 and has resided
    in the United Kingdom, together with  his  mother  and  brother,  since
    then; save for an extended period of time living in Zimbabwe  in  2011.
    As such he is inevitably more familiar with the culture in  the  United
    Kingdom than that in Zimbabwe, but I do not find that he will have lost
    familiarity with the culture in Zimbabwe given he grew  up  there,  has
    spent an extended period of time there as an  adult  in  2011  and  has
    family members and friends in the United Kingdom from Zimbabwe.  I also
    do not accept the Appellant's claim not to have any family or  contacts
    remaining  in  Zimbabwe  given  that  this  is  inconsistent  with  the
    information given to his offender manager for the purposes of his OASys
    report and is one of many examples of inconsistent evidence before  me,
    in addition to the unchallenged adverse credibility  findings  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  protection
    claim; which overall undermines the Appellant's credibility.

14. The Appellant speaks English which is widely spoken in Zimbabwe, he has
    educational qualifications and work experience in  the  United  Kingdom
    and there is  no  specific  reason  (particularly  in  the  absence  of
    background country evidence about Zimbabwe) as to why he would  not  be
    able to utilise those skills and experience  to  obtain  employment  on
    return.  There was no evidence before me at all  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant would not be able to find accommodation on return.   Further,
    although he stated it  may  be  difficult  for  them,  the  Appellant's
    evidence was that his family in the United Kingdom  would  continue  to
    support him in Zimbabwe.

15. Taking all of these factors into  account,  I  do  not  find  that  the
    Appellant has established that he would face very significant obstacles
    to reintegration on return to Zimbabwe.  Although it is likely that the
    Appellant's return to Zimbabwe would  present  some  challenges  and  a
    period of adjustment, he does have some familiarity  with  the  country
    and experience of living there (including as an  adult);  has  extended
    family there; faces no language barriers; has qualifications  and  work
    experience to use to obtain employment; has no medical problems; and is
    likely to receive at least some continuing support from family  in  the
    United Kingdom.  In these circumstances, he would not only be  able  to
    maintain and support himself, but also has sufficient understanding and
    capacity to participate in and be accepted  in  society,  to  build  up
    private and  family  life  there.   The  Appellant  has  not  therefore
    established that he meets the private life exception to deportation.

16. The final issue is whether  the  Appellant  has  established  any  very
    compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions to outweigh  the
    significant public  interest  in  his  deportation  to  Zimbabwe.   The
    Appellant did  not  rely  on  any  distinct  matters,  individually  or
    cumulatively over and above those already relied upon  in  relation  to
    the family and private life exceptions to deportation.

17. The Appellant has an extensive criminal history in the United  Kingdom,
    including  drugs  offences  of  a  serious  nature  and  which  have  a
    significant adverse impact on  individuals  and  society  as  a  whole.
    Although his convictions in 2018 were for offences which  were  not  as
    serious as the index offences, they were still of a similar pattern  of
    driving and drugs offences for which he had previously  been  convicted
    and were committed after the  Appellant  had  made  assertions  to  his
    family and offender manager about not committing further offences; at a
    time when he had entered into a relationship and had responsibility for
    a child and a time when he knew that  he  was  subject  to  deportation
    action in the United Kingdom.  It is clear from the Appellant's history
    that his convictions and time in prison, his family and even the threat
    of deportation has not been sufficient to prevent further offending.

18. In addition  to  the  matters  set  out  already  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's private and family life in the context of the exceptions to
    deportation which are also of relevance to the final balancing exercise
    of whether there are very compelling circumstances; I have  also  taken
    into account the fact that  the  Appellant's  relationship  only  began
    after the index offences and when both parties knew that the  Appellant
    was subject to deportation  action  by  the  Respondent  and  that  the
    relationship has only very recently involved cohabitation.

19. Although not expressly relied upon by  the  Appellant  at  the  hearing
    before me, I have also taken into account  in  his  favour  his  family
    relationships with his mother and brother in the United Kingdom and his
    wider network of friends established here.

20. Taking all of these matters into  account,  including  the  factors  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, I  do
    not find that the Appellant has established that  there  are  any  very
    compelling circumstances (individually or cumulatively) to outweigh the
    significant public interest in his deportation.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on protection grounds.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         1st October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

