
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/08219/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Friday 29 May 2020                |On Tuesday 02 June 2020              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     P R
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.   The Appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hawden-Beal promulgated on 15 November 2019 ("the Decision").  By
    the Decision, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 14 August 2019 refusing his protection  and
    human rights claims and those of his wife and four children who are his
    dependents in this appeal.

2.   The Appellant and his family are nationals of Iraq.  They left Iraq  in
    July 2017 and arrived in the UK in June 2018, travelling via Turkey and
    Greece.  The Appellant claims to be at risk  on  return  from  the  IKR
    authorities because he had organised and taken part  in  demonstrations
    against the government.  He also claimed to have been  targeted  by  an
    individual from a Peshmerga unit.  The  Respondent  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity but otherwise  did  not  believe  his
    claim.

3.    The  Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  may  have  taken  part  in
    demonstrations which took place in IKR in 2014-16 but not that  he  was
    involved in organising them.  She did not accept that the Appellant had
    been targeted by the authorities via the individual he claimed to  fear
    or otherwise.  The Judge did not accept that the Appellant  was  unable
    to obtain a CSID card.  She also rejected the human rights claims based
    on Article 8 ECHR and those based on health problems of  the  Appellant
    and his wife.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

4.   The Appellant appeals  on  six  grounds  which  can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

    Ground One:   The  Judge  has  applied  too  high  a  standard  to  the
                   protection  claim,  finding  that  the  Appellant  should
                   remember dates  and  therefore  putting  herself  in  the
                   position of the Appellant.

    Ground Two:   The  Judge  has  assumed  that,  if  the  Appellant  were
                   genuinely an organiser of the  protests,  he  would  have
                   been arrested and detained and  has  therefore  erred  by
                   relying on plausibility.

    Ground Three: The Judge has erred by requiring documentary evidence  of
                   the claim.

    Ground Four:  The Judge has  made  assumptions  about  the  Appellant's
                   ability to know the mind of the man he claimed to fear.

    Ground Five:  The  Judge  has  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
                   rejecting the claimed fear of the individual concerned.

    Ground Six:   The Judge has erred by relying on the Appellant's failure
                   to mention the claimed fear of the individual during  his
                   screening interview which is potentially unfair.

5.   Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  on  7
    February 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... The grounds challenge paragraphs 43-49 of the Judge's decision
         and  assert  the  Judge  made  assumptions  as  to  facts  and  the
         plausibility  of  elements  of  the  Appellant's  account,   sought
         documentary corroboration, gave inadequate reasons to  support  her
         adverse credibility findings and failed to apply the learning in JA
         (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 450 on the weight to be  given
         to discrepancies between the replies given at the initial screening
         of the Appellant and subsequent evidence.

         It is arguable the Judge erred at  paragraphs  45  and  46  of  her
         decision in attaching too much weight to the absence of  particular
         items of documentary evidence without exploring  how  difficult  or
         easy it would be to obtain such evidence and  to  send  it  to  the
         United Kingdom and any reason for its absence.

         I find the Judge arguably erred in  law  at  paragraph  49  of  her
         decision in her treatment of the  evidence  at  screening,  as  the
         grounds for appeal state.

         The challenges to paragraphs 47 and 48 of the Judge's decision  are
         weaker than the other grounds which are  sufficient  to  merit  the
         grant of permission to appeal.  Nevertheless, all  grounds  may  be
         argued."

6.   By a Note and Directions sent on 6 April  2020,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Bruce, having reviewed the file, reached the provisional view  that  it
    would be appropriate to determine without a hearing (pursuant  to  Rule
    34 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  -  "the
    Procedure Rules") the following questions:

         (a)  whether the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
         involved the making of an error of law and, if so

         (b)  whether that decision should be set aside.

    Directions were given for the parties to make submissions in writing on
    the appropriateness of that course and further submissions in  relation
    to the error of law. The reasons for the Note and  Directions  was  the
    "present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,  and
    the overriding objective expressed in the Procedure Rules".

7.   Rather than responding as requested to the  possibility  of  making  an
    error of law decision on the  papers  and  expanding  on  the  existing
    grounds, the Appellant, by his submissions dated 10 April 2020,  sought
    to expand the grounds to include three further grounds.   Ground  seven
    asserted a failure to apply extant country guidance.  It  is  not  said
    which case the Judge failed to take into account which was relevant  to
    the Appellant's case.  Ground  eight  asserts  a  failure  to  consider
    internal relocation. Ground nine asserts a  failure  to  consider  past
    persecution arising from the reasons why the Appellant claims to suffer
    from migraines.  I note for present purposes that  the  Appellant  does
    not have permission to argue those grounds and has not made any  formal
    application to amend explaining the  failure  to  raise  these  grounds
    earlier. Contrary to what  is  suggested,  Judge  Bruce  permitted  the
    Appellant to submit further submissions in support of the assertion  of
    an error of  law,  whilst  noting  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  were
    detailed.  She did not give  the  Appellant  permission  to  amend  the
    grounds which were put forward.

8.   On 21 April 2020, the Respondent filed her response to the  Appellant's
    submissions in the following terms:

         "... 2.  The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application
         for permission to appeal in that the Judge appears to  the  applied
         to [sic] higher burden of proof on  the  appellant  for  supporting
         evidence.

         3.   It is submitted that the  appellant  does  not  challenge  the
         ability to obtain a CSID card, therefore, that finding stands.

         4.   The Tribunal are invited to determine the appeal with a  fresh
         oral (continuance)  hearing.   Given  that  this  hearing  concerns
         credibility this may be an appeal that requires oral evidence."

9.   On 23 April 2020, the Appellant  filed  a  Reply  to  the  Respondent's
    written submissions.  The Appellant disputed that he had not challenged
    the finding in relation to the CSID card.  He drew attention to  ground
    eight (as raised only in the further  submissions).   Whilst  accepting
    that there was no mention there of the CSID  card,  he  submitted  that
    whether one could be obtained was relevant to the  internal  relocation
    issue which he said that the Judge had failed  to  consider.   For  the
    first time in that Reply, the Appellant raised the issue of the country
    guidance case which he said required the Judge to conduct the  exercise
    of considering the availability of the CSID  card  in  the  context  of
    internal relocation (being SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) ("SMO  and  others").   That
    decision was reported on 20 December 2019 and therefore after both  the
    hearing of this appeal and the Decision.  The Appellant also  sought  a
    set aside of the whole of the Decision with no findings preserved.   It
    was asserted that an oral re-hearing could only take place once it  was
    safe to do so and that it was not possible to hear the appeal  remotely
    due to the need for live evidence.  It is not said  why  such  evidence
    could not be given via remote means.

10.   The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision  contains
    an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make  the  decision
    or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

11.  When considering the grounds on which permission has been  granted,  it
    is appropriate to have regard to the passage of the Decision which sets
    out the Judge's findings and  which  is  therefore  the  focus  of  the
    grounds of appeal.  As Judge Shaerf points out, the relevant paragraphs
    (at least as regards the grounds before him) are [43] to [49].

12.  The Judge's findings in fact begin at [42] where the  Judge  notes  the
    consistency  of  the  Appellant's  claim  about   the   anti-government
    demonstrations with  the  background  evidence.   At  [43],  the  Judge
    considered the photographs produced of the  Appellant's  attendance  at
    the demonstrations which although not dated, she accepted may show that
    he was involved with the protests.  However, she pointed to the lack of
    media reporting which was inconsistent with the Appellant's claim about
    media attendance.  Moreover, the Judge said that, if the Appellant  had
    been an organiser as he claimed "[h]e would have had a  rough  idea  of
    the number who attended and he  certainly  would  have  remembered  the
    dates.  The fact that he does not damages his credibility in so far  as
    his claim to have been an organiser of these  protests".   It  is  that
    sentence on which the Appellant relies as showing that the Judge  erred
    both in terms of the standard of proof which the Judge required (by use
    of the word "certainly") and the assumptions made about the Appellant's
    likely recollection.  Although the Judge did remind herself at [38]  of
    the Decision about the standard which applies to protection  claims,  I
    accept the Respondent's concession that  this  sentence  does  tend  to
    suggest that the Judge applied too high a standard and made assumptions
    which were unwarranted for that reason.  That deals with ground one.

13.  I am also persuaded that there is an error disclosed by ground  two  in
    relation to [44] of the Decision although not perhaps for  the  reasons
    given by the Appellant in that regard  (insofar  as  I  understand  how
    ground two is put).  There seems to me to be an  inconsistency  between
    the Judge's findings in that paragraph and/or an absence of a  required
    finding.  The Judge begins  by  noting  that  the  background  evidence
    reported the arrest of activists before the 2016 protests and yet it is
    the Appellant's case that he was not arrested and participated in those
    protests.  That was something to which the Judge was entitled  to  have
    regard.  However, the Appellant's case was that the  authorities  would
    have been unaware of his involvement as he and his friends were careful
    about how they transmitted information, avoiding  the  use  of  phones.
    The Judge does not actually say whether  she  accepts  the  Appellant's
    evidence in that regard but rather  says  that  "..either  he  and  his
    friends were very good at keeping their identity a complete secret from
    the security services or he did not have a prominent role as  he  would
    have me believe".  She does not say why it could not be the  case  that
    they were indeed good at maintaining secrecy.  I accept that  she  does
    give other reasons why she did not accept that  the  Appellant  was  an
    organiser which may have been open to her, but she did not resolve  the
    issue which arose from the Appellant's evidence on this point.

14.   I  am  unpersuaded  by  ground  three.   The  consideration   of   the
    registration certificate at [45] is just that.  The Judge was  required
    to consider whether the certificate  supported  the  Appellant's  case.
    She concluded that it did not because it did not mention the  Appellant
    and his friends.  As she also pointed out, the  organisation  to  which
    that certificate related was closed  down  (on  the  Appellant's  case)
    after he left Iraq by the authorities (although that does rather add to
    the  Appellant's  case  about  the  authorities'   interest   in   that
    organisation which point is not expressly  considered  by  the  Judge).
    Similarly, at [46]  of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  was  assessing  the
    evidence which the Appellant put forward in support of the existence of
    the individual concerned.  The threat from that quarter was  considered
    not only in that paragraph but also those following.

15.  I am also unpersuaded by ground four.  At [47]  of  the  Decision,  the
    Judge says this:

         "If this General knew who the appellant was such that he  was  able
         to call the appellant's  father  and  threaten  him,  why  was  the
         appellant never arrested?  Clearly the General was able to find out
         who the appellant was and where he lived otherwise,  he  would  not
         have sent the appellant a letter, but the appellant states that  he
         was never arrested because he was not at his home or his shop  when
         the men came.  This is contradicted by his evidence today  that  he
         and his family were too afraid of the threats from the  General  to
         leave their home and go to work and that it became like  a  prison.
         Given that claim a General in charge of peshmergas,  who  had  been
         fighting ISIS, would have been able to find  the  appellant  if  he
         really wanted to, especially if the appellant never  went  to  work
         and stayed at home because he was so afraid.  The  appellant  makes
         no mention of his friends being threatened by the  General  and  so
         why was he targeted and no one else?   I  do  not  accept  for  one
         minute that such a high-ranking officer would  call  the  appellant
         himself and threaten either him or his father.  He would have  much
         better things to do.  If he was of such a high rank with an army at
         his command, I also do not accept that  the  appellant  would  have
         been able to avoid arrest as he claims he did."

16.  The Judge was entitled to call this element of the case  into  question
    based on the inconsistency in the Appellant's case.   Whilst  I  accept
    that some of what is here said turns on implausibility, the  Judge  was
    entitled to have regard to whether events are likely to  have  occurred
    as the Appellant claimed, in particular given  the  General's  asserted
    state  of  knowledge  and  position.   However,  the  reason  why  this
    paragraph discloses an error has nothing to do with a required need  to
    second guess the actions of a third party but rather  because  this  is
    another example of the Judge potentially applying too high  a  standard
    particularly when indicating that she did not "for one  minute"  accept
    that events "would" happen as the  Appellant  claims.   The  issue  was
    whether it was reasonably likely that they did.  Ground  one  therefore
    impacts also on these findings.  For that reason, I do not need to deal
    with ground five which concerns the Judge's reasoning about this aspect
    of the Appellant's claim.

17.  I do not accept that an error is  disclosed  by  ground  six.   As  the
    Court of Appeal itself said at the start of [24] of its judgment in  JA
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 450 "[i]n the absence of a statutory provision of the  kind  to  be
    found in section 78 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, I  do
    not think that in proceedings of this kind the tribunal has  the  power
    to exclude relevant evidence. It does, however, have an  obligation  to
    consider with care how much weight is to  be  attached  to  it,  having
    regard to the circumstances in which it came into existence".   I  note
    the Appellant's failure to include that part of  the  citation  in  the
    grounds.  What follows in the grounds does not explain what it is about
    the circumstances of the screening interview in this case which renders
    the Judge's reliance on a failure to mention something unfair.   In  JA
    (Afghanistan), the appellant was a minor who was interviewed without an
    appropriate adult.  Clearly those  circumstances  do  not  apply  here.
    There is no assertion in the Appellant's  witness  statement  that  the
    screening interview was  unfairly  conducted.   Indeed,  the  Appellant
    expressly relies on  that  interview  (see  �3  of  that  statement  at
    [AB/11]).  I note also from [49] of the  Decision  that  the  Appellant
    failed to mention this either in his substantive interview  when  asked
    who he feared.  Those were points which the Judge was entitled to  take
    into account.  However, the finding that the Appellant is not  in  fear
    of this individual cannot stand  due  to  the  Judge's  comments  which
    suggest that she may have applied too high a standard  of  proof  as  I
    have already noted.



CONCLUSION

18.  For the above reasons,  I  find  an  error  of  law  in  the  Decision,
    particularly as  regards  the  adoption  of  too  high  a  burden  when
    considering the protection claim. I accept that the error is  material,
    certainly as regards the determination of the protection claim.

NEXT STEPS

19.  That brings me on to next steps as regards the  setting  aside  of  the
    Decision.  The Respondent asks me to preserve the finding in particular
    in relation to internal relocation due to the  Appellant's  failure  to
    challenge the finding that he would be able to obtain  his  CSID  card.
    It is in  this  regard  that  the  additional  grounds  raised  in  the
    Appellant's submissions dated 10 April 2020 become relevant.  Whilst  I
    do not propose to take those  into  account  when  considering  whether
    there is any error of law in the Judge's asserted failure to deal  with
    internal relocation  or  apply  (unspecified)  country  guidance,  this
    appeal will need to be re-heard whether in this Tribunal or the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the extant country guidance which now applies is  not
    that which was in force at the time of the Decision.  As such,  another
    Judge will have to consider  the  case  as  a  whole  including  as  to
    internal relocation (if and insofar as that is relevant) based on  what
    is now said in SMO and Others.   For  that  reason,  it  would  not  be
    sensible to preserve findings in that regard.

20.  I have also considered  whether  it  is  appropriate  to  preserve  the
    findings made in relation to human rights.  However, this hearing  took
    place over six months ago and involves minor children.  It is not clear
    when it will be possible to hear this appeal.  It would be  appropriate
    for the human rights claims to be determined based on the facts as they
    stand at the time of the re-hearing.

21.  That brings me on to the way in which this appeal should  be  re-heard.
    I accept that since credibility is in  issue,  live  evidence  will  be
    required to  be  heard.   However,  simply  because  live  evidence  is
    required  does  not  mean  that  a  remote  hearing  is  not  possible.
    Arrangements can be made for evidence to be given via  Skype  or  other
    platforms.  It may also be possible for some face-to-face  hearings  to
    be heard even now although the types and prioritisation of such appeals
    will depend on administrative arrangements within the  Tribunal.   Good
    reason would need to be given why a remote hearing is not possible.

22.  That leads me finally to consider whether  the  appeal  should  be  re-
    heard in this Tribunal or remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   My
    decision has identified an error which impacts on the previous  Judge's
    credibility findings as well  as  a  potential  need  properly  to  re-
    determine  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  if  that  arises  once
    credibility findings are re-made. It  will  be  necessary  for  another
    Judge to consider all issues and to  make  credibility  findings  which
    will be initial ones.  Due to the extent of the fact finding which will
    be necessary, I consider it appropriate to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-determination.



DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hawden-Beal
promulgated on 15 November 2019 is set aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing  before  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
Hawden-Beal.


Signed   L K Smith     Dated: 29 May 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
