


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal No's:
PA/08974/2018

                                        PA/05468/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 July 2019                      |       On 16 July 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 A M N & L M
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Aslam, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are husband and wife, both citizens of the  DRC.   There
    are procedurally two  appeals,  but  in  substance  the  wife's  appeal
    depends entirely on her husband's.   Rather  confusingly,  and  for  no
    apparent  reason,  FtT  Judge  Clough  issued  two  separate  decisions
    dismissing the appeals, both promulgated  on  22  February  2019.   Two
    applications for permission to appeal to the UT were made, but  on  the
    same grounds, relating to the first appellant's case.   Permission  was
    granted on 1 May 2019.

 2. Some of the confusion can be traced back  to  the  appellants,  through
    their previous agents, submitting separate but overlapping appeals  and
    inventories  of  productions  for  each   appellant,   at   least   one
    supplementary inventory, and further separate items.

 3. Mr Aslam submitted  that  the  judge's  principal  reason  for  holding
    against the first appellant was that stamps on his passport showed that
    he returned on various occasions to the DRC, and there was an error  of
    failing to deal with the explanation he advanced at paragraph 12 of his
    witness statement dated 14 September 2018.

 4. The inventory of productions containing that statement does not  appear
    to be on the FtT's files, but the judge must have seen it, because  she
    refers to it by its date at paragraph 15.

 5. Mr Aslam showed that there are other items of relevant  evidence  which
    were or should have been before the FtT, but which are not mentioned in
    the decision.

 6.  In  course  of  submissions,  Mr  Diwyncz  conceded  that  while   the
    explanation mentioned above is not one the judge was bound  to  accept,
    she should have dealt with it; it could not be said that the FtT  dealt
    with all the materials which were, or should have been, before it;  and
    the decision could not safely stand.

 7. The responsibility appears to have been partly due to  the  judge,  and
    perhaps also to administrative mishap, and a failure all  round  to  be
    clear that parties and the FtT had the relevant materials before  them.
    It is unnecessary to try to apportion the blame any further.

 8. Mr Aslam was confident that his firm has all the material necessary  to
    assemble a comprehensive set of  evidence  to  place  before  a  future
    hearing.

 9. The following outcome was agreed.

10. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  The nature of the case is such  that  it
    is appropriate under section 12 of the 2007  Act,  and  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.   The
    member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case  are  not  to  include
    Judge Clough.

11. The appellants are to file with the FtT  and  copy  to  the  respondent
    within 21 days of this date a complete and  combined  set  of  all  the
    evidence on which they  rely,  prepared  in  accordance  with  Practice
    Direction 8.

12. The hearing in the FtT will be not less than 14 days thereafter.

13. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
    direction applies  both  to  the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

            [pic]
            11 July 2019
            UT Judge Macleman
