

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: PA/08428/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields           |     Decision & Reasons         |
|                                 |Promulgated                     |
|On 30 August 2019                |     On 6 September 2019        |
|                                 |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    A. A.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Solicitor, Immigration Advice Centre Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a national of Iraq, entered  the  United  Kingdom
           illegally in 2017 and claimed asylum. His protection  claim  was
           refused on 20 June 2018. The  Appellant's  appeal  against  that
           decision was heard on 17 September 2018, and it was dismissed by
           First Tier Tribunal Judge Moxon on all  grounds  in  a  decision
           promulgated on 4 October 2018.
        2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by decision of 17
           January 2019 of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor on the  basis
           it was arguable the Judge had  erred  having  decided  that  the
           Appellant could not return  to  his  home  area  of  Kirkuk,  in
           failing to provide adequate reasons beyond his general  lack  of
           credibility for his ability to relocate to the KRG.
        3. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further  evidence.  Thus  the
           matter came before me.


      The hearing
        4. When the appeal was called on for  hearing  Ms  Rogers  accepted
           that she was in some difficulties in  advancing  the  criticisms
           that had been levelled against the decision in the grounds.  She
           accepted that the decision was adequately reasoned, and that the
           Judge's findings were open to him on the evidence.
        5. Ground 1 had complained about the weight attached to the  record
           of the Appellant's screening interview, and ground  2  that  the
           Judge had found him to be contradictory and  evasive.  Ground  3
           had complained that the Judge placed weight upon the  fact  that
           the Appellant was brought  from  Greece  across  Europe  without
           claiming asylum until his arrival in the  UK.  There  is  in  my
           judgement no merit in either  of  these  complaints,  and  on  a
           strict reading of the grant of permission  it  does  not  appear
           that Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Taylor  actually  intended  to
           grant permission in relation to them. However, even if she  did,
           as Ms Rogers now accepts, there is  no  proper  basis  to  these
           complaints and they disclose no material error  of  law  in  the
           Judge's approach to the evidence.
        6. Accordingly the adverse findings of primary fact that the  Judge
           made must stand. The Appellant had invented a fictitious account
           of his experiences in Kirkuk in order to advance a  bogus  claim
           to asylum [39]. He was still in contact with his family in Iraq;
           and their circumstances had allowed them to pay for  his  travel
           to the UK, which had included a three month stay in a  hotel  in
           Greece. He had not lost his CSID as he had claimed; he  retained
           it. He also had the ability as a result of his  ongoing  contact
           with his family to satisfy the Iraqi authorities as  to  who  he
           was.
        7.  The  Judge  therefore  turned  to  consider  the   humanitarian
           protection appeal on the basis the Appellant was  an  ethnically
           Kurdish individual who had been born in, and had  grown  up  in,
           Kirkuk, who held his own CSID and remained in contact  with  his
           family in Iraq. The Judge recognised that the  Appellant,  as  a
           civilian, could not be expected to return to Kirkuk  because  it
           was a contested area, and the risk of harm to civilians remained
           too high [42-3]. Thus he considered the two possible  areas  for
           relocation to avoid that risk; Baghdad, and the KRG.
        8. No complaint is made by either party of the Judge's finding that
           the Appellant's return to Iraq was feasible. The Judge  took  as
           his starting point that the point of return to Iraq would be  by
           air from the UK to Baghdad, and  that  the  Appellant  would  be
           travelling upon his own legitimate CSID.
        9. Equally there is no complaint by either party in relation to the
           Judge's conclusion  that  it  was  unreasonable  to  expect  the
           Appellant  to  relocate  to  Baghdad  [44].  That  finding   was
           consistent with the guidance to  be  found  in  BA  (Returns  to
           Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18.
       10.  On the other hand the Judge concluded that the Appellant  could
           travel  in  safety  from  Baghdad  to  the  KRG  using  his  own
           legitimate CSID [47]. That approach is confirmed in a series  of
           country guidance decisions, of which AAH  is  the  most  recent;
           only a CSID is required to board an internal flight from Baghdad
           to the KRG.
       11. Upon arrival at the KRG the Judge noted that the Appellant would
           be able to establish  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  legitimate
           authorities, using his own travel documents; his true  identity,
           that he was recently arrived in Iraq from the UK, and,  that  he
           was a Kurd born in Kirkuk [48].  Applying  the  current  country
           guidance of AAH he noted that the  Appellant  would  be  granted
           admission to the  KRG,  and  that  he  would  be  able  to  seek
           legitimate employment in the KRG without requiring sponsorship.
       12. The Judge correctly noted that the Appellant would  have  access
           to the funding provided through the  voluntary  returns  scheme,
           and the Appellant cannot be  heard  to  say  that  it  would  be
           unavailable to him because he would refuse  to  co-operate  with
           his removal.
       13. The Judge noted that the Appellant had denied he had  family  in
           the KRG. He did not expressly reject that  evidence,  but  found
           that the Appellant could draw upon  support  from  his  extended
           family wherever in truth they were located. There is no error of
           law in that approach. Since the extended family's resources  had
           been able to finance his travel to the UK, the Judge found  that
           the Appellant had failed to establish that those resources would
           no longer be available to him, and  that  the  family  would  be
           unable to provide financial assistance to him in the KRG. As  Ms
           Rogers accepts, those findings were open to  the  Judge  on  the
           evidence, and they were adequately reasoned.
       14. The Judge considered the lack of family  physically  present  in
           the KRG, and the Appellant's  lack  of  employment  skills,  but
           nevertheless found that in all the circumstances his  relocation
           to the KRG would not be unduly  harsh.  Absent  any  sustainable
           challenge to the Judge's relevant findings of primary fact,  the
           conclusions that were reached in relation to the ability of  the
           Appellant to internally relocate to the KRG to avoid  the  risks
           of harm he would face if he were to seek  to  return  to  Kirkuk
           were open to the Judge, and were  adequately  reasoned.  It  was
           open to the Judge to conclude in the light of the guidance to be
           found in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG  [2018]
           UKUT 212 that in reality the Appellant would with the assistance
           of his extended family be able to secure employment and suitable
           accommodation so that he was not forced  into  destitution,  or,
           into living in a "critical shelter arrangement". Read as a whole
           it is in my judgement clear that this was the  Judge's  decision
           and reasoning.
       15. In the circumstances, which include Ms  Rogers'  acknowledgement
           of the lack of merit in the challenge, and  notwithstanding  the
           grant of permission to appeal, I am not satisfied that the Judge
           fell into any material  error  of  law  when  he  dismissed  the
           appeal. In  my  judgement  the  grounds  fail  to  disclose  any
           material error of law in the approach taken by the Judge to  the
           evidence before him that requires his decision to be  set  aside
           and remade.



DECISION


The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  4
October 2018 contained no material error of law in the decision  to  dismiss
the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision  to  be  set  aside  and
remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with  this  direction
could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 30 August 2019


