
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08019/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th September 2018               |On 04th October 2018                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     ES
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Griffiths, Counsel, instructed by Montague
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Turkey  born  in  1985.  The  appellant
    entered the UK clandestinely in September 2009 but then left in October
    2009.  He arrived again in the UK on  15th  January  2017  and  claimed
    asylum on 3rd February 2017. This claim was refused in  a  decision  of
    the respondent dated 4th August 2017. His appeal against  the  decision
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Beach  in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 28th November 2017.

 2. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy on  3rd  January  2018.  I  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons set out in my decision  which
    is appended as Annex A to  this  decision.  The  remaking  hearing  was
    initially listed for 26th June 2018 but  had  to  be  relisted  due  to
    problems with the wrong interpreter having been booked.  I  now  remake
    the appeal. I need to remake findings on  the  contended  detention  in
    2016 and what would happen to the appellant on return  to  Turkey,  and
    then combine these with the  preserved  findings  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to determine the appeal. At the end  of  the  hearing  I  gave
    permission for Ms Griffiths to make further written submission  on  the
    issue of internal relocation within 7 days which should be sent to  the
    respondent as well as the Upper Tribunal. Mr Kotas declined the offered
    option to make  submissions  in  response  to  the  submissions  of  Ms
    Griffiths.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

 3. In summary the evidence of the appellant in relation to the issues that
    need to be remade is as follows. He gave his oral  evidence  through  a
    Turkish interpreter whom he confirmed he could understand, and this  is
    combined with his written evidence set out in his two statements  which
    he confirmed to be true and correct.

 4. On 26th November 2016 the appellant says he was detained for  two  days
    and very badly tortured, and threatened with death if he did not  agree
    to become an informer  at  the  gendarme  station  in  his  village  of
    Bagliisa, in the district of Karlova in the province of Bingol  in  the
    South East of Turkey. He says that he did not say he was detained for 7
    days in 2016 at his screening interview, and it must have been an error
    by the interviewing officer  if  this  is  what  is  recorded.  He  was
    detained for 2 days, as set out in his full interview  and  statements.
    He did say he was detained for 7 days in 2014 however.

 5. He says during this  detention  he  was  blindfolded  and  taken  to  a
    building after leaving the HDP branch in  Karlova.  His  finger  prints
    were taken and they requested his identity papers.  He  says  that  the
    gendarmes knew who he was, and  said  he  was  involved  with  the  PKK
    because of his family, and particularly his nephew. They  knew  he  was
    active in HDP;  were  aware  of  his  past  detentions  and  had  other
    information about him. He says he knows that his friend Kamal  informed
    on him to the gendarmes who raided his home told his  father  this.  He
    refused to become an informer as he said he had no links with the  PKK.
    He then had to sign at the gendarme station  every  week.  He  was  not
    charged as there was no evidence to bring a court case and for  him  to
    be formally arrested. He signed on at the  gendarme  station  on  three
    occasions and was asked questions about the PKK on each  occasion,  but
    said he had no information as  he  was  not  involved  each  time.  The
    gendarmes would beat him as a result but  could  not  charge  him  with
    anything as there was no evidence to take to court. He says he was  not
    injured badly as a result of the torture when he was detained  for  two
    days, and just attended a private doctor who gave him some  creams  and
    painkillers for bruising. He did not attend a doctor for  his  physical
    or psychological injuries in the UK either as this was not necessary.

 6. The appellant maintains that if he is returned to Turkey  he  would  be
    stopped and questioned on arrival  in  Turkey.  His  detention  history
    would then be revealed, and he would be further detained,  interrogated
    and tortured. Wherever he relocated his record would go with him due to
    the Muhtar registration system and he  would  be  at  risk  of  further
    detention and ill-treatment so he could not find safety by  relocating.
    He understands that the gendarmes are conducted a  harsh  offensive  in
    his village, and that many people have been arrested and have fled  the
    area. His family remain in the village, and have not moved because they
    believe things would be the same for them wherever they went in Turkey.



 7. With respect to the 2016 detention Mr Kotas submits for the  respondent
    that weight should be given to the fact that at the screening interview
    the appellant said he had been detained for 7 days  on  this  occasion,
    and then changed his history to this detention  being  2  days  in  the
    subsequent interview and statements. It  is  argued  that  it  was  not
    plausible that he would be asked to work for the authorities if he  was
    viewed as being a PKK sympathiser, nor that he would have been  let  go
    if he refused to act as an informer  for  the  gendarmes.  The  witness
    evidence of MS confirming that the appellant was detained  in  2016  is
    not first hand as MS was in the UK claiming asylum at the time it  took
    place. These  matters,  combined  with  the  fact  that  the  appellant
    implausibly did not claim to have any substantial injuries after  being
    tortured and the fact that his family  had  remained  in  the  village,
    should lead to the conclusion that this incident did not take place.

 8. It is submitted that it was not plausible that  the  authorities  would
    have any interest in the appellant if he were returned to Turkey as  he
    had no position in the HDP, and clearly was not at risk of  persecution
    due to events prior to 2010 as he returned to Turkey at that  time.  He
    is Kurdish, but, as submitted above, he was not detained  in  2016  and
    his 2014 detention was not a targeted arrest  but  just  the  appellant
    being held as part of a general round up. It is now 4 years on from the
    untargeted 2014 detention. It is argued that the appellant has not been
    subjected to a severe degree of ill-treatment; he has  not  been  under
    surveillance and it is not plausible he was asked to be an informer; he
    is not an Alevi or a draft-evader and there is no  arrest  warrant  for
    him. It is also argued that the Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
    Version 2 August 2017 states that generally an ordinary member  of  HDP
    would not come to adverse attention of the authorities  on  account  of
    their political beliefs, and it is only the senior members who might be
    suspected of involvement with the PKK or support for autonomy  for  the
    Kurdish people. Further relatives of members or supporters of  the  PKK
    are also only likely to  face  harassment  or  discrimination  and  not
    persecution from the authorities, see Turkey: Kurdistan Workers'  Party
    (PKK) Version 2 August 2017, and so his nephew being a  refugee  is  of
    little relevance particularly as the nephew travelled to the UK  before
    the appellant.  It  is  not  plausible  that  the  appellant  would  be
    detained at the airport given his low political profile, although it is
    accepted that there is the capacity for him to  be  identified  at  the
    airport.

 9. Ms Griffiths relies upon skeleton argument, oral  submissions  and  her
    further submissions on internal relocation. With respect  to  the  2016
    arrest she says that the appellant has given consistent evidence  about
    this matter in his asylum interview and statements, and has always said
    that it was an error for the interviewing officer to have recorded that
    he was detained for 7 days in 2016 in his screening interview  records,
    as this was the period he gave for his 2014  detention.  The  appellant
    gives full descriptions of both detentions at his interview.  It  would
    strange if he were making it up that  he  would  chose  to  reduce  the
    length of the 2016 detention from the initial recorded 7 days to 2 days
    if this were not the truth. It is plausible that his full evidence  was
    not recorded at the initial screening interview. It is  also  plausible
    that he might well have been detained in 2016 as after  the  July  2016
    coup the country of origin materials show that there were more  actions
    against suspected opponents  belonging  to  Kurdish  organisations  and
    those believed to have PKK links. It is clear that the information that
    the appellant was informed upon by  his  friend  Kemal  came  from  the
    gendarmes, as he says this at interview and  in  his  evidence  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and this too is consistent with the country  of  origin
    evidence about  detainees  being  forced  to  incriminate  others.  The
    witness evidence of MS is not first-hand, but it is of some  weight  as
    he himself was found to be a credible witness by a First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  It is contended that  the  appellant  should  be  found  to  be
    credible and given the benefit of the  doubt,  as  his  statements  are
    reasonably internally consistent, detailed, coherent, plausible and are
    consistent with the country of origin information, in  accordance  with
    paragraph 339L(iii) of the Immigration Rules and the Home Office Asylum
    Policy Instructions Assessing Credibility and Refugee Status.

10. In relation to risk on return to Turkey Ms Griffiths submits that it is
    clear that although the official state of emergency has ended in Turkey
    more power has been consolidated in the President and state, and  there
    has been an enduring backslide in respect for human  rights.  The  fact
    that the appellant has already been subjected to persecution in  Turkey
    should be regarded as a serious indication that he would  have  a  well
    founded fear of persecution if returned unless there are  good  reasons
    to consider that such persecution would  not  repeat  itself,  applying
    paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules.

11. It is clear from the case of IK that the appellant could be  questioned
    at the airport as a failed asylum seeker without a passport,  and  also
    clear that he must be expected to tell the truth about his  history  of
    detentions  connected  with  his  involvement  with  Kurdish  politics.
    Applying the risk factors  in  IA  it  is  submitted  that  it  is  not
    important that the appellant does not have a prominent role in  HDP  or
    the PKK: it would suffice that he was a Kurd who left  Turkey  in  2016
    with his background, absconding whilst on reporting  conditions  having
    been asked to be  an  informer.   It  is  notable  that  the  preserved
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal  include  that  the  appellant  was
    detained in 2008 and in 2014 as a suspected supporter of the  PKK:  and
    it therefore follows  that  ordinary  members  of  HDP  (such  as  this
    appellant) with this profile can be  detained  on  this  basis.  It  is
    submitted that he was detained  in  2016  as  this  profile  as  a  PKK
    supporter was wrongly confirmed by Kemal. He also has a nephew who  has
    been recognised as a refugee in the UK.  The appellant is therefore  at
    real risk of being handed over to the anti-terror police and facing ill-
    treatment during his detention and interrogation at that time.

12. It is submitted that even if the appellant  were  to  get  through  the
    airport without incident that he would  not  be  able  to  find  safety
    internally within Turkey if a  well  founded  fear  of  persecution  is
    accepted for the appellant in his home area. This is because  he  fears
    state persecution from the Turkish authorities. This is set out in  the
    various Home  Office  Country  Policy  and  Information  Notes  firstly
    "Turkey: Kurdish Political Parties" Version 3 August 2018 at  paragraph
    2.6.1; secondly "Kurds" Version 2 September 2018 at 2.6.1; and  thirdly
    "HDP" Version 1 March  2016;  and  "Turkey:  Kurdistan  Workers  Party"
    Version 2 August 2017.

13. Further the evidence in IK at paragraphs 70, 113 and  114  is  that  if
    someone has been of adverse interest to the authorities in  their  home
    area, even if they were not charged with any offence, that there  could
    be a marker on their NUFUS file so if they register with the Mukhtar in
    a new area and apply for a new NUFUS card that this may come to  light.
    It would also be unduly harsh to live without a NUFUS  card  in  a  new
    area. In IK at paragraph 118  it  is  stated  that  a  Tribunal  should
    generally proceed on the basis that information known in the home  area
    would be known at the airport and in any new area of relocation, so the
    question is whether this information would lead to persecution  outside
    of the home area. At paragraph 119 it was concluded that  the  question
    is whether it would be perceived that an appellant had a link with  the
    PKK or other main Kurdish parties, and sympathy with the PKK. If  there
    is such a perceived  link  and  sympathy  then  there  is  no  internal
    relocation alternative within Turkey. As this is  the  case  with  this
    appellant then there is no internal flight alternative, particularly as
    in accordance  with  SA  (political  activist  -  internal  relocation)
    Pakistan [2011] UKUT 30 he cannot be required to  cease  his  political
    activities. It is noted that the situation at the time IK  was  written
    was one where the human rights situation in Turkey was moving in a  far
    more positive direction than at the  current  time,  see  the  European
    Commision: Turkey 2018 Report, which documents increased reports of ill-
    treatment and torture against critical voices. This is consistent  with
    the CPINs set out above,  and  the  evidence  about  the  targeting  of
    political Kurds as well as suspected Gulenists after the  failed  coup.



Conclusions - Remaking

14. In the decision in IA & Ors (Risk -Guidelines - Separatist)  Turkey  CG
    [2003] UKIAT 34 the Upper Tribunal gave the following  guidance  as  to
    risk factors:

15. "The following are the factors which inexhaustively we consider  to  be
    material in giving rise to potential suspicion  in  the  minds  of  the
    authorities concerning a particular claimant.

    a)      The  level  if  any  of  the  appellant's  known  or  suspected
         involvement with a separatist organisation. Together with this must
         be  assessed  the  basis  upon  which  it  is  contended  that  the
         authorities knew of or might suspect such involvement.

    b)     Whether the appellant has ever been arrested or detained and  if
         so in what circumstances. In this context it  may  be  relevant  to
         note how long ago such arrests or detentions took place, if  it  is
         the case that there appears to be no causal connection between them
         and the claimant's departure from Turkey, but otherwise it may be a
         factor of no particular significance.

    c)     Whether the circumstances of the appellant's past arrest(s)  and
         detention(s) (if any) indicate that the  authorities  did  in  fact
         view him or her as a suspected separatist.

    d)     Whether  the  appellant  was  charged  or  placed  on  reporting
         conditions or now faces charges.

    e)     The degree of ill treatment to which the appellant was subjected
         in the past.

    f)     Whether the appellant has family connections with  a  separatist
         organisation such as KADEK or HADEP or DEHAP.

    g)     How long a period elapsed between the  appellant's  last  arrest
         and detention and his or her departure from Turkey. In this  regard
         it may of course be  relevant  to  consider  the  evidence  if  any
         concerning what the appellant was in fact doing between the time of
         the last arrest and detention and departure from Turkey.  It  is  a
         factor that is only likely to be of  any  particular  relevance  if
         there is a reasonably lengthy period between the two events without
         any ongoing problems being experienced on the part of the appellant
         from the authorities.

    h)     Whether in the period after the appellant's last arrest there is
         any evidence  that  he  or  she  was  kept  under  surveillance  or
         monitored by the authorities.

    i)     Kurdish ethnicity.

    j)     Alevi faith.

    k)     Lack of a current up-to-date Turkish passport.

    l)     Whether there is any evidence that  the  authorities  have  been
         pursuing or otherwise expressing an interest in the appellant since
         he or she left Turkey.

    m)     Whether the appellant became an informer or was asked to  become
         one.

    n)     Actual perceived political activities abroad in connection  with
         a separatist organisation.

    o)     If the returnee is a military draft evader there  will  be  some
         logical impact on  his  profile  to  those  assessing  him  on  his
         immediate return. Following Sepet of course this  alone  is  not  a
         basis for a refugee or human rights claim."

16. The country guidance in IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004]
    UKIAT 312 is as follows:

         "Summary of Generic Conclusions

         133.     The following is a summary of our main conclusions in this
             determination.

          1. The evidence of Mr Aydin (paragraph 32)  accurately  describes
             the defined and limited ambit of the computerised GBT  system.
             It  comprises  only  outstanding  arrest  warrants,   previous
             arrests,  restrictions  on  travel  abroad,   possible   draft
             evasion, refusal to perform military service and tax  arrears.
             "Arrests"  as  comprised  in  the  GBTS  require  some   court
             intervention, and must be distinguished from  "detentions"  by
             the security forces followed by release  without  charge.  The
             GBTS  is  fairly  widely  accessible  and  is  in   particular
             available to the border police at booths in Istanbul  airport,
             and elsewhere in Turkey to the security forces.

          2. In addition, there is border control information  collated  by
             the national police (Department for  Foreigners,  Borders  and
             Asylum)  recording  past  legal  arrivals  and  departures  of
             Turkish citizens, and information about people prohibited from
             entering Turkey  as  a  result  of  their  activities  abroad,
             collated by MIT.

          3. The Judicial Record  Directorate  keeps  judicial  records  on
             sentences served by convicted persons, separate from GBTS. The
             system is known as "Adli Sicil."  It  is  unlikely  that  this
             system would be  directly  accessible  at  border  control  in
             addition to the information in the GBTS.

          4. The  Nufus  registration  system  comprises  details  of  age,
             residence, marriage, death, parents' and  children's  details,
             and religious status. It may also include arrest warrants  and
             if any of the people listed have been stripped of nationality.
             There is no evidence that it is directly available  at  border
             control.

          5. If a person is held for  questioning  either  in  the  airport
             police station after  arrival  or  subsequently  elsewhere  in
             Turkey and the situation justifies it,  then  some  additional
             inquiry could be made of the authorities  in  his  local  area
             about him, where more extensive records  may  be  kept  either
             manually  or  on  computer.  Also,  if  the  circumstances  so
             justify, an enquiry could be made of the anti terror police or
             MIT to see if an individual is of material interest to them.

          6. If there is a material entry in the  GBTS  or  in  the  border
             control information, or if a returnee is travelling on a  one-
             way emergency travel document,  then  there  is  a  reasonable
             likelihood that he will be identifiable  as  a  failed  asylum
             seeker and could be sent to the  airport  police  station  for
             further investigation.

          7. It will be for an Adjudicator in  each  case  to  assess  what
             questions are likely to be asked during such investigation and
             how a returnee would respond without being  required  to  lie.
             The  ambit  of  the  likely  questioning  depends   upon   the
             circumstances of each case.

          8. The escalation of the violence following the ending of the PKK
             ceasefire reinforces our view  that  the  risk  to  a  Kurdish
             returnee of ill treatment by the authorities may be greater if
             his home area is in an area of  conflict  in  Turkey  than  it
             would be elsewhere, for the reasons described in paragraphs 90
             and 116.

          9. The Turkish Government is taking  action  in  legislative  and
             structural terms to address the  human  rights  problems  that
             present a serious obstacle to its membership of the EU. It has
             made its zero tolerance policy towards torture clear.  However
             the use of torture is long and  deep-seated  in  the  security
             forces and it will take  time  and  continued  and  determined
             effort to bring it under control in practice. It is  premature
             to conclude that the long established  view  of  the  Tribunal
             concerning the potential risk of torture in detention as per A
             (Turkey) requires material revision on the  present  evidence.
             However the situation will require review as further  evidence
             becomes available. For the time being as  in  the  past,  each
             case must be assessed on its own merits from the  individual's
             own history and the relevant  risk  factors  as  described  in
             paragraph 46 of A (Turkey).

         10. Many of the individual risk factors described  in  A  (Turkey)
             comprise in themselves a broad spectrum of variable  potential
             risk that requires careful evaluation on the specific facts of
             each appeal as a whole. The factors described  in  A  (Turkey)
             were not intended as a simplistic checklist and should not  be
             used as such.

         11. A young, fit, unmarried person,  leaving  his  home  area  and
             seeking unofficial employment in a big city, may not feel  the
             need to register with the  local  Mukhtar,  at  least  at  the
             outset. Many  do  not.  However,  given  the  range  of  basic
             activities for which a certificate of residence is needed, and
             which depend upon such registration, we conclude that it would
             in most normal circumstances  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  a
             person  to  live  without  appropriate  registration  for  any
             material time, as a requirement for avoiding persecution. This
             does  not  necessarily  preclude  the  viability  of  internal
             relocation for  the  reasons  described  in  paragraph  133.13
             below.

         12. The proper course in assessing the  risk  for  a  returnee  is
             normally to decide first whether he has a well founded fear of
             persecution in his home  area  based  upon  a  case  sensitive
             assessment of the facts in the context of an analysis  of  the
             risk factors described in A (Turkey). If he does not  then  he
             is unlikely to be at any real risk anywhere in Turkey.

         13. The risk to a specific individual in most  circumstances  will
             be at its highest in his home area for a variety  of  reasons,
             and particularly if it is located in the areas of conflict  in
             the south and east  of  Turkey.  Conversely  the  differential
             nature of the risk outside that area may be sufficient to mean
             that the individual would not be at real risk  of  persecution
             by the state or its agencies elsewhere in Turkey, even if they
             were made aware of the thrust of the information maintained in
             his home area by telephone or fax  enquiry  from  the  airport
             police station or elsewhere, or by a transfer of at least some
             of the information to a new home area on registration with the
             local Mukhtar there. Internal relocation may well therefore be
             viable, notwithstanding the need for registration in  the  new
             area. The issue is whether any individual's  material  history
             would be reasonably likely to lead to persecution outside  his
             home area.

17. I preserved a number of findings of the First-tier Tribunal which I set
    out as follows:

       . The appellant is accepted  as  being  a  supporter  of  pro-Kurdish
         parties, the DTP, BDP and HDP because of his knowledge.

       . It is accepted that the appellant was harassed in 2004 because  the
         authorities wished to deter him from supporting the PKK.

       . It is accepted that he was beaten by  soldiers  because  he  was  a
         Kurdish farmer who knew the area well in 2008, and  fears  that  he
         might be assisting the PPK.

       . It is found that in 2009 the appellant's father  was  detained  for
         his own reasons, and not because of the appellant, and that at that
         point in time the appellant did  not  demonstrate  having  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution due to his return to Turkey.

       . It is found that the appellant was detained, but  not  singled  out
         for detention, at a political demonstration in 2014,  and  that  he
         was questioned and ill-treated in detention for a period of 7 days.



       . It is not accepted that  the  appellant  was  informed  on  by  his
         friend, K, and it is not accepted that  the  appellant's  home  had
         been raided in the current offensive in his village.

18. As set out above I need to remake findings on the  contended  detention
    in  2016  and  whether  the  appellant  has  a  well  founded  fear  of
    persecution on return to Turkey.

19. I am satisfied that the appellant has shown that he  was  detained  for
    two days on 26th November 2016, as I find this to be credible when  all
    evidence is considered in the round for the following reasons. I accept
    that the appellant has been largely  consistent  about  the  length  of
    period of this detention, always stating this  was  two  days  and  not
    seven, with the only  inconsistency  being  what  is  recorded  in  the
    screening interview. It is plausible that at this short  interview  the
    interviewing officer confused information  about  the  2014  detention,
    which is not mentioned in the  notes,  and  it  would  be  odd  if  the
    appellant were making up a story that he would have  chosen  to  reduce
    the time he spent in detention in the  period  most  proximate  to  his
    departure  from  Turkey.  The  appellant  has  given  detailed  initial
    accounts of his 2014 and 2016 detention at his  full  asylum  interview
    before the interviewing officer goes on to ask additional questions. It
    is, I find, plausible that the gendarmes would ask a  person  who  they
    believe to have PKK links to act as an informer for them; and also that
    the  gendarmes  let  him  go  even  though  he  refused  if  they   had
    insufficient information to have him formally arrested by a court. This
    is consistent with the background information that  I  set  out  below,
    which shows that the claimed history of detention of a person  such  as
    the  appellant  at  that  point  of  time  was  highly  plausible.  The
    appellant's account is also supported by his nephew, who is  a  someone
    who has been granted refugee status, although I do give less weight  to
    this evidence as MS was not present in Turkey at that time.

20. The country of origin materials undoubtedly  demonstrate  that  at  the
    time of the contended detention in  November  2016  that  the  PKK  and
    related armed group had stepped up attacks and escalated violence.  The
    government was in response conducting extensive security  and  military
    operations against the PKK, including air strikes  on  their  bases  in
    Turkey and Iraq and active security operations in Turkey which  led  to
    the death and injury of civilians. The PKK then responded by committing
    terrorist acts in Istanbul and Ankara. There were many credible reports
    of severe human rights violations committed  by  the  security  forces,
    including torture, ill-treatment, disappearances and arbitrary arrests.
     The Council of Europe Commissioner of Human Rights in  submissions  to
    the European Court of Human Rights in April 2017 stated that there  was
    a  widespread  perception  that  the  anti   terror   operations   were
    "collective punishment of the civilian population  who  were  allegedly
    automatically branded as PKK-sympathisers by the security forces",  see
    the many credible sources cited at section 5, "Situation  in  the  east
    and  south-east",  of  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  Turkey:
    Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK)  August  2017  Version  2.  Material  in
    section 6 of that document sets out that it was possible to  detain  an
    individual for up to 30 days without  charge  following  the  state  of
    emergency as a result of the July 15th 2016 coup, and that  there  were
    credible reports of torture in detention. In  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note Turkey: Kurdish political parties August 2017  Version
    2 section 9 it is  clear  that  thousands  of  members  of  pro-Kurdish
    parties have been detained in 2016, with many more being detained  than
    formerly arrested and charged by a court, see paragraph  9.1.14  citing
    figures for 2015 of 2308 members being taken into custody between  July
    and October 2015 and 542 arrested.

21. The final question to be answer is whether the  appellant  has  a  well
    founded fear of persecution if returned to Turkey at the current  time.
    Paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules requires that the fact  that  I
    have found that the appellant has been subjected to persecution in  the
    past, as I have found that he has been detained  and  tortured  by  the
    gendarmes for his imputed political opinions, that I must find that  he
    has a well founded fear of future persecution  unless  there  are  good
    reasons to consider that that persecution would not be repeated.

22. I consider the application of the two sets of country guidance, IA  and
    IK, when looking at whether this past persecution is likely  to  repeat
    itself. I accept the submission of Ms Griffiths  that  the  country  of
    origin situation is, as a generalisation, not  characterised  with  the
    optimism for improvement as it had been at  the  time  when  these  two
    cases were determined.  It  is  no  longer  the  case  that  Turkey  is
    addressing its human rights  situation  with  a  zero-tolerance  policy
    towards torture in order to qualify for  EU  membership.  The  European
    Commission Turkey 2018 Report, as set out in the further submissions is
    one which shows  Turkey  moving  away  from  the  EU,  and  backsliding
    regarding civil society and human rights. In this context  I  find  the
    guidance in these cases to remains pertinent.

23. Applying the IA risk factors I find that the appellant is seen  by  the
    gendarmes in his home area as a person who is probably a PKK supporter:
    they detained him in 2008 on suspicion of assist  them;  they  detained
    him in 2014 at a demonstration they regarded as being supportive of the
    PKK; and they accused him of supporting the PKK whilst he was  detained
    in 2016 and tried to get information about them, wanting him to  inform
    on others because they believed the  appellant  had  those  links.  The
    appellant left Turkey just over a month  after  he  was  released  from
    detention at the end of November 2016, and I accept that  there  was  a
    direct link between this last detention and his departure, and  at  the
    time when he left he was subjected to  reporting  conditions  which  he
    broke by leaving the country.  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  been
    severely ill-treated during his periods of detention: he  has  been  by
    being stripped, beaten and tortured with cold water. I do not  find  it
    indicative that he was not badly tortured that he did not need hospital
    treatment after this treatment as there is no reason why this would  be
    the case given what he says happened  to  him.   The  appellant  has  a
    nephew who is a recognised political refugee, who left Turkey  recently
    in May 2016 and who had lived with the  appellant  in  the  same  house
    prior to this. I find that the appellant therefore also  has  a  family
    connection to separatism. He is accepted as being Kurdish, and does not
    hold a Turkish passport. I have preserved the finding from  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the appellant was not informed on by his friend,  K,
    from paragraph 53 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

24. On the basis of these risk factors, and particularly in the context  of
    his past history, I am satisfied that there is a  real  risk  that  the
    appellant would be detained and tortured again on return to  Turkey  in
    his home area on account of his actual and imputed political  opinions.
    Whilst I accept this is a case which involves state persecution  it  is
    clear from points 12 and 13 of the guidance in IK that  the  risk  will
    mostly be at its highest in the home area, and that  this  is  all  the
    more the case where that area is in an area of conflict in  the  south-
    east of Turkey, and that whilst  it  must  be  assumed  that  the  same
    information would be available  at  the  airport  and  in  an  area  of
    internal relocation that this would not always result in there being  a
    real risk of serious harm.  I also take note  of  IK  when  considering
    whether the appellant will be at real risk of detention at the  airport
    on return. I note that as he would be travelling on a one-way emergency
    travel document he will be identifiable as a failed asylum  seeker  and
    could be sent to the airport police station for further  investigation.



25. In the context of there having been a period of mass arrests in  Turkey
    of persons who are believed to be  PKK  sympathisers,  as  well  as  of
    Gulenists, since the July 2016 failed military coup  I  find  that  the
    appellant has shown to the lower civil standard of proof that he has  a
    well founded fear of persecution throughout Turkey on  account  of  his
    actual political support for legal  Kurdish  parties  and  his  imputed
    support for the PKK for the following  reasons.    As  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 2.4.15 of Home Office Country Policy  and  Information  Notes
    "Turkey: Kurdish Political  Parties"  Version  3  August  2018  in  the
    context of the current post failed coup political climate and the break
    down of the ceasefire with the PKK  in  2015,   on  the  basis  of  the
    various credible and respected country of origin reports set out in the
    sections 2.4 and 7, if a person has "come to the adverse  attention  of
    the authorities because  of  suspected  involvement  with  the  PKK  or
    support for autonomy for Kurdish people, they may be at risk of serious
    harm or  persecution".  In  the  context  of  this  appellant's  entire
    history, and in particular the three incidents where  he  was  seen  to
    have PKK connections by the authorities and was  subjected  to  torture
    for these perceived political views and his family ties with a recently
    recognised refugee, I find that he has shown that he has a current well-
    founded fear of persecution throughout Turkey and  not  simply  in  his
    home area.

Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the
         appeal.

      3. I remake the appeal by allowing  it  on  asylum  and  human  rights
         grounds.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm  arising
to the appellant from the contents of his protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   24th  September
2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A: Error of Law Decision


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Turkey  born  in  1985.  The  appellant
    entered the UK clandestinely in September 2009 but then left in October
    2009.  He arrived again in the UK on  15th  January  2017  and  claimed
    asylum on 3rd February 2017. This claim was refused in  a  decision  of
    the respondent dated 4th August 2017. His appeal against  the  decision
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Beach  in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 28th November 2017.

 2. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy on 3rd January 2018 on the basis that  it  was  arguable
    that the First-tier judge had erred  in  law  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk of ill-treatment or detention on  return
    to Turkey given that it was accepted that he was a  supporter  of  pro-
    Kurdish political parties and given that  he  had  been  identified  as
    having taken part in a pro-Kurdish demonstration; and given that it was
    arguable that Judge Beach had failed to deal with updating  country  of
    origin information which indicated a crackdown on Kurds by the  Turkish
    government.

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

 4. In the grounds of appeal the appellant argues that his Kurdish identity
    is accepted at paragraph 45 of the decision,  and  that  his  knowledge
    indicated that he was a supporter of  Kurdish  political  parties,  see
    paragraph 47 of the decision. As such it is clear that it was  accepted
    that the appellant was likely to be perceived as a left- wing Kurd  who
    sympathises with the PKK. This view is supported by the  fact  that  at
    paragraph 48 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal finds that he  was
    harassed to deter him from assisting the PKK.

 5. It was  contended  that  some  of  the  factual  findings  against  the
    appellant were not  rational  for  instance  to  have  found  that  the
    appellant had not returned to Turkey because his father  was  detained,
    although it was found that his father was in  fact  detained.  Also  at
    paragraph 50 of  the  decision  there  is  a  vague  finding  that  the
    appellant had been detained and ill-treated "to some extent"  which  is
    unsatisfactory.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal is also argued to have erred by failing to look
    at the risk factors in the guidance case of  IA  HC  KD  RO  HG  (Risk-
    Guidelines-Separatist) Turkey CG [2003] UKIAT 34. If this had been done
    then it would have been seen that he has  many  risk  features  on  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal: a family connection with the  PKK;
    Kurdish ethnicity; two detentions accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal;
    an acceptance of ill-treatment; no current Turkish passport; the family
    come from  the  south-east  of  Turkey  where  there  has  been  recent
    conflict; and the appellant was asked to be an informer. The First-tier
    Tribunal failed further to consider the  current  situation  in  Turkey
    where there is a state of emergency. This means it is more likely  that
    the appellant will be detained on arrival and his  background  checked,
    and he will suffer ill-treatment due to his previous political  actions
    and his family history.

 7. I indicated to Mr Kotas that I was, on reading of the papers, concerned
    about the failure  to  determine  the  appeal  with  reference  to  the
    guidance case of IA & Others, and also with the findings  at  paragraph
    50 that the appellant was not detained in 2016 due to  the  quality  of
    the reasoning. I asked that he address me on these two specific issues.



 8. Mr Kotas argued that the finding that the 2016 detention had not  taken
    place was adequately reasoned as it was said that there was no  trigger
    for the arrest; no evidence from the witness who was not in  Turkey  at
    that point; and because of a difference between what was  said  at  the
    screening interview and full  asylum  interview  with  respect  to  the
    number of days of the detention.  He  argued  that  IA  &  Others  risk
    factors were sufficiently considered in the decision as a whole or were
    not sufficiently present (for instance a high degree of torture) so  it
    was not important that they were not set out in the conclusion.

 9. In reply Mr Sandu argued that the reasoning with respect  to  the  2016
    detention was not sufficient. No weight was  given  to  the  fact  that
    previous detention and  ill-treatment  for  similar  reasons  had  been
    accepted, along with the concerns I had identified above.

10. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I found that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons I  now  set  out  below.  The
    parties had initially favoured returning the matter to  be  re-made  in
    the First-tier Tribunal but when I said that I thought  it  appropriate
    to re-make it in the Upper  Tribunal  both  agreed  that  this  was  an
    acceptable course. The matter had then to be adjourned at this stage as
    we had no Kurmanji interpreter available.

Conclusions - Error of Law

11. At paragraphs 34 to 40 the First-tier Tribunal sets  out  some  of  the
    background evidence. The country guidance case of IA & Others is  cited
    at paragraph 41 of  the  decision,  with  IK  (Returnees-  Records-IFA)
    Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 312 being set out at paragraph 42.

12. As argued by the appellant the First-tier Tribunal does find that he is
    a supporter of two pro-Kurdish parties, the DTP and the BDP because  of
    his knowledge, see paragraph 47 of the decision. It  is  also  accepted
    that the appellant was harassed in 2004 because the authorities  wished
    to deter him from supporting the PKK. I also find that it was  accepted
    on the lower civil standard of proof by the First-tier Tribunal that he
    was beaten by soldiers because he was a Kurdish farmer who new the area
    well in 2008, and fears that he might be assisting the PPK.

13. It is found that in 2009 the appellant's father was  detained  for  his
    own reasons, and not because of the appellant, and that at  that  point
    in time the appellant does not demonstrate having a  well-founded  fear
    of persecution due to his return to Turkey, see  paragraph  49  of  the
    decision. I find that these findings are sufficiently  and  sustainably
    reasoned.

14. The First-tier Tribunal finds that the appellant was detained, but  not
    singled out for detention, at a political demonstration  in  2014,  and
    that he was questioned and ill-treated in detention, see  paragraph  50
    of the decision.

15. At paragraph 51 of the decision it is not believed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the appellant was detained in 2016 because he is said  to
    have been inconsistent and vague, however there are no examples of  the
    appellant being vague and I find that the only inconsistency identified
    is between the number of days  put  forward  for  the  length  of  this
    detention at the screening interview (7) and the full asylum  interview
    (2). Given the care that must be  taken  in  making  negative  findings
    based on screening interview evidence and given there is a  failure  to
    consider whether this incident is to be seen  as  consistent  with  the
    history of a believed prior detention and other political ill-treatment
    from the Turkish authorities I find that the rejection of  this  aspect
    of the appellant's case is insufficiently reasoned particularly in  the
    context of the lower civil  standard  of  proof  applicable  in  asylum
    appeals.

16. The First-tier Tribunal does not accept that the appellant was informed
    on by his friend, K, in a reasoned finding at paragraph 53,  and  there
    is also a reasoned finding that  the  appellant's  home  has  not  been
    raided in the current offensive in his village.

17. The First-tier Tribunal then concludes at paragraph 59 the appellant is
    likely to be stopped and questioned at the airport on return to  Turkey
    because he left without documents. However, he is found not at risk  of
    ill-treatment or detention because he was lasted detained in  2014;  he
    only has a nephew who has been granted asylum (and there is no evidence
    of why this was the case although  it  was  said  it  was  for  similar
    reasons); and there is  no  evidence  of  harassment  of  other  family
    members. I find that this paragraph  was  insufficiently  reasoned  and
    unlawfully failed to apply the risk categories in IA & Others  in  full
    given the finding that the appellant would be detained  and  questioned
    on arrival.

18. The decision therefore has to be remade  on  the  basis  of  the  sound
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal as  identified  above  with  a  re-
    examination of the contended detention in 2016 and a  remaking  of  the
    final conclusion as to whether the appellant is at real risk of serious
    harm on return in accordance with IA & Others.

    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the
         appeal.

      3. I adjourn the remaking of the decision to the first available  date
         before me.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm  arising
to the appellant from the contents of his protection claim.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  24th April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


