

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/08682/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1st March 2019                          |On 19th March 2019              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  MR B R H
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:     Mr E Wilford (Counsel)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an error  of  law  hearing.  The  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    appellant in this matter.  He appeals against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge I Howard) (F-tT) promulgated on 19th December 2018
    in which the Claimant's appeal on protection grounds was allowed.

Background

2.   The Claimant is a citizen of Iraq and a Sunni Muslim Kurd from  Barika,
    Sulaymaniyah in IKR.  He claimed asylum on the grounds that he faced  a
    risk of persecution following a blood feud.

3.   The F-tT found that the Claimant's core account was  not  credible  but
    allowed the appeal on "asylum and human rights  grounds  under  Article
    3". The F-tT concluded that the Claimant would not be  able  to  return
    safely to his home area from Baghdad and that he would not be  able  to
    obtain a CSID.

Grounds of appeal
4.  In grounds of appeal the SSHD argued that the F-tT erred by  failing  to
    give adequate reasons for allowing the appeal on asylum  grounds  given
    that it found the core claim to be without merit.

5.   The F-tT failed to take into account that the  Claimant  had  relatives
    in Iraq who could assist him to obtain a  CSID  [23-26].   The  finding
    that he had no male relatives was speculative [26] given  that  on  the
    evidence it was more likely that he did have male relatives.

6.   The F-tT made contradictory findings as to the process of obtaining  of
    a CSID [26 &32] - on the one had it was straightforward and  the  delay
    minimal and on the other the F-tT concluded that the Claimant would not
    be able to survive [34-41].

7.   The F-tT failed to consider alternative processes for obtaining a  CSID
    following AA Iraq 2915 (revised in 2017).

8.  The  F-tT  failed  to  consider  that  there  was  a  viable  relocation
    alternative to IKR as direct flights had resumed to Erbil,  and  Kirkuk
    was no longer a contested area (as per the CPIN 2017  &  2018  and  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds- internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC).

Permission to appeal

9.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was  granted  by  FTJ  L
    Murray on 23rd January 2019.  In granting permission the FTJ considered
    that it was arguable that  the  F-tT  erred  in  making  findings  that
    misapprehended  the  fact  that  flights  had  resumed  to  Erbil   and
    Sulamaniyah .

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me Mr Walker relied on the grounds of appeal.   He
    did not produce a copy of the CPIN for either 2017 or 2018 nor  any  of
    the relevant CG case law.  I made a direction for that material  to  be
    produced within 7 days.  Mr Walker submitted that it  had  always  been
    the case that the Claimant could return by direct flight to  Erbil  and
    he had a male relative who could help with the travel documents.

 11.  In response Mr Wilford for the  Claimant  produced  and  relied  on  a
    document entitled "Speaking Note", which had  been  prepared  from  the
    grant of permission as the Claimant had  not  been  provided  with  the
    grounds of appeal. I provided Mr Wilford with a copy of the grounds  of
    appeal. Mr Wilford submitted that whatever the situation, the  Claimant
    would need documents for return  to  IKR  otherwise  it  would  be  via
    Baghdad. The F-tT found that there were no male  relatives  to  assist.
    The F-tT adopted the findings made by the  previous  Tribunal  in  2012
    including that it was disbelieved that that Claimant's father was dead.
    In applying AA and AAH the F-tT considered the question of harshness in
    Baghdad and concluded that  the  Claimant  qualified  for  humanitarian
    protection. The critical finding was whether or not the F-tT  erred  in
    law as to the existence of male relatives to  facilitate  documentation
    for travel.

Discussion and conclusion

12.  I am satisfied that the F-tT erred in its assessment  of  the  evidence
    as to the return of the Claimant to IKR.  The F-tT clearly  disbelieved
    the Claimant's core account that he was involved on a  blood  feud  and
    concluded that he faced no risk on return. The concluding decision made
    by the F-tT allowing the appeal on asylum (my  underlining)  must  have
    been an error.

13.  In reading the decision it seems that the F-tT intended  to  allow  the
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds by concluding that  he  would
    face harshness in Baghdad where he would necessarily have to return  to
    in order to obtain the travel documents.

14.   The SSHD submits that the F-tT erred in finding that the existence  of
    male relatives was speculative and that in any event the Claimant could
    return by direct flight to Erbil.

15.  The F-tT adopted the findings made by the  previous  Tribunal  in  2012
    which disbelieved the Claimant's evidence that  his  father  was  dead.
    There was no more evidence on this issue before the F-tT.   Accordingly
    I take the view that the F-tT erred by  concluding  that  it  was  more
    likely than not that the Claimant  had  no  male  relatives  who  could
    assist him to obtain travel documents. The F-tT found that the Claimant
    had contact with at least one male person. These findings ought to have
    informed the F-tT's evaluation of the objective evidence  and  CG  case
    law as to the feasibility of return to IKR and  in  that  regard  taken
    into account that direct flights were available to Erbil in  KRI  which
    was not a contested area.

16. There is a material error of law in the  decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside. The SSHD's appeal is allowed.

Re making

17.  I go on to remake the decision.  It is accepted that the  Claimant  did
    not have a CSID nor a valid passport or Laissez  Passer.   There  is  a
    previous finding that the Claimant was not believed that his father was
    dead (Devaseelan*) which was adopted by the F-tT stands.  I  find  that
    there is a likelihood that his father remains available to help him  on
    return to Iraq or to  assist  with  the  provision  of  information  or
    documents so as to obtain a CSID.  In addition I find  that  he  is  in
    contact with another male person in Iraq who  could  also  assist  him.
    Following the current guidance the Claimant would be in a  position  to
    obtain travel documents and thereafter to get a direct flight to Erbil.
    The UT in AA concluded that "For those without a passport, or  who  are
    unable to produce the relevant family registration details, a power  of
    attorney can  be  provided  to  someone  in  Iraq  who  can  thereafter
    undertake the process of obtaining the CSID for such a person from  the
    Civil Status Affairs Office in their home governorate" (para 177).  The
    UT in AAH found that there were international flights to the  Kurdistan
    region (KRI) and that former residents who return voluntarily  and  can
    obtain travel documents and can return to the  KRI  without  having  to
    transit to Baghdad.  Both AA and AAH agree that in order to  facilitate
    the obtaining of travel  documents  contact  with  male  relatives  are
    required. I am satisfied that a return to Erbil is feasible with travel
    documents, the appellant that he had previously lived in Erbil and  has
    contact and family who could assist him. This position is confirmed  in
    the current CPIN at 2.7.2 and 2.7.7.; the government of Iraq has lifted
    the ban on international flights to the KRI and former residents of the
    KRI with travel documents can return to  Erbil  or  Sulamaiyah  without
    having to transit Baghdad.


Decision

18. I remake  the  decision  by  substituting  a  decision  to  dismiss  the
    Claimant's protection appeal.



                               Signed                     Date  14.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




ANONYMITY ORDER
NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                     Date  14.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








