








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08751/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |                                |
|On 12th June 2019                     |On 20th June 2019               |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                 Kelsang [L]

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tettey Counsel instructed by GMIAU

For the Respondent:    Mr Tan   Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup promulgated on the 7th  March  2019  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's protection claims.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge E M Simpson the 16th April 2019. Thus the case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. A hearing was set for 14th June 2019 to determine whether or not  there
    was an error of law in the decision.

 5. By letter dated  11  June  2019  the  respondent  has  written  to  the
    appellant's representative and to the Upper  Tribunal  indicating  that
    they concede the appeal. The respondent accepts that  for  the  reasons
    set out within the grounds of appeal there are material errors  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  including  the  fact
    that the judge does not appear to  have  made  any  assessment  of  the
    expert report.

 6. The respondent accepted that the appeal should be allowed and that  the
    case should be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
    afresh with none of the findings of fact preserved.

 7. In the circumstances as conceded by the respondent there being an error
    of law in the original decision for the reasons set out in the  grounds
    of appeal, I allow the appeal of the appellant against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and direct that the appeal be remitted back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

    Notice of Decision

 8. I allow the appeal to the extent that it is remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 14th June 2019

