
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08319/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2018                   |On 9 February 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [H A]
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Petterson, (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Khan (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  brought
    with the permission of a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal")  which
    it sent to the parties on 23 October 2017,  whereupon  it  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  15
    August 2017 refusing to grant him international protection.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Iraq and is of Kurdish  ethnicity.  He  is
    from Diyala in Iraq. None of that was the subject of dispute before the
    tribunal. In seeking asylum he gave an account of his being pressurised
    to work for the  organisation  sometimes  referred  to  as  "ISIS".  He
    claims, however, that he responded to this bid to forcibly recruit  him
    by fleeing for his own safety.

 3. The Secretary of State did not believe that the claimant had  told  the
    truth about the claimed attempt to forcibly recruit him. Nor, for  that
    matter, did the Secretary of State believe a further claim he had  made
    to the effect that he had experienced difficulties in the past  due  to
    his father's claimed history as a former member of  the  Ba'ath  party.
    The Secretary of State, as I understand the reasons for refusal  letter
    in this case, thought that it would  be  safe  for  him  to  return  to
    Diyala. Whilst  this  is  perhaps  clumsily  expressed  I  have  in  my
    paragraph 55 of that letter where it is said:

         "55.     It is noted that in Iraq  you  fear  returning  to  Diyala
         governorate. This means that you have related your fear  of  return
         only to certain areas  within  Iraq.  It  is  also  noted  that  in
         general, a person can relocate to Diyala as ISIS does  not  control
         this area (country policy info: internal relocation 3.1.2)."

 4. It was then suggested, in the  same  letter,  that  in  any  event  the
    claimant would be able to relocate elsewhere in Iraq.

 5. The claimant, having been refused international  protection,  appealed.
    His appeal came before the tribunal on 27 September 2017. Both  parties
    were represented. The claimant's  representative  before  the  tribunal
    was, as before me, Ms S Khan.  The  tribunal,  as  noted,  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal. It did so despite its view that he had not offered a
    credible account concerning the claimed forcible recruitment.  It  does
    not seem to have dealt with  any  risk  consequent  upon  the  father's
    claimed previous involvement with the Ba'ath Party but perhaps that was
    not  pursued.   In  any  event  the  tribunal  concluded  that,  having
    reminding itself of what had been said in AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC), that there  was  a  state  of  internal  armed
    conflict in Diyala and that any person returned there would, solely  on
    that basis, face a real risk of indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to
    serious harm within the scope of article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive. The tribunal also decided that the claimant would  not  have
    available to him a viable internal flight alternative having considered
    the possibility of his relocating to Baghdad (the place where he  would
    be returned) or the area controlled by the Kurdish authorities ("KRG").
    The tribunal explained its reasoning as to all of that in this way:-

         "23.     The refusal letter does not suggest Diyala is no longer  a
         contested area. The Country Policy Information Note, Iraq;  Return/
         Internal  relocation.  Version  5.0  September  2017  confirms  the
         situation in Diyala is still so serious it reaches the Article  15C
         threshold. I therefore accept the appellant cannot  return  to  his
         home area and would have to  relocate.  I  have  not  believed  his
         evidence concerning contact with his  family  but  as  he  is  from
         Diyala and given what is said about  the  difficulty  in  obtaining
         documents in such areas I accept he will be unable  to  obtain  the
         necessary entry evidence on return to Baghdad. I accept  he  speaks
         Arabic and Kurdish so he has the benefit of  being  able  to  speak
         Arabic but given he      is from Diyala I accept he will  be  alone
         in Baghdad and would as a Sunni Kurd  find  it  very  difficult  to
         support himself. I am not satisfied  in  those  circumstances  that
         Baghdad is a viable option. There is a paucity of evidence of  how,
         therefore, he would be able to safely travel from  Baghdad  to  the
         KRG and on the current evidence I am not satisfied this  is  viable
         as I understand if he can be forced to leave the KRG if  he  cannot
         find  work.  This  isn't  a  safe  and  durable   option   in   his
         circumstances."

6.    So, the appeal succeeded.

7.    The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal. The  grounds,
    in summary, contain these propositions:

    (a)    The tribunal misread the Home Office policy document to which it
    referred  and  which  actually  suggests  that  since  ISIS  have  lost
    territory in Iraq safe return is possible to most areas of that country
    including Diyala;

    (b)    The tribunal wrongly concluded that the claimant  would  not  be
    able to obtain documentation from Diyala and that wrong conclusion  fed
    into its assessment as to relocation to Baghdad;

    (c)    The tribunal did not  adequately  consider  the  possibility  of
    relocation to the KRG.

8.    Permission to appeal having been granted there was  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that the question of whether  or  not
    the tribunal had erred in law could  be  explored  and  decided.  I  am
    grateful to each representative.

9.    At the hearing Ms Khan provided me with a typed note constituting  her
    record of what had been said before the tribunal. She told me that  the
    relevant Home Office policy document had not  been  placed  before  the
    tribunal by the representative for the Secretary  of  State.  She  said
    that the Secretary of State's representative had simply relied upon the
    content of the reasons for refusal  letter  and  had  not  invited  the
    tribunal to depart from what had been  said  in  the  Country  Guidance
    decision in AA. Ms Petterson, at that stage, suggested that Ms Khan was
    giving  evidence  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  but   I   accept   that   a
    representative is entitled to inform the  Upper  Tribunal,  during  the
    course of a hearing such as this, as to what recollections  she/he  may
    have about what was said below and, of course, Ms Khan had her note  in
    any event. But the intervention did cause me  to  consider  whether  if
    there was going to be dispute about what was said I should consider  an
    adjournment for Ms Petterson to see if there was any similar note which
    had been made by the Secretary of State's representative. In  the  end,
    though, such proved to be unnecessary.

10.   Ms Petterson argued that, whether the policy document had been  placed
    before the tribunal or not, it had considered it  for  itself  and  had
    misread it. Even if that  were  not  the  case,  the  consideration  of
    internal flight to the KRG had been very brief and did not amount to  a
    proper consideration. Ms Khan, replying, said that it had been accepted
    in the reasons for refusal letter that Diyala was controlled  by  ISIS.
    She referred me to paragraph 53 of that letter which reads as follows:

         "53.     In light of the above conclusions, it is accepted that you
         have demonstrated a genuine subjective  fear  on  return  to  Iraq.
         However, for the reasons given below it  is  considered  that  your
         genuine subjective fear is not objectively well founded because you
         are able to internally relocate in Iraq".

11.   She further argued  that  AA  is  still  extant  and  binding  Country
    Guidance case law. So, ran the argument, tribunals have  to  follow  it
    unless satisfied that there has been a durable change. The tribunal had
    not been invited by the Secretary  of  State  to  depart  from  Country
    Guidance and the policy  document  in  isolation  cannot  be  taken  to
    displace the Country Guidance. The tribunal's findings as  to  risk  in
    Diyala had been open to it. Alternatively, even  if  the  tribunal  had
    erred any  error  could  not  be  material  because  the  tribunal  was
    required, as a matter of law, to apply AA in any event.  The  reasoning
    as to internal  flight  to  Baghdad  had  not  been  challenged  by  Ms
    Petterson today. The reasoning as to internal flight  to  the  KRG  was
    succinct but, nevertheless, adequate.

12.   After hearing the submissions I was able to inform the parties that  I
    would be concluding that the tribunal's decision had to be set aside on
    the basis that it had given inadequate reasons for its  conclusions  as
    to internal flight to the KRG. I indicated I would decide later whether
    there were any other errors of law and also whether, given that  I  was
    setting aside the tribunal's decision, I would retain the case  in  the
    Upper Tribunal or remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

13.   I have, in fact, decided that the tribunal erred not only in  the  way
    in which it dealt with internal flight to the KRG  but  in  other  ways
    too. I explain my reasoning, as to all of that now.

14.   There is no doubt that, in considering what  the  situation  was  with
    respect to regulation 15c of the Qualification Directive, the  tribunal
    did consider the policy  document  referred  to  above.   There  is  an
    extract from it contained  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and it has not been suggested, at any point, that the extract,
    as produced in the grounds, is incorrectly worded. The  extract  quoted
    is as follows:

         "2.2.3   Since AA (Iraq) was promulgated,  the  security  situation
         has changed. In particular:

         (  Daesh (Islamic State of Iraq and Syria/ the  Levant)  have  lost
         territory;

         (  Government Iraq (GI) and/ or  associated  forces  have  regained
         control of some areas;

         (  The level of violence has declined;

         (  Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) are returning to their areas
         of origin.

         See the country policy and information note on Iraq:  security  and
         humanitarian situation.

         2.2.4    Therefore, internal relocation is, in general, possible to
         all areas of Iraq except;

         (  Anbar Governorate (but possible to the areas - Daesh  no  longer
         controls, including  the  Fallujah,  Ramadi  and  Heet  districts),
         Ninewah Governorate, the parts of Kirkuk Governorate in and  around
         Hawija, and the parts of  the  "Baghdad  Belts"  (the  residential,
         agricultural  and  industrial  areas  that  encircle  the  city  of
         Baghdad) that border Anbar, Diyala and Salah al-Din.

         These  areas  are  still  assessed  as  meeting  the  Article   15c
         threshold."

15.   So, and the contrary was not  argued  before  me  or  in  the  written
    grounds, the tribunal was  incorrect  in  saying  the  policy  document
    "confirms the situation in Diyala is still so serious  it  reaches  the
    Article 15c threshold". Indeed, according to the wording set out above,
    it says the opposite. I have no doubt, in looking at  paragraph  23  of
    the tribunal's written decision, that its view as to  what  the  policy
    document relevantly stated was a factor in its  concluding  that  there
    remained an Article 15c risk in Diyala. On the face of  it,  therefore,
    it does appear that the tribunal  has  erred  through  misunderstanding
    relevant evidence and through reaching a view as to an important aspect
    of the case on the basis, in part at  least,  upon  that  misunderstood
    information. But, as noted, Ms Khan makes a number of points about that
    which I must now consider.

16.   It is said that the Secretary of State's representative simply  relied
    upon the content of the reasons for refusal letter  which,  of  itself,
    contained an acceptance that Diyala is still controlled  by  ISIS  such
    that risk remains for anyone (I suppose other than ISIS members) simply
    in consequence of being present in Diyala.

17.   The reasons for refusal  letter  is  imperfectly  drafted  and  to  an
    extent does lack clarity. But I do not read it in the way Ms Khan does.
    I have set out paragraph 53 and paragraph 55 of that  letter  above.  I
    have not been taken to anything  else  in  the  letter  that  might  be
    interpreted as an indication that the  Secretary  of  State,  when  the
    letter was prepared, was accepting that ISIS did still  control  Diyala
    or was accepting that there remained an Article  15c  risk  in  Diyala.
    Paragraph 53 does talk about a "subjective fear" but that does not seem
    to me to amount to a concession with respect to any Article  15c  risk.
    Surely, if the Secretary of State had been of the view that  there  was
    such a risk then it would have been acknowledged that the claimant  had
    an objective fear. But, perhaps confusingly, the  paragraph  does  then
    make the point that the claimant can internally  relocate  rather  than
    making the point that he can simply  return  to  Diyala.  Nevertheless,
    paragraph 55 does contain the  view,  expressed  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, that ISIS does not control Diyala and that "in general a  person
    can relocate to Diyala". So, I conclude that it cannot be said that the
    reasons for refusal letter does contain an acceptance on  the  part  of
    the Secretary of State that ISIS still  control  Diyala  (in  fact  the
    opposite is said) or that there remains an Article 15c risk there.

18.   Ms Khan makes the point  that  the  policy  document  was  not  placed
    before the tribunal by the Secretary of State's representative  at  the
    appeal hearing or before it. I am happy to accept that that is  so.  Ms
    Khan's note does not make any reference to it being produced on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State at the hearing and there is no copy of it  in
    the Upper Tribunal's file which there probably would have  been  had  a
    hard copy been handed up.  But given what is said in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter to which I have already referred, I do not  accept  that
    the mere fact of the failure to produce it relieved the tribunal of  an
    obligation to consider whether country  conditions  in  Iraq,  or  more
    specifically in Diyala, had changed. Had I read the reasons for refusal
    letter in the way that Ms Khan does or had there been a record  of  the
    Secretary of State's representative accepting that there  had  been  no
    changes in Diyala since the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  AA  had
    been made then I might have reached a different view. But that was  not
    the case.

19.   Ms Khan says that the tribunal was not  invited  to  depart  from  the
    Country Guidance decision in AA in any event.  Again,  I  am  happy  to
    accept that no specific invitation was made to the tribunal to do so. I
    say that on the basis of Ms Khan's  note  of  the  hearing.  But  again
    matters come back to the content of the reasons for refusal letter.  On
    my reading the Secretary of State, in writing that letter,  as  I  have
    already said, was indicating  or  suggesting  that  there  had  been  a
    significant material change in that ISIS was no longer  in  control  of
    Diyala. So, the invitation was already there and there  is  nothing  to
    suggest it was withdrawn by the Secretary of State's representative.  I
    agree that where it is part of the Secretary of State's case, or indeed
    part of a claimant's case, that pre-existing  Country  Guidance  should
    not be followed, that really ought to be prominently flagged up for the
    tribunal in oral submissions or, perhaps  more  appropriately,  at  the
    very outset of a hearing. It may be that in that sense the tribunal did
    not receive the degree of assistance it was  entitled  to  expect.  But
    what had been said was, in  my  judgment,  sufficient  to  trigger  the
    tribunal's obligation to deal with the matter  of  changes  in  Diyala.
    Indeed, the tribunal did  do  so,  albeit  that  it  misunderstood  the
    Secretary of State's stance and the policy document.

20.   Finally, Ms Khan submits that any error  that  the  tribunal  made  in
    misunderstanding the policy document could not  possibly  have  been  a
    material  one  because  the  document,  of  itself,  was  incapable  of
    justifying departure from pre-existing Country Guidance. She says, more
    specifically, it was incapable of indicating  that  there  had  been  a
    "durable change" in country conditions in the relevant part of Iraq. It
    is not necessary, for the purposes of  this  decision,  for  me  to  go
    through the various authorities which  address  the  question  of  when
    Country Guidance may be departed from. There is relevant material as to
    that in Practice Direction 12.2 and 12.4 and the  UTIAC  Guidance  Note
    2011, no. 2. Departure may be justified where there is  credible  fresh
    evidence relevant to the issue that was not considered in  the  Country
    Guidance case. That may be where Country Guidance has  become  outdated
    by reason of developments in the country in  question.  But  a  durable
    change should be demonstrated.

21.   The indications contained in the policy document refer to  changes  of
    significance  in  consequence,  in  particular,  of  ISIS  having  lost
    territory. Perhaps it might be said that the document,  of  itself  and
    taken in isolation, could not  have  been  capable  of  persuading  the
    tribunal that the  conditions  necessary  for  departure  from  Country
    Guidance in the context of Diyala had been satisfied. But it  certainly
    was  sufficient  to  raise  that  possibility.  Had  the  tribunal  not
    misunderstood the document, therefore, it might have been that it would
    have wished to hear further from the parties  or  would  have  directed
    further relevant material to be produced. That  might  have  led  to  a
    different outcome. I am unable to say, therefore, that the error  which
    the tribunal did make as to the document could not have been a material
    one.

22.   In light of the above I have concluded that the tribunal did  err,  in
    a material way, through its misreading of the policy document. On  that
    basis alone, therefore, the tribunal's decision does  fall  to  be  set
    aside.

23.   As to other matters what was said  about  the  lack  of  viability  of
    internal flight to the KRG was very brief. Brevity, of itself, does not
    bring about legal error and is not to be discouraged.  But,  whilst  it
    appears that the tribunal took the  view  the  claimant  would  not  be
    likely to find work in the KRG and  might  be  removed  from  there  in
    consequence, those conclusions were not explained at  all.  No  reasons
    for those conclusions were offered. So that represents a further  error
    of law on the part of the tribunal.

24.   My analysis as  to  additional  errors  has  stopped  there.  That  is
    because, having decided that the tribunal's decision must be set  aside
    on the basis of its having made two errors of law I have  decided  that
    there ought to be remittal for a complete  rehearing.  As  to  that,  I
    appreciate that Ms  Petterson  did  not  actively  pursue  the  grounds
    regarding the internal flight to Baghdad. I appreciate that Ms Khan, in
    her  grounds,  did  not  seek  to  challenge  the  tribunal's  findings
    regarding  the  claims  concerning  forcible   recruitment   by   ISIS.
    Nevertheless,  I  have  decided  that  a  substantial  amount  of   the
    tribunal's reasoning has been infected by the errors I have identified.
    There is sometimes a degree of artificiality in  seeking  to  pick  out
    aspects of a tribunal's decision that can and aspects  that  cannot  be
    preserved. I take the view that since I  have  identified  errors  with
    respect to the safety of return  to  the  home  area  as  well  as  the
    availability of internal  flight,  and  since  therefore  much  of  the
    tribunal's reasoning cannot stand, it is most appropriate to  remit  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for  a  complete  rehearing  and  to  give  the
    tribunal an entirely blank canvas. So, I will set aside  the  whole  of
    the tribunal's decision and there shall be a remittal  for  a  complete
    rehearing where all matters will have to be considered afresh.

25.   I do think, though, that it is important that the  tribunal  rehearing
    the  case  ought  to  know,  in  advance,  precisely  and  in  entirely
    straightforward terms what is being asked of it. The previous  tribunal
    was hamstrung because of a lack of such clarity which probably  goes  a
    long way to explaining why it erred as it did. It is  because  of  that
    need  that  I  have  set  out  what  might  appear  to  be   relatively
    prescriptive directions.  Those directions may be replaced, amended  or
    supplemented but I hope  that  they  will  be  of  some  assistance  in
    ensuring that the issues of dispute are clearly identified in readiness
    for the rehearing.

26.   Finally then, my decision is that  the  tribunal's  decision  involved
    the making of errors of law. The tribunal's decision is set aside.  The
    case is remitted to the tribunal for a complete rehearing in accordance
    with the directions set out below.

Directions

    A.     There shall be a complete  rehearing  of  the  appeal  before  a
    differently constituted First-tier Tribunal (in other  words  before  a
    different Judge).

    B.     The rehearing shall take place at the Bradford  Hearing  Centre.
    There shall be a time estimate of three hours. The  claimant  shall  be
    provided with a Kurdish-Sorani speaking interpreter.

    C.     The Secretary of State shall provide to the First-tier Tribunal,
    at least ten working days prior to the date which  will  be  fixed  for
    hearing, a written submission confirming in clear terms whether or  not
    the tribunal rehearing the appeal is  to  be  invited  to  depart  from
    Country Guidance as contained  in  AA  or  any  other  current  Country
    Guidance decisions concerning Iraq. When that submission is sent to the
    First-tier  Tribunal  a  copy  must  simultaneously  be  sent  to   the
    claimant's solicitors.

    D.     If the  Secretary  of  State  wishes  to  rely  on  any  further
    documentary evidence, policy guidance or background  country  material,
    copies  must  be  supplied  to  the  tribunal  and  to  the  claimant's
    solicitors within  the  above  time  frame.  Such  material  should  be
    contained in an  indexed  and  paginated  bundle  with  a  schedule  of
    essential reading if appropriate.

    E.     If the claimant seeks  to  rely  upon  any  further  documentary
    evidence or background country material which has not already been sent
    to the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal, such material  should
    be sent to the  tribunal  (with  a  copy  simultaneously  sent  to  the
    Secretary of State) at least five working days prior to the date  which
    will be fixed for the rehearing. Again, such material should be in  the
    form of an  indexed  and  paginated  bundle  with,  if  appropriate,  a
    schedule of essential reading.

    F.     If the claimant is to give any oral evidence to the tribunal  at
    the rehearing beyond what is contained in his witness statement  of  20
    September 2017, such evidence  must  be  set  out  in  a  supplementary
    witness statement drawn in sufficient detail so that it,  coupled  with
    the statement of 20 September 2017, may stand as his evidence-in-chief.
    The statement should be sent to the tribunal (with a copy being sent to
    the Secretary of State) at least five working days prior to the hearing
    date.

    G.     These directions may be varied, replaced or supplemented at  any
    time by any salaried Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

    H.     The parties should note that the  Upper  Tribunal  considers  it
    important that these directions are adhered to by both.

Decision

The decision of the tribunal involved the making of errors  of  law.  It  is
set aside.

The  case  is  remitted  for  a  complete  rehearing  before  a  differently
constituted First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

No anonymity order is made.  None was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
none was sought before me.


Signed:     Date: 7 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:     Date: 7 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
