
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08177/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 March 2020                     |On 24 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     MG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Sudan, of Nuban ethnicity, born  on  19  July
1988. She arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  18  November  2017,  having
previously resided in the UK for three years with an exempt diplomatic  visa
issued as a result of her husband's employment with  the  Sudanese  embassy,
and having left the UK and returned to Sudan on  9  October  2017  when  her
husband's employment at the embassy ceased. The appellant claimed asylum  on
5 December 2017. Her claim was refused on 13 August 2019.

The basis of the appellant's claim was that she was at  risk  on  return  to
Sudan as a result of her husband's political activities and  his  arrest  in
Sudan. The appellant claimed that,  although  her  husband  worked  for  the
Sudan government, as a warrant officer in the army HQ in Khartoum,  he  also
secretly worked for the Popular Movement as treasurer and  he  was  arrested
and imprisoned as a result of his opposition activities.  She  was  told  of
his arrest from his colleague who also advised her that she was at  risk  of
being arrested and she therefore left the country.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, accepted that she  was  a
member of the Nuba tribe but did not accept that she was of any interest  to
the Sudanese authorities. The respondent considered that she would be at  no
risk on return Sudan.

The appellant appealed against that decision. Her appeal was heard by  First
tier Tribunal Judge Oliver on 20  November  2019  and  was  dismissed  in  a
decision of 30 December 2019. Judge Oliver  recorded  the  evidence,  noting
that the appellant had two daughters, the eldest  A  born  on  14  September
2010 who had come to the UK with her and her husband, and the  youngest,  N,
who was born on 1 June 2016 in the UK. The  appellant's  evidence  was  that
her husband, who was of Nuban ethnicity, was a member of the National  Party
Section North, working as an accountant for them, and had been arrested  for
raising money for the poor and destitute in the  Nuba  mountain  areas.  She
last heard from him on 25 October 2017. The appellant also  claimed  at  the
hearing that she had been subjected to female genital  mutilation  (FGM)  at
the age of about four and feared for her daughters as her mother-in-law  had
been putting pressure on her and her husband to have them  circumcised.  The
appellant claimed also to support the Sudan People's Liberation  Movement  -
North and that her husband had told  her  before  his  arrest  that  he  was
worried because of his involvement. Her home was ransacked after his  arrest
and her laptop and papers had been taken. The appellant stated in  her  oral
evidence that her main fear was for her health, as she had  lupus,  and  her
fear of her daughters being subjected to FGM, as well as her fear of  arrest
because of her husband's arrest.

The judge did not accept that the Sudanese authorities had any  interest  in
the appellant and did not accept that she was at risk as  a  result  of  her
husband's activities. The judge did not accept that  the  appellant  was  at
Article 3 risk as a result of her medical  condition.  With  regard  to  the
appellant's fear that her daughters would be subjected  to  FGM,  the  judge
considered that that was a new matter,  and  which  was  therefore  not  for
consideration by himself. He declined to consider the matter  and  concluded
that the appellant's removal would not breach her Article 8 rights.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on  three  grounds,  namely
that the judge had erred by declining to make findings on her  fear  of  her
daughters being subjected to FGM when the respondent had in  fact  consented
to the matter being considered; that the judge  had  made  material  factual
errors; and that the judge had made irrational findings  on  the  Article  3
medical claim.

Permission was granted on 27 January 2020 in the First-tier Tribunal on  all
grounds.

At the hearing Ms Fijiwala conceded that  the  judge's  decision  could  not
stand and had to be set aside. As I indicated to the parties, that  was  the
correct course, as it was clear that the judge had materially erred  in  law
and the grounds, in particular the first and  third  grounds,  were  plainly
made out. In the circumstances there is no need for me to say more.

As accepted by the parties, and given the extent of the judge's errors,  the
appropriate course is  for  the  case  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
tribunal to be heard de novo before a different judge.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal pursuant to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2(b),  to  be  heard  afresh
before any judge aside from Judge Oliver.




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  We  continue  the
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.


Signed   [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 16 March 2020
