
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08732/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2020                           |On 10 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     TP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms S Jegarajah, counsel instructed by Greater London
Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett, promulgated on 12 December 2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott Baker on 14 January 2020.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, however I make one  now  because
    this is a protection matter.

Background

 3. The appellant travelled from Sri Lanka to Saudi Arabia during May 2008,
    returning in late 2010. He applied for a Tier 4 visa to  the  UK  on  2
    December 2010, which  was  issued  shortly  thereafter.  The  appellant
    entered the UK on 7 January 2011, with leave to enter until 8 May 2013.
    That leave was extended in the same capacity until 28  April  2014.  An
    application for further leave  was  unsuccessful  and  the  appellant's
    appeal against that decision was dismissed on  10  November  2015.  The
    appellant applied for asylum during 2017.

 4. The basis of the  appellant's  protection  claim  was  that  he  is  of
    Sinhalese ethnicity and worked in his family business  in  Colombo.  He
    became acquainted with SD, a person of  Tamil  ethnicity  in  2007.  SD
    rented a room from a person known to the appellant and also recommended
    a shop in Colombo where the appellant could buy inexpensive  items  for
    the family business. The appellant would, on occasion, collect  parcels
    for SD from Colombo and SD would  collect  them  from  the  appellant's
    shop. On 25 April 2008 there was a terrorist attack which the appellant
    believed was carried out by SD, using the contents of the parcels.  The
    appellant left for Saudi Arabia and while he was away his  family  were
    questioned about his whereabouts. The appellant returned to  Sri  Lanka
    in late 2010 and encountered no difficulties on return  or  during  the
    two to three months  he  remained  there.  The  appellant  subsequently
    learned that two warrants had been issued for his arrest during 2008.

 5. By way of a letter dated 30 August 2019, the respondent  explained  her
    reasons for refusing the asylum  claim.  The  respondent  accepted  the
    appellant's identity and his account  of  collecting  parcels  for  SD,
    however it was not accepted  that  the  parcels  contained  bomb-making
    materials. No weight was placed upon  a  newspaper  article  which  the
    appellant said referred to him nor the two arrest  warrants,  which  it
    was not accepted would have been left with his parents.  Reference  was
    also made to the ease with which the appellant departed and entered Sri
    Lanka after the claimed events. In addition, the appellant  provided  a
    discrepant account during his screening interview and he had delayed in
    making his asylum claim. Consideration was  given  to  the  appellant's
    suicidal  thoughts  however  it  was  not  accepted  that  there   were
    substantial grounds for believing that his removal would expose him  to
    a real risk of serious harm or loss of life.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. In an 11-paragraph decision spanning 3 pages, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    rejected the appellant's account, concluding that his claim  arose  for
    reasons other than a fear of return.



The grounds of appeal

 7. There were four grounds of appeal. Firstly, that the  judge  failed  to
    apply country guidance in GJ (Sri Lanka) relating  to  whether  it  was
    reasonably likely he would have been stopped at the airport;  secondly,
    the judge failed  to  note  that  the  appellant  provided  the  entire
    newspaper and not just the translated article;  thirdly  criticism  was
    made of several of the judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the  arrest
    warrants and lastly, the judge failed to give adequate reasons.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought, with Judge  Scott
    Baker noting additional arguable errors in the  judge's  assessment  of
    the supporting evidence.

 9. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

10. While it was the appellant's appeal, Mr Jarvis helpfully gave  a  clear
    indication of the respondent's position at the outset.  Describing  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal as  "admirably  brief,"  Mr  Jarvis
    accepted that the judge had not engaged with the  explanation  provided
    by the appellant for behaviour  said  to  damage  his  credibility.  In
    addition, there was force in the argument that the judge had failed  to
    engage with the evidence in GJ regarding the ability of people to leave
    the country by  payment  of  a  bribe  and  had  not  directed  himself
    regarding GJ in relation to the stop list. He was of the view that  the
    errors set out in the first and fourth ground had a material impact  on
    the credibility of the appellant's asylum claim. He invited me  to  set
    aside the decision in its entirety. I had  no  need  to  hear  from  Ms
    Jegarajah.

11. At the end of the hearing I announced that the First-tier Tribunal made
    material errors of law and that the decision was  set  aside,  with  no
    findings preserved. The matter was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision on error of law

12. It was common ground that the judge's finding that the appellant  would
    have been unable to leave Sri Lanka if he was of  adverse  interest  to
    the authorities was made without reference to the evidence  before  the
    Upper Tribunal in GJ. Furthermore,  the  judge'  extraordinarily  brief
    findings were  woefully  inadequate  given  the  complexities  of  this
    appeal.

13. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  him  of   such
    consideration.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Birmingham IAC, with a time estimate of  3  hours  by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date 28 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


