
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08184/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 29 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Fazli, Sohaib Fatimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, MM, is a citizen of Afghanistan,  born  on  15  November
    1996. He appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Louveaux promulgated on 2 October 2019 dismissing his appeal against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 2  August  2019,  refusing  his  fresh
    claim under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

Factual background

 2. The appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  and  claimed
    asylum on 8 March 2011. His claim was refused by the respondent, but he
    was granted discretionary leave  as  an  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
    child until 15 May 2014, when he would have been 17 and a half years of
    age.

 3. The appellant claims his father and eldest brother were both members of
    the Taliban.  They were killed in battle, but the authorities  will  be
    interested in the appellant on  a  "guilt  by  association"  basis,  he
    contends.  The appellant also claims  that  his  father  killed  a  man
    during Eid celebrations, and that the family of the  victim  would  now
    seek to kill him, the appellant, to avenge the death. When  the  police
    came looking for the appellant's father in connection with the  murder,
    the appellant was detained, first in a  police  station,  and  then  in
    prison, but that he escaped from prison when there was a bomb explosion
    which destroyed the prison walls, enabling him to escape.

 4. The appellant's uncle arranged for him to leave the  country  with  the
    use of an agent.  His father and eldest brother later died fighting for
    the Taliban.  He claims that he will be wanted by the Taliban upon  his
    return, as the next in line in the family to replace  his  late  father
    and brother.  He also claims that he will continue to be sought by  the
    authorities.  Finally, he  claims  that,  since  his  arrival  in  this
    country, he has become "Westernized", such that his new  identity  will
    lead to persecution on account of having  refuted  Afghan  and  Islamic
    culture.

 5. The appellant made a fresh claim to the  respondent  on  the  basis  of
    additional documents which, he claimed, demonstrated  that  he  was  at
    risk, particularly from the Taliban.

Procedural history

 6. There is a relatively complex procedural background to this matter.  In
    the time that has followed since the appellant first claimed asylum  in
    March 2011, the appellant has had two  appeals  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and this is his second appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

 7. The appellant initially appealed against  the  refusal  of  his  asylum
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal in August 2011. In a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 8 September 2011, Judge  Higgins  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on credibility grounds.  The appellant's appeal  was
    also rejected on humanitarian protection grounds.

 8. The appellant obtained permission to appeal against  that  decision  to
    the Upper Tribunal on  the  basis  that  Judge  Higgins'  decision  was
    arguably not "in  accordance  with  the  law",  having  regard  to  the
    published policy of the respondent in relation to unaccompanied minors.
    The  judge  had  not  considered  that  that  policy.  The  asylum  and
    humanitarian  protection  conclusions  of  Judge   Higgins   were   not
    challenged. Upper Tribunal Judge King set aside the decision  of  Judge
    Higgins in its entirety in a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  15
    February 2012, remitting the decision to the respondent  in  order  for
    consideration to be given to the issue of  discretionary  leave.  Judge
    King appears to have dealt with the  matter  on  the  papers.   In  the
    meantime, on 23 November  2011,  the  respondent  had  written  to  the
    appellant conferring leave to remain as an unaccompanied minor, from  3
    November 2011 until 15 May 2014.  It appears that Judge  King  did  not
    know that the respondent had already reconsidered her decision in  that
    way before he promulgated his decision.

 9. Shortly before the expiration of that leave, the appellant submitted an
    application for further leave to remain. The basis of that  application
    was that the appellant had no one to return to in Afghanistan;  he  had
    lost contact with his family, and the Red  Cross  had  been  unable  to
    assist. The situation in  Afghanistan  had  not  improved,  and  anyone
    perceived to be an associate of the  Taliban  would  be  treated  as  a
    suspect.

10. On 6 March 2015, the respondent refused to grant further leave  to  the
    appellant, resulting in an  appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shand, promulgated on  19  January  2016.  Judge  Shand  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal. Her  decision  is  relevant  to  these  proceedings
    because the nature of the appellant's application for leave  to  remain
    required Judge Shand to  consider  and  evaluate  the  protection-based
    submissions he had originally relied upon.   She  expressly  considered
    the issue of asylum as though she were hearing a protection appeal.

The decision under consideration

11. The appellant's fresh claim relied on new  documents  obtained  by  the
    appellant  which,  he  claimed,  originated  from  the  Taliban.  Judge
    Louveaux noted that the appellant's claimed fear of the Taliban was not
    an issue before Judge Shand, although the appellant had referred to  it
    in his original asylum witness statement. By the time the  fresh  claim
    was made, the appellant claimed that his father and eldest brother  had
    been killed fighting, and that he was now sought for forced recruitment
    by the Taliban.  The appellant relied on  threat  letters  he  received
    from the Taliban addressed to him  and  his  surviving  elder  brother,
    imploring them to join the ranks. The first letter promised a financial
    reward. The second letter threatened punishment.

12. The appellant provided two reports  from  Dr  Giustozzi,  a  well-known
    country expert on Afghanistan. The  first  report,  dated  8  September
    2019, considered the authenticity of the Taliban  letters  ("the  first
    Giustozzi  report").   Dr  Giustozzi  prepared  the  report  with   the
    assistance of his researcher based in Afghanistan.  The  researcher  is
    said to have passed the threat letters  to  the  relevant  geographical
    Taliban commander  in  Afghanistan  who,  in  turn,  is  said  to  have
    confirmed that the letters sent to the appellant were authentic.

13. Dr Giustozzi's second report, dated 18  September  2019,  analysed  the
    appellant's claim against the  background  information  concerning  the
    security situation in Afghanistan, and the author's perceptions of  the
    Taliban's likely actions ("the second Giustozzi report").

14. The judge took into account  Judge  Shand's  credibility  findings  but
    accepted that the Taliban threat letters were  genuine.  At  [26],  the
    judge found that the appellant's father and  eldest  brother  had  been
    members of the Taliban, and that the appellant was being pressured into
    joining the Taliban.

15. The judge did not accept, however, the appellant's claim that he  would
    be killed, or face being persecuted for failing to join the Taliban. He
    noted extracts from Dr Giustozzi's second report, analysing the  threat
    the appellant claimed to face, concluding that the  Taliban  would  not
    seek to use lethal force against the appellant if he sought  to  resist
    their advances. At [28], the judge noted that Dr Giustozzi  had  opined
    that the Taliban did not "normally" use coercion and were "not  likely"
    to use it in  relation  to  the  appellant.  The  judge  said  that  Dr
    Giustozzi:

         "does not explicitly state that [the appellant] would  be  at  risk
         from the Taliban on return or identify any specific features  about
         the appellant's case that would cause the telephones to depart from
         the 'normal' or 'likely' practice."

16. The judge noted at [29] that the appellant's  remaining  elder  brother
    had not left home upon receipt of the Taliban threat letters, which had
    targeted him also. Although his brother later did leave Afghanistan for
    Pakistan, the reason given by the appellant was that his brother feared
    the authorities, rather than the Taliban. The brother  fled  in  August
    2017. The judge found that, if the Taliban were likely  to  punish  the
    appellant and his brother in any way amounting to persecution,  it  was
    not credible that his brother waited for so long  after  receiving  the
    threat letters before leaving Afghanistan. A letter  from  the  Taliban
    dated 25 April 2017 only gave the appellant and his brother a few  days
    to report the  Taliban;  it  was  not  credible,  therefore,  that  the
    appellant's brother would wait several months in  the  family  home  to
    which the letters were addressed before fleeing, and even then he  left
    the country for  ostensibly  different  reasons,  namely  fear  of  the
    authorities, rather than the Taliban.

Permission to appeal

17. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Appleyard
    on the basis that, first,  the  judge's  finding  that  the  threat  of
    coercion from the Taliban did not amount to persecutory  treatment  was
    arguably an error of law.   Secondly,  that  the  judge  arguably  made
    inadequate findings on the reports of Dr Giustozzi. Thirdly,  that  the
    accepted interest of the Taliban meant that  the  judge  arguably  fell
    into error  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  276  ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("very significant obstacles"). It was also said that
    the judge had made various mistakes of fact in relation to the evidence
    that was before him.

Discussion

18. There was no rule 24 response and Mr Fazli relied  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal which had been drafted by a colleague.

19. The first ground of appeal has two strands.  One  strand  is  that  the
    judge made "inadequate findings" concerning the  contents  of  the  two
    reports from  Dr  Giustozzi,  considering  them  in  isolation  of  the
    entirety of their contents.

20. At [27], the judge said:

         "I reject the appellant's claim that the Taliban would kill him for
         failing to join them. The expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi  is  that
         'even if coercion is not normally used in these cases, the  Taliban
         offer financial incentives  to  recruit  and  employ  psychological
         pressure: 'your father was a hero of the jihad and you have to join
         him too', 'your family always participated in  the  jihad  and  you
         have too' [sic]. This is consistent with the two  letters  supplied
         by the appellant in evidence: the first offering a financial reward
         to join the Taliban, the second threatening unspecified  punishment
         for failing to join the Taliban. Later in his report, Dr  Giustozzi
         makes the same point again: 'In sum, the Taliban are able to pursue
         and track Mr M Countrywide, including in Kabul, but as the son of a
         former member who was killed fighting for the Taliban, they are not
         likely to use extreme coercion against him.'"

21. The relevant extract from the second Giustozzi report is at [32.e].  It
    must be read in  context.  Dr  Giustozzi  was  addressing  the  general
    practice of the Taliban in relation to forced recruitment. He said:

         "32. With a few exceptions, there is no evidence that  the  Taliban
         as such actually  practice  forced  recruitment.  Interrogation  of
         prisoners by ISAF and my own interviews with  village  elders  have
         failed to produce any evidence of forced recruitment by the Taliban
         as an  organisation.  The  only  known  cases  of  Taliban  forcing
         children to act against the will of their families are:

             [...]

             e.   Relatives of Taliban are  targeted  for  recruitment  and
             even if coercion is not normally  used  in  these  cases,  the
             Taliban offer financial  incentives  to  recruits  and  employ
             psychological pressure: ''your father was a hero of the  jihad
             and  you  have  to  join  him  too',   'your   family   always
             participated in the jihad and you have too [sic]' , etc.  many
             young men have been brought up in the myth of their fathers or
             relatives  as  heroes  of  the  1980s  jihad  and  are   often
             vulnerable to this type of arguments [sic].

         33.  [The appellant's]  case  falls  under  32.e,  as  the  Taliban
         believe he should replace his dead relatives."  [Emphasis  in  bold
         added]

22. Dr Giustozzi also noted at [34] that the Taliban have "undoubtedly wide
    reach", observing how they have a total manpower which exceeded 200,000
    men in 2016, with an  additional  number  of  sympathisers  and  unpaid
    supporters that was impossible to estimate. At [36], Dr Giustozzi noted
    that the Taliban deploys execution squads to hunt down and engage known
    enemies. At [37], he noted the extensive information exchange  deployed
    across the Taliban in order to share intelligence about wanted  targets
    and their known locations. At [38], quoting a former Taliban commander,
    Dr Giustozzi noted that Taliban's intelligence  operations  have  grown
    "increasingly  sophisticated",  and  their  ability   to   track   down
    individuals as "very sophisticated". The Taliban have secret  informers
    throughout Afghan society, writes Dr Giustozzi.  At  [39],  the  report
    states that the police  are  known  to  collaborate  with  the  Taliban
    frequently.

23. Against that background of the general practice and  procedure  of  the
    Taliban, Dr Giustozzi  addresses  the  likely  risk  to  the  appellant
    personally at [41]. He writes:

         "Taliban efforts to bring [the appellant]  back  into  their  ranks
         would not extend far from his home area, where  their  presence  is
         pervasive. Laghman province is now seriously affected by  violence.
         Qarghayi started being affected in 2005, and Alingar Alisheng,  the
         two northernmost districts of Laghman, even earlier.  Hizb-i-Islami
         is also active in all these districts, but mainly  in  Alingar  and
         Alisheng.  These are remote areas where the reach of the state  was
         already very weak..."

24. As the paragraph continues, Dr Giustozzi details a number of known acts
    of Taliban violence which have taken place over the decade to 2015.

25. At [42] and [43], Dr Giustozzi outlines the infiltration  of  Kabul  by
    the Taliban, and the steps they take to target  known  enemies  located
    there.  He concludes at [49] in these terms:

         "In sum, the Taliban are able to pursue and track  [the  appellant]
         countrywide, including in Kabul, but as the son of a former  member
         who was killed fighting for the Taliban, they are not likely to use
         extreme coercion against him."

26. The above conclusions must be read in the  context  of  Dr  Giustozzi's
    earlier report, dated 8 September 2019, concerning the verification  of
    the claimed threat letters from the Taliban.  The  judge  accepted  the
    report's  conclusions  that  the  threat  letters  were  genuine.   The
    respondent has not sought to cross-appeal against those  findings.   At
    [8], Dr Giustozzi quoted the Taliban intelligence official who had,  at
    Dr Giustozzi's  researcher's  request,  verified  the  letters  against
    Taliban records. At [9], Dr Giustozzi writes:

         "[The Taliban intelligence official] also added  that  the  Taliban
         are looking for [the appellant's brother] and [the appellant] cross
         [sic] 34 provinces for punishing them of their disobedience [sic]."



27. In his second report, Dr Giustozzi did not address the  impact  of  the
    Taliban  intelligence  official's  statement  that  the   Taliban   are
    searching for the appellant not only in his home province,  but  across
    all 34 provinces of Afghanistan.  Nor did the judge.

28. Weight is a matter for the judge. Appeals to this tribunal lie only  in
    relation to decisions of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  involved  the
    making of an error of law. However, in some circumstances, findings  of
    fact  can  amount  to  errors  of  law,  for  example  where  they  are
    irrational, or fail to resolve a material conflict.

29. However, I consider that the judge fell into error with  his  treatment
    of the two Giustozzi reports. The  judge  failed  to  reconcile  a  key
    tension between Dr Giustozzi's conclusions in his  second  report  that
    the appellant would not be  sought  by  the  Taliban  beyond  his  home
    province, on the one hand, and  the  quoted  remark  from  the  Taliban
    intelligence official  in  his  first  report,  that  the  Taliban  are
    actively  looking  for  the  appellant  across  all  34  provinces   of
    Afghanistan.

30. This is a key tension, and a key omission in the judge's reasoning.

31. Given the judge relied on the verification report in order to reach his
    finding that the appellant received genuine  threat  letters  from  the
    Taliban, it was necessary for the judge  to  explain  why  he  did  not
    accept the contents of [9] of the verification report, quoted above  in
    paragraph 26. There may, of course, have been cogent reasons that  were
    open to the judge as to why he was able to accept  some  parts  of  the
    verification report's underlying source of information, and not others.
    The difficulty is, however, that the judge did not explain  what  those
    reasons were. On the face of his decision, this appears to be a  factor
    that he simply has not considered. Indeed, at [28], the judge said that
    Dr Giustozzi had not  identified,  "any  specific  features  about  the
    appellant's case that would cause the  Taliban  to  depart  from  their
    'normal' or 'likely' practice." The difficulty with that  statement  is
    that Dr Giustozzi had identified precisely such characteristics in  his
    verification report at [9], as outlined above: the Taliban  itself  had
    said that they  would  pursue  the  appellant  across  Afghanistan.  By
    failing to resolve the tension, the reader  of  the  decision  is  left
    wondering whether the judge had  overlooked  [9]  of  the  verification
    report, or, alternatively, whether he had reasons  for  distinguishing,
    or otherwise not accepting that paragraph, that he did not give.

32. I have some sympathy for the judge, as Dr  Giustozzi  appears  to  have
    drafted his main expert report in a vacuum, without referring  to  this
    material feature that was specific  to  this  appellant  from  his  own
    verification report, dated only 10 days prior. However, it is the  role
    of judges to resolve such conflicts where  they  have  the  ability  to
    impact the findings of fact which underlie the  decision  before  them,
    which the judge failed to do.

33. The judge did, of course, consider the second report of Dr Giustozzi in
    relation to the likely interest  of  the  Taliban  on  the  appellant's
    return to Afghanistan. In  his  analysis  of  [32]  of  the  second  of
    Giustozzi report, the judge focused on [32.e] without recalling on  the
    contents of the introductory  paragraph,  at  [32].  The  subparagraphs
    listed by Dr Giustozzi are the exceptions to the rule that the  Taliban
    does not normally practice forced recruitment. It is relevant that  the
    subcategories of exceptions are introduced as "the only known cases  of
    the  Taliban  forcing  children  to  act  against  the  will  of  their
    families..." by Dr Giustozzi (see the emboldened text in paragraph  21,
    above). Accordingly, while the judge has relied on [32.e] of the report
    to support his conclusion that the appellant would not be at risk  from
    the Taliban because he is only sought as a "replacement" for  his  late
    father and eldest brother, the judge does not appear to have considered
    that that category itself was specified by Dr Giustozzi as being one of
    the "known cases of the Taliban forcing children  to  act  against  the
    will of their families..." Again, there is a tension in the  report  Dr
    Giustozzi. On the one hand, at [32.e], Dr Giustozzi appears to  suggest
    that there will be no "extreme" coercion on the  part  of  the  Taliban
    told the appellant, whereas, on the other, in  the  root  paragraph  at
    [32], he had specifically introduced the subcategories as  examples  of
    the Taliban forcing children to act.  Again,  this  is  a  tension  the
    judge failed to reconcile, and in doing so relied on one aspect of  the
    report in isolation, at  the  expense  of  considering  both  documents
    together, in the round. I consider this to be an error of law.

34. The judge had other credibility concerns. Those concerns were  properly
    open to him on the evidence that he heard. For example, the  judge  was
    concerned that  the  appellant's  surviving  elder  brother  only  left
    Afghanistan upon receiving the adverse  interest  of  the  authorities,
    rather than in response to the threat letters:  see  [29].  That  is  a
    valid concern, within the range of concerns properly open to the judge.
     The question for  my  consideration  is  whether  the  errors  of  law
    identified above are such that the decision must be set aside,  despite
    some of its findings that have not been impugned.   I  will  return  to
    this point.

35. The second strand to ground one is that the judge erred when concluding
    that the absence of threat of "extreme coercion" on  the  part  of  the
    Taliban meant that  the  appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  of  being
    persecuted  upon  his  return.  Mr  Fazli  submits  that  there  is   a
    distinction between the likely attempts on the part of the  Taliban  to
    coerce the appellant back into their ranks, on the one hand, and  their
    likely punishment for the appellant, were he to refuse to cooperate.  I
    do not  consider  this  to  be  a  distinction  of  significant  merit,
    primarily because the judge erred by  concluding  that  the  threat  of
    "mere" coercion from the Taliban would not engage the Convention.

36. The primary issue for the judge's consideration was whether the  threat
    of coercion, even if not "extreme", would be capable  of  amounting  to
    persecution for the purposes of the Refugee Convention. The  judge  was
    dealing with the accepted interest of a well-known and well-established
    terrorist organisation in the appellant which,  as  documented  in  the
    background materials before the judge, was willing and able  to  resort
    to extreme violence on a highly sophisticated basis. Although there was
    a suggestion that, as a person related to two fallen Taliban  soldiers,
    the appellant would somehow be immune to the Taliban's  most  murderous
    potential, I do not consider that that is a conclusion capable of being
    sustained  on  the  evidence.  After  all,  at  [9]  of  the   document
    verification  report,  Dr  Giustozzi  noted  the  Taliban  intelligence
    official as commenting that the appellant remains a  sought  person  in
    all 34 provinces.

37. In principle, I do not consider that it  was  a  conclusion  rationally
    open to the judge to find that a person sought by the Taliban  for  the
    purposes of (as he accepted) fighting for them would only be subject to
    "mere" coercion not amounting to persecution. At the very least, if the
    judge was minded to find that a lower category of attention on the part
    of the Taliban would not amount to the appellant being  persecuted,  it
    was incumbent upon the judge to address the steps the  appellant  could
    be expected to take to resist such coercion, the impact that that would
    have upon him, and the extent  to  which  he  would  be  successful  in
    resisting their efforts, were they to track him down. The judge  should
    have also addressed whether "mere"  financial  pressure  and  emotional
    manipulation from  the  Taliban  is  something  an  individual  can  be
    expected to resist, given the well-known  ability  of  the  Taliban  to
    cause loss of life.  This the judge failed to do.

38. As Mr Tarlow submits, this is a case which, properly analysed, turns on
    the issue of internal relocation. The judge did consider the ability of
    the appellant to relocate to Kabul. Before internal relocation to Kabul
    would be a potential option, however, it was necessary for the judge to
    satisfy himself that the appellant would not continue  to  be  at  risk
    even were he to relocate there.

39. I have outlined above how Dr Giustozzi's first report  noted  that  the
    Taliban said they would pursue the appellant across  Afghanistan.   His
    second report detailed the  extensive  infiltration  of  Kabul  by  the
    Taliban. The difficulty with the judge's conclusions on this  point  at
    [31] to [35], where he concluded that internal relocation would  enable
    the appellant to evade the threat of the Taliban, is that it takes  the
    background information available to the judge,  from  both  the  second
    Giustozzi report and AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT
    00118 (IAC), and fails to analyse  it  in  the  context  of  the  first
    Giustozzi report at [9], and the findings of  fact  the  judge  reached
    which accepted the appellant's family connections to the Taliban.

40. Again, I have some sympathy for the judge's reliance  on  [41]  of  the
    second Giustozzi report, where Dr Giustozzi states in  terms  that  the
    Taliban's efforts to bring the appellant back into  their  ranks  would
    not extend far from his home area.  The difficulty with this aspect  of
    the second Giustozzi report is that the reasons given by  Dr  Giustozzi
    at [41] appear to bear little relation to the proposition Dr  Giustozzi
    seeks to establish  at  the  outset  of  the  paragraph.  Dr  Giustozzi
    outlines a series of  insurgent  attacks  in  provinces  close  to  the
    appellant's home area  between  2005  and  2015.  Again,  he  does  not
    consider the contents of his own verification report at [9], but,  more
    significantly,  the  documented  activities  of  insurgents  which   Dr
    Giustozzi proceeds to outline in the paragraph appear  to  bear  little
    relation to the likely intentions of the Taliban in  relation  to  this
    appellant individually, or those  fitting  his  profile  generally.  It
    appears as though Dr Giustozzi is attempting to draw a parallel between
    heightened insurgent activity in areas close to  the  appellant's  home
    province and the likelihood of  someone  in  the  appellant's  position
    being sought for forced recruitment, perhaps in order  to  assist  with
    the heightened insurgent activity. If that is what Dr Giustozzi  meant,
    it would have been helpful if he said so. Instead, Dr Giustozzi cited a
    series of seemingly unconnected events which have affected the  overall
    security situation in particular  parts  of  Afghanistan,  rather  than
    referring to the quite separate activity of forced recruitment  to  the
    Taliban.

41. The judge approached the issue of internal relocation pursuant  to  his
    earlier flawed analysis of the  extent  of  the  threat  faced  by  the
    appellant.  He placed selective reliance on the second Giustozzi report
    and did not subject that report to sufficient scrutiny  which,  had  he
    done so, would  have  revealed  some  of  the  flaws  inherent  to  the
    reasoning adopted by Dr Giustozzi.  I find that  the  judge's  findings
    concerning the appellant's ability  internally  to  relocate  to  Kabul
    involved the making of an error of law.

42. The grounds of appeal also contend that the judge  failed  properly  to
    assess the likely risk faced by the appellant from the  authorities  in
    Afghanistan.  At [44], the judge accepted that the appellant  would  be
    likely to be questioned by the authorities upon his  return  but  found
    that that would be only the routine questioning  to  which  all  failed
    asylum seekers are subject.  Dr Giustozzi in his second  report  stated
    at [17] that the appellant would be assumed  to  have  links  with  the
    Taliban.  The judge did not consider the fact that the appellant  could
    not be expected to lie or otherwise attempt to conceal the  basis  upon
    which he had unsuccessfully claimed asylum, namely that he was a family
    member of two Talibs and was sought for conscription, as the judge  had
    found.  While the judge was right to draw upon AS (Afghanistan) for the
    purposes of assessing  the  typical  profile  of  those  likely  to  be
    targeted for additional questioning, the operative reason he  gave  for
    rejecting Dr Giustozzi's opinion that the appellant would  be  at  risk
    personally was his age.  The judge said that there  was  no  indication
    that Dr Giustozzi had considered the age  of  the  appellant  upon  his
    departure  from  Afghanistan,  and  concluded  that,  "given  he   left
    Afghanistan when he was so young, I find that there  is  no  real  risk
    that the appellant would be assumed to have had any  prior  involvement
    with  the  Taliban  or  have  any  information  of  interest   to   the
    authorities..."  The basis upon which the judge reached that conclusion
    is not clear.  Dr Giustozzi noted at the outset of  his  second  report
    that  he  had  a  number  of  immigration  documents  relating  to  the
    appellant, which would have  confirmed  his  age.   The  focus  of  the
    operative analysis of his second report  was  the  risk  faced  by  the
    appellant, as the child of a deceased Talib.  Clearly, Dr Giustozzi was
    aware of the appellant's age.

43. The above errors of law are such that I need to  set  the  decision  of
    Judge Louveaux aside. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    reheard by a different judge, with no findings of fact preserved.

44. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Louveaux involved the making of an error  of  law  and
is set aside, with no findings of fact preserved.

This matter is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  reheard  by  a
judge other than Judge Louveaux.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 21 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
