
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08736/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 21 August 2019                    |On 12 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   Mr H F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Santamera, Legal Representative, IAS
(Liverpool)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Iraq and ethnically Kurdish, born on 1
January 1977.  He is from Kirkuk.  He arrived in the United Kingdom with
his wife and four children as his dependants on 20 December 2016, on which
day, having been encountered having travelled and entered the UK
clandestinely, he also claimed asylum.

The basis of his claim is that his father was a committee organiser for the
Ba'ath Party.  His father and two sisters were shot dead in a revenge
attack on 16 March 2004.  On 30 May 2004 his wife was attacked at home by
two men and stabbed in the arm.  The Appellant then fled to stay in Riyaz
with a colleague of his fathers from the Ba'ath Party and remained there
until 9 June 2014 when Mosul was occupied by ISIS.  The family then moved
to Tessein until 27 September 2016 when ISIS tried to take Kirkuk and the
family fled on 27 of that day, 27 September 2016, to Turkey and thus
unlawfully crossed Europe until they arrived in the UK.

The Appellant's asylum application was refused on 22 June 2018.  He
appealed against that decision and his appeal came before Judge of the
First-tier Tribunal Siddiqi for hearing on 25 February 2019 in Manchester.
In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 25 March 2019 the judge dismissed
the appeal.  Having accepted that the Appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity and
from Kirkuk, the judge found whilst he could not reasonably be expected to
live in Baghdad he could internally relocate to the IKR.  In respect of the
CSID in the Appellant's possession, the judge accepted based on evidence
from the Respondent that this was not genuine, but found the Appellant
could utilise other identity documents which the Appellant possesses, in
particular, his Iraqi national identity card, to obtain a replacement CSID.

The Appellant appealed against this decision in time.  The grounds in
support of the appeal assert that the judge erred by making a material
misdirection in law in relation to the findings concerning the CSID and
that the judge had failed to provide adequate reasons for finding this
could be replaced within a reasonable time upon return to Baghdad.  The
grounds asserted that following the country guidance decision in AAH (Iraqi
Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) the judge had failed
to properly implement the guidance set out therein and had failed to assess
the reasonableness of internal relocation.  It was further asserted that
the judge had failed to make a finding of fact on a material matter and had
permitted procedural unfairness in relation to the Appellant's father's
membership of the Ba'ath Party and his military service book.

Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D E Taylor
on 22 June 2019 in the following terms:

"The grounds challenge the judge's conclusion that relocation to the IKR is
reasonable and may be argued.  The issue of whether the Appellant would be
able to obtain a replacement CSID card, given that the judge accepted that
the Appellant and his family have no connections with the IKR to help with
employment and accommodation, should be explored further.  Since the judge
accepted that the Appellant and his father were Ba'ath Party members it is
arguable that this should have been taken into account.  There is nothing
in ground 2.  The judge accepted the Appellant's father's Ba'ath Party
membership and any claimed error in relation to the military service book
is therefore material."

    Hearing

At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Santamera on behalf of the
Appellant sought to rely on the grounds of appeal.  She submitted that the
Appellant did provide evidence he could not obtain a CSID card and the
Respondent's evidence was that the card he did produce was not authentic.
She submitted that there was no adverse credibility point taken against the
Appellant.  He had appointed a proxy in Iraq to obtain the card for him but
this has now been classified as a document that he cannot rely upon.  The
Appellant had attempted to honestly obtain a CSID but had been unable to do
so.  The judge accepted that the Appellant has no relatives to assist him
in Iraq.  He is from Kirkuk and cannot reasonably be expected to return
there in light of Article 15(C) of the QD and there is no-one to
countersign or assist the Appellant through the procedures in order to
obtain a new CSID.  Consequently, it would be unduly harsh to expect him to
internally relocate to the IKR as it is clear from the country guidance
decision in AAH that without a CSID he would not be able to work, access
healthcare, education etc.

In his submissions, Mr Bates sought to clarify that the judge's finding at
paragraph [43](d) was that the Appellant had no family in the IKR.
However, there was no finding as to whether or not he had family elsewhere
in Iraq.  At [43](a) the judge accepted that the CSID is not a genuine
document.  However, the Appellant's Iraqi nationality certificate was
genuine and in light of the first headnote in AAH this constitutes another
form of documentation which would be of substantial assistance in obtaining
a replacement CSID and also quite straightforward.  Mr Bates submitted that
the fact the Appellant has produced a non-genuine CSID cannot be read back
to show that the Appellant could not, going forward, attain a genuine one.
It does not follow he would be unable to instruct a reliable proxy and
obtain a genuine CSID.

Mr Bates submitted the judge clearly followed the guidance set out in AAH,
as is apparent from [43] of the Decision and Reasons.  The judge finds the
Appellant cannot remain in Baghdad but could go to the IKR and found at
[43](e) that the Appellant would be entitled to financial support from the
Voluntary Return Scheme.  Mr Bates sought to rely on the facts of AAH and
that on the facts the appeal was dismissed because that Appellant had a
CSID card and semi-skilled experience, which put him in a stronger position
with regard to employment.  He submitted this is precisely the finding that
the judge made in this Appellant's case, see [43](f), and it was reasonable
and sustainable for the judge to find he could internally relocate even
without family support in the IKR.  Mr Bates submitted the judge was
entitled to find that the Appellant would no longer be at risk due to
Ba'ath Party membership and that there was no material error of law in the
judge's Decision and Reasons.

In reply, Ms Santamera accepted that the judge had had partial regard to
the country guidance decision in AAH, see (i) of the headnote.  However,
there was still substantial violence in Kirkuk and it would not be possible
for the Appellant to obtain a replacement CSID card from that municipality.
 It was also material that there were no family members to assist the
Appellant in obtaining such a CSID card in the IKR.  It is clear from the
evidence of Dr Fatah recorded in AAH that the Appellant would require the
assistance of a male family member to assist in procuring a CSID and that
is not available to this Appellant.  Thus, he would not be in a position to
return to Iraq with a CSID card.

Ms Santamera also sought to rely on the fact that the Ba'ath Party
membership may still be an issue due to the fact that there are connections
between the party and ISIS and that matters were very nepotistic in that
area of Iraq.  She submitted it would be very difficult for the Appellant
to find employment and it was clear from the evidence that there were very
high unemployment rates in the IKR and the Appellant was only lowly
skilled.  She concluded by submitting that the judge had not explained how
in light of the CG decision in AAH at (ii) and (iii) the Appellant would in
practice be able to obtain a CSID card.

I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

I find that there are material errors of law in the decision of First tier
Tribunal Judge Siddiqi, in the following material respects:

12.1.    Whilst the Appellant has a CSID, obtained on his behalf by a proxy
    in Iraq, the Respondent's position, which was accepted by the Judge, is
    that it is not genuine [28](a). At [43](a) the Judge held that the
    Appellant would be able to travel to the IKR either by flying to Erbil
    or by travelling overland from Baghdad. However, it is clear from AAH
    that returns are to Baghdad only. Whilst the Respondent takes the
    position that returns can be made to Erbil this is contrary to country
    guidance and the Judge has not provided any reasons for departing from
    AAH.

12.2.    In respect of return to Baghdad, AAH provides as follows at
    headnotes [4] and [5]:

         "4.  P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
         IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.

         5.   P will face considerable difficulty in making the journey
         between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or valid
         passport."

    Thus it is apparent that, in order to travel from Baghdad to the IKR,
    the Appellant and his family members would need to obtain CSIDs in
    Baghdad. I find that the Judge has not provided sufficient reasons or
    analysis as to how the Appellant might do this, inlight of headnote
    (1)(iii) and the absence of any male family members to attend the civil
    registration office in Baghdad with the Appellant. Whilst the Appellant
    has an INC and the false CSID, the Judge appears to have assumed that
    this would be sufficient to obtain a genuine CSID, however, I do not
    consider in light of AAH that this is necessarily the case.

12.3.    It follows that the Judge's findings at [43](b)-(h) and [44] as to
    internal relocation to the IKR are unsustainable because they are
    predicated on the basis that the Appellant and his family members would
    be returning to the IKR in possession of CSIDs.

Notice of Decision

I find material errors of law in the decision of First tier  Tribunal  Judge
Siddiqi as to internal relocation to the IKR. I set aside  her  findings  at
[42]-[44] and remit the appeal for  a  hearing  confined  to  the  issue  of
reasonable internal relocation to the IKR. The Judge's  finding  up  to  and
including [41] are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 10 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


