
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08657/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 29 November 2018                  |On 12 December 2018                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     ajm
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by Popitiya & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of AJM.  His details will remain  anonymous  on  the
    usual terms.

2.   He  seeks  permission  to  appeal  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Keane who, in a Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  24
    September 2018, dismissed his appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to make a deportation order against him and he was ordered  to
    return to Iraq, specifically the IKR.

3.   The broad outline of this is that the appellant said that he fell  into
    a relationship with a young woman in Iraq.  Her family did not  approve
    of that.  He was assaulted with a knife and he escaped, in due  course,
    arriving in the United Kingdom.  He received word at a later stage that
    the young woman's family murdered her and he feared for his life if  he
    returned.

4.   The first of his contentions was accepted by the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    but nonetheless, it was held that he could return to Iraq, there  being
    a sufficiency of protection available to him. Thus his protection claim
    was refused.  However, it has been  agreed  before  us  today  in  this
    appeal against that decision, that there are a number of errors of law.
     In the first place, the decision took some  time  to  be  promulgated,
    some three  months  or  so,  and  between  hearing  the  case  and  the
    promulgation of the decision the latest country guidance  case  of  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT  212  was
    promulgated and that has changed the landscape.  The extent to which it
    has done so will be a matter for discussion in due course.  However, it
    is quite clear that the sufficiency  of  protection  was  not  properly
    considered, nor was the question of internal relocation, or the ability
    or otherwise  of  the  appellant  to  obtain  essential  documentation,
    principally a CSID (Citizen's Status Identity Document).

5.   We agree with the parties that these are matters which are material  to
    the decision.  We are not satisfied that there has in  essence  been  a
    proper consideration of the appellant's  claim  and  we  therefore  set
    aside the decision.  We do not want to say any  more  about  the  facts
    since we have decided that the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal, except to say that the primary findings of fact will  be
    maintained.   The  real  issue  is,  as  we  say,  the  sufficiency  of
    protection, the question of internal relocation and the ability of  the
    appellant to obtain the necessary documentation which will  assist  him
    if he returns.

Notice of Decision

6.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  matter  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with the findings of  primary  fact
    maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                                       [pic]

                                                           For LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                          Date: 7th Dec 2018

