
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08654/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 June 2017                               |On 11 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     SP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Uppal, Solicitor, Glen Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on [ ] 1990 who entered the UK
    on 8 January 2010 as a Tier 4 General Student. On 25 January 2016 she
    applied for asylum. The application was refused on 22 July 2016. The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her appeal was
    heard by Judge Mitchell. In a decision promulgated on 29 March 2017,
    following a hearing on 17 March 2017, her appeal was dismissed. She now
    appeals against that decision.


 2. The background to this appeal is that on 5 July 2009 the appellant
    married a national of Nepal and travelled with him, in January 2010, to
    the UK. The appellant was physically abused by her husband. In May 2015
    she left him and contacted the police. He was arrested and pleaded
    guilty to assault. He left the UK, returning to Nepal, in August 2015.

 3. The appellant claims that after she left her husband he continued to
    harass her, and that this continued after he left the UK. She claims
    that her husband and his family have threatened to harm her and her
    family in Nepal and that if she is returned to Nepal she will be at
    real risk of being killed by her husband.


 4. In a letter setting out the reasons for refusal dated 22 July 2016, the
    respondent rejected the appellant's asylum claim on the basis that
    there is sufficiency of protection in Nepal for victims of domestic
    violence and/or that she could reasonably relocate within Nepal to
    avoid any risk from her husband.


 5. The respondent also considered whether removing the appellant from the
    UK would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR. It was found that she would not
    face significant obstacles integrating into Nepal and therefore
    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules was not satisfied. Nor
    did the respondent consider there to be exceptional circumstances that
    would warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules.


 6. The respondent's reasons for refusal letter also considered whether
    removing the appellant would breach Articles 3 or 8 of the ECHR because
    she had claimed to have attempted suicide. The respondent, applying J v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629, concluded there would not be a breach of
    either Article 3 or Article 8.


 7. The appellant lodged an appeal against the respondent's decision. The
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal submit that the respondent
    failed to properly consider the risk the appellant would face in Nepal.
    No argument was advanced in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal that removing the appellant from the UK would breach Article 8
    ECHR because of family or private life in the UK; or that her removal
    would breach Article 3 or Article 8 ECHR because of the risk she might
    commit suicide. Paragraph 9 of the grounds of appeal states: "The
    appellant intends to particularise each of the above grounds and
    further grounds at the hearing of this appeal."

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The judge refused to consider whether removing the appellant from the
    UK would breach her human rights or place her at risk under Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive. At paragraph 4 he stated:


         "The grounds of appeal that have been produced by the
         representatives did not make reference to either article 8 ECHR or
         article 15(c) of the qualification directive, both of which [sic]
         referred to at some length in the skeleton argument. No appropriate
         notice had been served. The skeleton argument had only been
         received by the Tribunal on 15 March 2017. There had not been any
         application to vary the grounds of the appeal. Ms Hitschmann on
         behalf of the Secretary of State objected to the inclusion of those
         two matters in this appeal. I therefore do not consider that either
         of these matters can be considered in this appeal."


 9. The judge did not accept that the appellant and her family in Nepal,
    are, or have been, subject to ongoing threats from her husband since he
    left the UK and on this basis rejected her asylum claim. He concluded
    at paragraph 35 that:


         "The appellant has clearly fabricated the claim that her ex husband
         is continuing to threaten her. She gave evidence that he has
         remarried or is now living with another woman. He appears to have
         moved on in his life. They are now leading entirely separate lives.
         For the reasons set out above I conclude that the appellant has
         embellished and that her claim that the husband is still interested
         in threatening or harming her or his family is also interested in
         threatening or harming her or her family is not credible. I
         therefore conclude that the appellant has not shown that she has
         any well founded fear of return to Nepal."


10. Having made this finding, the judge stated, at paragraph 36, that it
    was not necessary to consider whether the appellant could be a member
    of a particular social group, the viability of internal relocation in
    Nepal or whether there is sufficiency of protection.

Grounds of Appeal

11. A wide range of arguments are made in the grounds of appeal.


12. The first ground of appeal argues that the judge elevated the standard
    of proof and misapplied the case of Tanveer by focussing
    disproportionately on the appellant's evidence regarding her husband's
    threats and that the judge adopted a "tenacious and flawed" approach.


13. The second ground of appeal argues that the judge erred by failing to
    consider sufficiency of protection and internal relocation, on the
    basis that the appellant would still be at risk even if there had been
    no threats from her husband since he left the UK. The grounds submit
    that the judge failed to consider the objective country information
    concerning the risk to single divorced females in Nepal from their
    former husbands and families.


14. Thirdly, the grounds challenges the judge's evaluation of the evidence
    that lead him to conclude that the appellant fabricated the account of
    her husband continuing to threaten her. These aspects of the decision
    are described as contradictory and problematic.


15. Fourthly, the grounds submit that the judge erred by refusing to
    consider Article 8 ECHR and Article 15(c) of the Qualification
    Directive. It is argued that the appellant was entitled to raise these
    claims as the grounds before the First-tier Tribunal stated that
    "further grounds" would be particularised at the hearing, submissions
    regarding Article 8 and Article 15(c) were included in the skeleton
    argument, and the witness evidence dealt with Article 8 issues. The
    decision to refuse to consider these areas is described in the grounds
    as a procedural irregularity and contrary to the spirit of the Tribunal
    Procedure Rules.


16. Fifthly, it is argued that the judge erred by stating he was unclear
    about aspects of the appellant's account without giving her the
    opportunity to clarify the points.


17. Sixthly, the grounds maintain that the judge erred by taking into
    consideration 28 "Viber messages" the appellant claimed to have
    received from her husband that were deleted from her telephone as these
    were not relied upon by the appellant and only came to light in cross
    examination.


Adjournment


18. Shortly before the hearing, the appellant's former solicitors ceased
    acting for her. She applied for an adjournment which was refused. The
    application to adjourn was renewed before me.


19. Mr Uppal, in support of his application to adjourn, stated that he had
    been given incomplete documentation by the previous solicitors and
    therefore his preparation for the hearing was incomplete.


20.  I refused the application but agreed to the appeal being heard last on
    my list, thereby giving Mr Uppal several hours to prepare. In addition,
    I asked Mr Uppal to identify any documents he was missing in order that
    I could provide them from the court file.


21. My reason for refusing the application, which I explained to the
    parties, is that Mr Uppal would have time to consider any papers he had
    not seen as his appeal would be last on my list. The matter before me
    concerns an error of law, which requires a focus on relatively narrow
    issues, and there is no reason Mr Uppal has not been able, based on the
    papers he did receive from the previous solicitors, to prepare for the
    error of law hearing. I accepted that he might be in difficulty if a
    full rehearing is required and I told the parties that if I were to
    decide to remake the appeal, I would adjourn if appropriate to enable
    Mr Uppal further time to prepare.


22. Moreover, the decision to change legal representation was made by the
    appellant (due to the cost). That is a matter for her and is not a good
    basis to delay a hearing.


23. In all the circumstances, and having regard to the overriding objective
    in the Procedure Rules, I was satisfied that it was fair and just to
    proceed with the error of law hearing.


Submissions

24. The focus of Mr Uppal's argument was on the failure of the judge to
    consider the appellant's claim under Article 8 ECHR. He argued that the
    appellant did not need, in the grounds accompanying Form IAFT-5, to
    specifically refer to Article 8. This, he maintained, was covered by
    the grounds stating that further grounds would be particularised at the
    hearing. He submitted that the appellant had a strong case under
    Article 8, having been the victim of domestic violence and facing
    serious hardship on return. He also noted that the appellant's partner
    is a British national.


25. Mr Uppal also argued that the judge 's assessment of the appellant's
    credibility was flawed. He observed that it is not uncommon for a
    violent partner to continue harassing someone after they separate and
    the judge has not properly reasoned the rejection of the appellant's
    account.


26. He also questioned some of the judge's adverse findings about the
    appellant. The judge had drawn an adverse inference from apparent
    discrepancies between the appellant and her partner about text
    messages. He argued that the judge had not dealt with the appellant's
    explanation. Nor had the judge recognised, when holding against the
    appellant that messages had been deleted, that it is common to delete
    messages. Mr Uppal noted that the appellant had explained in her
    statement why messages where deleted.


27. Mr Uppal also highlighted the adverse finding about the email address
    used to contact the police in Nepal, noting that the judge had never
    put his concern to her. Had he done so, should could have explained.
    Likewise, the appellant was never given an opportunity to respond to
    the judge's apparent concern about the signatures of her father and
    brother.


28. Mr Kotas submitted, in response, that Article 8 had not been raised by
    the appellant other than in the skeleton argument. He commented that
    the appellant's and her partner's witness statements did not address
    issues relevant to Article 8. There is no point anywhere in the papers
    submitted by the appellant to address whether she satisfies the
    Immigration Rules. He also added that her relationship with her partner
    post-dated the Secretary of State's refusal letter, so the Secretary of
    State had no notice of this until the hearing.


29. Mr Kotas added that it was unclear why Article 15(c) of the
    Qualification Directive was raised in the grounds as it was irrelevant
    to the appeal.


30. He described the remainder of the grounds as a tedious litany of
    forensic criticisms. The appeal turned on credibility and in his view
    the judge had more than adequately explained why he found the appellant
    not credible.


Consideration

31. It is the responsibility of an appellant (or her representative) to set
    out in the Notice of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the grounds upon
    which she intends to rely. See Section 19(4)(a) Tribunal Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 ("the
    Procedure Rules"). In the Appeal Form IAFT-5 completed by the
    appellant's representatives it states that the appellant "must let us
    [the secretary of state] know the reasons you disagree with the
    decision on the Refusal Letter document". The Procedure Rules provide
    for circumstances where an appellant wishes to add to or amend grounds.
    See Section 19(7) of the Procedure Rules.


32. Neither Article 8 nor Article 15(c) were raised by the appellant in her
    grounds of appeal or in an application prior to the hearing to vary the
    grounds upon which she intended to rely. As neither the respondent nor
    the Tribunal were notified that the appellant disagreed with the
    decision of the respondent on these grounds (other than in a skeleton
    argument submitted two days before hearing), the judge did not err in
    finding the appellant was precluded from raising them at the hearing.


33. One of the central issues in the appeal was the appellant's credibility
    in respect of her claim to have received threats from her husband after
    he left the UK.


34. The judge gave multiple reasons why he did not accept the appellant's
    claim to be the victim of harassment from her husband since he left the
    UK. These include the following:


     a) The appellant and her partner gave inconsistent accounts of when
        they received threatening messages from her husband.


     b) The appellant's partner and the appellant gave inconsistent
        evidence both  about the content of the appellant's husband's texts
        and whether the partner had shown her the texts he claimed to have
        received from the husband.

     c) The partner claimed to have first been threatened on a date that
        pre-dated his relationship with the appellant.


     d) None of the social media messages alleged to have been sent by the
        appellant's husband were produced. The judge considered the
        appellant's explanation that she had deleted them all to not be
        credible. He also noted that she claimed to have sent one of the
        messages to her solicitors, but this was not produced.

     e) The appellant claimed to have received 28 threatening viber
        messages from her husband where he used a false name but his own
        picture. The judge described it as difficult to fathom that he
        would use a false name but real picture. The judge commented that
        she gave the impression the messages were on her phone for a long
        time but then said she had only seen them the morning of the
        hearing. None were produced at the hearing.

     f) The judge found it hard to believe the appellant's husband managed
        to contact her the day she changed to a new phone number in July
        2015. He also thought it surprising, if her phone had been "hacked"
        by her husband, that she had not subsequently changed her number.

     g) The appellant claimed her husband hacked her account so that his
        picture appeared on her laptop but she did not adduce any evidence
        to support this.

     h) The appellant produced a single email that she sent to the police
        in Nepal about her situation but never followed it up. The judge
        found it surprising that she had not made a greater effort to
        notify the policy in Nepal.

     i) A letter in support from her brother and father has signatures that
        bear no resemblance to the signatures on their passports.


35. These are cogent and thoroughly explained reasons which show clearly
    why the judge concluded that the appellant had fabricated her claim to
    have been threatened by her husband after he left the UK.


36. The approach taken in the grounds of appeal is to set out a litany of
    forensic criticisms of the type that has been subjected to judicial
    criticism. See VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522. The grounds, for
    example, criticise the judge's finding that the appellant and her
    husband contradicted each other and his finding about the appellant's
    brother and father having signatures that did not match. However, even
    if (which I do not accept) the judge made irrational findings or
    misconstrued the evidence in these particular areas, the overall
    conclusion of the judge is not undermined. He identified a wide range
    of strong reasons for finding the appellant to not be credible and
    there is no merit to the appellant's challenge to the credibility
    finding in the decision.


37. The grounds also argue that the judge erred by failing to consider the
    objective evidence concerning the risk faced by single divorced females
    in Nepal and the issue of sufficiency of protection and internal
    relocation. The difficulty with this argument is that the appellant's
    case before the First-tier Tribunal was that she faced a risk not
    solely on the basis of being a single woman but on the basis of being a
    single woman who faced a threat from her husband and his family. If, as
    I have found, the judge was entitled to conclude the appellant would
    face no such risk, then it was not necessary to proceed to consider the
    objective evidence and internal relocation/sufficiency of protection.
    In the absence of a threat from her husband and/or his family, there
    would be no need for the appellant to avail herself of state protection
    or to relocate.


Decision


38. The appeal is dismissed


39. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.


      |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 7 July 2017                   |

