
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08598/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 August 2017                    |On 28 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMED [H]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sharif of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Matthews promulgated on 16 March 2017 in which  the  Judge  dismissed
       the appellant's appeal on both protection and human rights grounds.

    2. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  refused  by
       another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but  granted  on  a  renewed
       application by a judge of the Upper Tribunal on the basis the grounds
       argue with merit that the Judge ought to  have  applied  the  country
       guidance of  AA  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  and
       considered  whether  the  appellant  could  reasonably  relocate   to
       Baghdad.

    3. The respondent  in  the  Rule  24  response  accepts  the  Judge  was
       incorrect to find the appellant was from the IKR  but  submitted  the
       error was not material for the appellant is an ethnic Kurd who has an
       internal relocation option to the IKR.

    4. It was accepted before the Upper Tribunal that such option would have
       to be exercised via Baghdad in accordance with AA which the Judge had
       clearly failed to consider in the decision under challenge.

    5. I find the Judge has erred for the reasons set out in  the  grant  of
       permission by the Upper Tribunal.  Factual  findings  made  were  not
       disputed.

    6. It was agreed with the advocates that the sole issue on which further
       consideration is required is that relating to internal relocation, in
       relation to which both parties agreed to provide written  submissions
       in anticipation that the Upper Tribunal will be able  to  remake  the
       decision on the basis of such written argument if no further  hearing
       was required.  If further  oral  evidence/submissions  were  required
       appropriate listing directions would be given.

    7. Written  submissions  were  received  from  both  parties,  from  the
       respondent  dated  29  August   2017   and   from   the   appellant's
       representatives dated 13 September 2017 in light of which  the  Upper
       Tribunal finds it is able to proceed to consider the  matter  further
       with a view to remaking the decision to either allow or  dismiss  the
       appeal on the papers without the need for a Resumed oral hearing.

Discussion


    8. It is not disputed the appellant is an Iraqi Kurd who  was  born  and
       lived in Bartella, said to be a small town about 35 miles by car from
       Mosul. It is not disputed between the  parties  this  does  not  fall
       within the IKR and therefore the appellant's initial point of  return
       is to Baghdad.

    9. The Judge records the appellants case relied upon before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal at [14 (i) - (vii)] of that decision which  I  set  out
       below for ease of reference:

           "14.   The account before me for the present appeal was that: -

                 i) The appellant is an Iraq Kurd. He was born and lived  in
                    Bartella, a small town about thirty-five minutes by  car
                    from  Mosul.   The  appellant's  father  died  when  the
                    appellant was very young, the appellant was living  with
                    his mother prior to leaving Iraq.

                ii) In August 2014 the appellant was taken from his home  by
                    ISIS. He was held for approximately 2 to  3  months.  He
                    was taken away in a blindfold; he and others were forced
                    to dig graves and trenches for ISIS  whilst  being  held
                    securely every night.

               iii) ISIS identified the appellant as a Muslim and so treated
                    him slightly better than others.

                iv)  He  was  finally  able  to  escape  when  guards   were
                    distracted by an explosion. The  appellant  and  another
                    fled, his companion was sadly shot,  but  the  appellant
                    escaped and  sought  help  after  running  to  a  nearby
                    property.

                 v) The appellant received help, and a lift to the  town  in
                    which an uncle lived. He stayed there  for  some  months
                    but did not return home. He learnt that his mother could
                    no longer be found and the family home  seemed  to  have
                    been destroyed by ISIS.

                vi) Eventually the appellant was helped by his uncle to  pay
                    an agent who brought him to the UK. He did not apply  in
                    any other  countries  as  he  travelled  through  Europe
                    because he did not know the procedure for such an asylum
                    claim.

               vii) The appellant has not been in contact with his mother or
                    uncle since he has been in the United Kingdom."

   10. The Judge notes  that  the  appellant  was  asked  about  travel  and
       identity documents and indicated ISIS took his National Identity Card
       that he had with him when he was abducted but that he  had  an  Iraqi
       Citizenship Card with him when he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.
       Although the appellant has the Citizenship Card with him when he  was
       abducted by ISIS, they never took the card from  him.  The  appellant
       also informed the Judge he had an Iraqi passport which he claimed  to
       have left in Iraq when abducted.

   11. At [26 - 27]  the  Judge  makes  the  following  findings  which  are
       preserved: -

           "26.   When I view all of the above matters in the round,  I  do
                not find that the appellant, even to the lower  standard  of
                proof, has satisfied me that he was abducted as  claimed.  I
                find no basis to suggest that he has been held as claimed by
                ISIS. I  note  in  any  event  that  the  appellant  himself
                accepted that even on his  own  account  he  was  not  being
                targeted individually by ISIS, he was  simply  a  young  man
                that was swept up in their activities. At  question  49  his
                substantive  interview  he  spoke  of  ISIS  simply   taking
                everybody, and not targeting him individually.

           27.    The matters set out above, when viewed  collectively  and
                in the context of the entirety of the evidence in this case,
                are matters that in my judgment drive me to  find  that  the
                appellant's account is lacking in credibility."

   12. The appellant is therefore no more than a failed asylum  seeker  from
       Iraq whose claim to have been abducted by ISIS, during the course  of
       which he had his National Identity Card taken, has been shown to lack
       any degree of credibility.  Similarly,  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       rejected the appellant's account this  must  include  the  appellants
       claim that he had not spoken to his uncle since leaving  Iraq  and/or
       that he had no family support available to him in his  home  country.
       This is therefore an appellant who, even if he left Iraq at the  time
       ISIS moved into his home area, was of no adverse  interest  to  them,
       has been issued with an  Iraq  Citizenship  Card,  National  Identity
       Card, and passport, and who has an  uncle,  mother,  and  possibly  a
       family home available in Iraq.

   13. The country guidance relating to return to Iraq is that currently  in
       force following the decision of the Court of Appeal in  AA  (Iraq)  v
       SSHD and SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944. The Court found that the  existing
       country guidance should be revised by consent  so  as  to  read:  (i)
       Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will  be
       to the IKR and all  other  Iraqis  will  be  to  Baghdad.  The  Iraqi
       authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to
       enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a current or  expired  Iraqi
       passport relating to P, or a laissez passer; (ii) No  Iraqi  national
       will be returnable to Baghdad if not in possession of  one  of  these
       documents; (iii) In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF
       (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
       EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection claim  made  by  P  cannot
       succeed by reference to any alleged risk  of  harm  arising  from  an
       absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport or a  laissez  passer,
       if the Tribunal finds that P's return is not  currently  feasible  on
       account of a lack of any of those documents; (iv)Where P is  returned
       to Iraq on a laissez passer or expired passport, P will be at no risk
       of serious harm at the point of return by  reason  of  not  having  a
       current passport.  However (v), regardless of the feasibility of  P's
       return, it will be necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or  will
       be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A  CSID
       is generally required in order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access  financial
       assistance from the authorities; employment; education; housing;  and
       medical treatment. If P shows there are no family  or  other  members
       likely to be able to provide means of support, P is in general likely
       to face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by
       the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary  of  State  or  her
       agents to assist P's return have been  exhausted,  it  is  reasonably
       likely that P will still have no CSID.

   14.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  will  not  be  able  to
       automatically enter the IKR initially but  will  have  to  return  to
       Baghdad.

   15. In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) (unchanged by the
       Court of Appeal) it was held that (i)  As a general matter,  it  will
       not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a  person  from  a  contested
       area to relocate to Baghdad City or (subject to comments in this case
       on humanitarian protection and areas of the country where there is an
       internal armed conflict) the Baghdad Belts; (ii) In assessing whether
       it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for an Iraqi  national  (P)  to
       relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however, likely to be
       relevant:(a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (b)
       whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less likely to  find
       employment); (c) whether P has family members or friends  in  Baghdad
       able to accommodate him; (d) whether P is a lone female  (women  face
       greater difficulties than men in finding employment); (e)  whether  P
       can find a sponsor to access a hotel room or rent accommodation;  (f)
       whether P is from a minority community; (g) whether there is  support
       available for P bearing in mind there is some evidence that  returned
       failed asylum seekers are provided with the support  generally  given
       to IDPs. (iii) there is not a  real  risk  of  an  ordinary  civilian
       travelling  from  Baghdad  airport  to  the  southern   governorates,
       suffering serious harm en route to such  governorates  so  as  engage
       Article 15(c).

   16. The written submissions made behalf of the Secretary of  State  which
       preceded those made by the respondent are in the following terms:

           "Respondents Written Submissions

             1. The Respondent makes these written submissions  pursuant  to
                the directions issued by the Upper Tribunal at the error  of
                law hearing on 18 August 2017. The SSHD  contends  that  the
                FTTJ's primary findings  of  fact,  and  in  particular  its
                findings in relation to the issues of credibility  have  not
                been successfully challenged and that these ought to  stand.
                The decision of FTTJ is only set aside in  relation  to  its
                assessment of the viability of internal relocation.




                Internal Relocation




             2. The SSHD contends that FTTJ Matthews  made  certain  adverse
                findings of  fact  that  are  fatal  to  any  claim  by  the
                appellant that internal relocation would  not  be  a  viable
                option for the appellant and  would  be  unduly  harsh.  The
                issue of internal relocation must be assessed  in  light  of
                these findings of fact.




             3. The SSHD accepts the appellant comes from a  contested  area
                and as such the appellant will be returned to  Baghdad.  The
                SSHD contends that in light of the Court of Appeals decision
                in  AA(Iraq)  [2017],  which  amended  the  extant   country
                guidance case of AA (Article 15 (c))  (Rev  2)  [2015],  the
                tribunal must assess whether A has a CSID be able to  obtain
                one reasonably soon after his arrival in Iraq.




             4. The SSHD contends the burden of proof  in  this  respect  is
                upon A and the findings of fact made by the  FTTJ  show  the
                appellant has been inherently incredible in relation to  the
                core of his claim and reasons for leaving Iraq.  Indeed  the
                FTJ  made  various  adverse   credibility   findings   which
                ultimately led him to conclude "in my judgment drive  me  to
                find that the appellant's account is lacking in credibility"
                [27].




             5. Indeed the  FTJ  makes  specific  findings  in  relation  to
                documentation, namely that the appellant had  a  citizenship
                card (which apparently ISIS allowed him to keep)  [20],  and
                critically, that he had an Iraqi  passport  but  claimed  to
                have left it in Iraq when abducted [21]. The  aforementioned
                findings, coupled with the FTJ's rejection of  the  core  of
                the  appellants  claim,  including  the  implausibility   of
                failing to call his uncle  to  let  him  know  that  he  had
                arrived safely in the UK (given the significant  expenditure
                to get him here [22&23]), inevitably leads to the conclusion
                that the appellant hasn't demonstrated he will not  be  able
                to get hold of this passport or have it sent to him.




             6. This is relevant because in AA (Iraq) [2015] the UT at [173]
                found that having a current or expired passport was  one  of
                the ways one can obtain a CSID from the Consular Section  of
                the Iraqi Embassy in  London.  Simply  therefore,  the  SSHD
                contends the appellant can obtain his passport  and  thereby
                obtain a CSID in London which will enable him  to  live  and
                work in Baghdad. The SSHD contends that in  accordance  with
                BA (Returns to Baghdad) [2017], the UT  has  reiterated  the
                levels of violence in Baghdad do not cross  the  Article  15
                (c) level.




             7. The appellant is  a  single,  healthy  adult  male  with  no
                dependents,  who   in   his   Asylum   Screening   Interview
                (Respondent's bundle A2), disclosed  he  is  50%  fluent  in
                Arabic and that  he  worked  as  a  floor  tile/labourer  so
                clearly has a skill or trade behind him. The appellant could
                therefore obtain work in  Baghdad  and  internal  relocation
                could not in all the circumstances be  described  as  unduly
                harsh. The SSHD also contends that possession of a  CSID  is
                only necessary if an appellant is able to  demonstrate  that
                they have no other means of other financial family  support.
                In the extant case the appellant has clearly  had  financial
                assistance from his uncle.  Given  the  acceptance  of  this
                fact, coupled with his general lack  of  credibility  -  the
                appellant has therefore not shown he has no family who could
                meet him or are indeed already present in Baghdad to provide
                him with shelter, accommodation and subsistence.  Mere  lack
                of  CSID  (which  the  SSHD  disputes  the   appellant   has
                demonstrated in any event) is not enough to  found  a  claim
                for humanitarian protection.




             8. In the alternative, the SSHD contends the appellant would be
                able to internally relocate to the  IKR  from  Baghdad.  The
                Tribunal is invited to adopt the  same  adverse  credibility
                findings above in this assessment too. Indeed FFTJ  Matthews
                found the appellant will have some family support in the IKR
                [28].




             9. The SSHD contends that the appellant as a Kurd, and in  line
                with the guidance  contained  in  AA  Iraq  (2015)  will  be
                allowed entry clearance for ten days as a visitor and if  he
                finds employment will be able to remain for longer. The SSHD
                also contends that in line with the  CG  that  there  is  no
                evidence the IKR authorities proactively remove  Kurds  from
                the IKR whose permits have come to an end. The SSHD contends
                the appellant for the same reasons as above, has  not  shown
                he will be unable to gain employment. Again,  the  appellant
                speaks Kurdish and is  a  healthy  adult  male  with  family
                support to return to.




            10. The SSHD contends and asked the Upper Tribunal to judicially
                note that there are daily flights from Baghdad  to  the  IKR
                which are not prohibitively expensive (especially not so for
                an appellant who has already spent thousands of dollars on a
                journey  to  the  UK)1.  Internal  relocation  is  therefore
                clearly viable  and  in  all  the  circumstances  cannot  be
                described as unduly harsh.




            11. Accordingly the UT is invited  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
                appeal on all grounds.




               1. Results from search  on  Skyscanner.net  performed  on  29
                  August 2017 reveals direct flights from Baghdad  to  Erbil
                  from �108 1-way for 31 August 2017.

   17. The appellant's written submissions read as follows:

           "Appellants written submissions

             1. The Appellant makes these submissions to the directions made
                by the Upper Tribunal on 18 August 2017 when  it  was  found
                that there was an error of law in the decision of the First-
                tier Tribunal Judge's findings  that  the  Appellant  was  a
                Kurdish citizen from the IKR and that there was  no  bar  to
                return to the IKR.




             2. The decision was set aside in relation to the assessment  of
                the viability of internal relocation. The Respondent accepts
                that the Appellant came from the area of Mosul, a  contested
                area and as such, will be returned to Baghdad.




             3. The  crucial  question  is  whether  such  return  would  be
                feasible because the Appellant does not have any  documents.
                His Iraqi passport was left in Iraq when he was abducted  by
                ISIS who took  his  National  Identity  Card  although  they
                allowed him to keep his Citizenship Card which he no  longer
                has. The further separate issue  is  whether  the  Appellant
                could obtain a CSID either from the Iraq Embassy  in  London
                because he held an Iraqi passport, thereby enabling  him  to
                return to Baghdad or obtain the same in Baghdad.




             4. The Respondent argues that the Appellant could obtain a CSID
                and that it would not be unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to
                relocate  to  Baghdad  or  alternatively   that   he   could
                internally relocate to the IKR from  Baghdad  because  as  a
                Kurd he would be allowed to enter for 10 days as  a  visitor
                and if he found employment, would be able to  remain  for  a
                longer period.




             5. The Appellant relies upon  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
                Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 in  respect  of  the
                judgment relating to the substantive appeal and the Annex at
                Part  B  regarding  documentation  and  feasibility   return
                (excluding IKR) and Part C regarding the  CSID  as  well  as
                Part D regarding internal relocation within Iraq (other than
                the IKR) and Part E regarding the Iraqi Kurdish region.




             6. Paragraph  170  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  AA
                (Article 15 (c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 had to  be  read  in
                light of and consistently with the amended  guidance  in  AA
                (2017). Regardless of the feasibility of a  person's  return
                to Iraq, it is necessary to decide whether that person had a
                CSID or be able to obtain one reasonably soon after  arrival
                in Iraq. The Upper Tribunal had equated the CSID to a return
                document which was wrong.  Without  a  passport  or  laissez
                passer a person could not be returned to  Iraq.  Since  such
                return was not feasible, there would be no risk of a  breach
                of Article 3. The position with a CSID was different. It was
                not merely a document used to achieve entry to Iraq  but  it
                was essential to access food  and  basic  services.  A  CSID
                could not automatically be acquired after return to Iraq.




             7. In the refusal letter at paragraph 44, the Respondent stated
                that because of AA (2015), the Appellant could not produce a
                current expired passport or  laissez  passer  and  therefore
                could not be returned to Baghdad and he could not produce  a
                CSID to obtain such a document. The Respondent  stated  that
                return to Iraq was not currently feasible.




             8. However, at paragraph 45, the  Respondent  stated  that  the
                Appellant could apply for formal recognition of identity  by
                the National Status Court in Baghdad and  at  paragraph  49,
                stated that he could return to Baghdad and travel onwards to
                the IKR. At paragraph 50, it was  said  that  the  Appellant
                will be able to obtain entry to the IKR  for  ten  days  and
                register for renewal. Paragraph 51, it  was  said  that  the
                Appellant could obtain a CSID. It was accepted at  paragraph
                36 that return to the Appellant's home area of  Mosul  would
                amount to a breach of Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
                Directive.




             9. If the Appellant cannot be returned to Iraq  because  he  is
                not in possession of a current expired  passport  a  laissez
                passer, AA (2017) makes it clear he will not be returned  to
                Baghdad. He will not be  at  risk  on  return  because  such
                return is not feasible. The Appellant would not be subjected
                to  Article  3  treatment  or   entitled   to   humanitarian
                protection for this reason.




            10. On the other hand, whether the  Appellant  could  acquire  a
                CSID depends upon his ability to obtain one from  the  Civil
                Status Affairs  Office  in  his  home  Government  and  this
                depends on whether he has a passport. If he does not have  a
                passport, his ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether
                he knows what information is contained in the  book.  In  AA
                (2017), it was held that the ability to  obtain  a  CSID  is
                likely to be severely hampered if a person is unable  to  go
                to the  Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  his  Governorate
                because it is an area where Article 15(c)  Serious  Harm  is
                occurring. Since the Appellant comes from  the  Mosul  area,
                alternative offices have been  established  in  Baghdad  but
                according to AA (2017), the evidence  does  not  demonstrate
                that the "Central Archive" which exists  in  Baghdad  is  in
                practice able to provide CSID's to those in  need  of  them.
                There is a National Status  Court  in  Baghdad  to  which  a
                person could apply for formal recognition  of  identity  but
                the precise operation of this court is, however, unclear.




            11. Thus, it is  submitted  that  it  is  entirely  unclear  and
                certain whether the Appellant could in fact  even  obtain  a
                CSID reasonably soon after his  arrival  in  Iraq,  even  if
                return is feasible. He is likely  to  be  destitute  in  the
                absence of a CSID. He has lost contact with  his  uncle  who
                lived in Mosul and  realistically  cannot  rely  on  him  or
                anyone else for support.  His father was killed just  before
                he was born and ISIS abducted  his  mother.  He  is  from  a
                minority community, namely Kurdish, he  would  not  able  to
                find accommodation or anyone to support him in  Baghdad  and
                he has no sponsor and is unlikely to find one. Part D of the
                Annexe in the amended  country  guidance  of  AA  (2017)  is
                relied upon at 15(a), (c), (e), (f) and (g) to  support  the
                fact that relocation to Baghdad  will  be  unreasonable  and
                unduly harsh.




            12. As to internal relocation to the IKR, the Appellant does not
                originate from the IKR. As a Kurd, he could obtain entry for
                ten days as a visitor but would then have  renew  permission
                for a further ten days. He may be able to remain  longer  if
                he can find employment. Although there is no  evidence  that
                the IKR authorities proactively remove Kurds  from  the  IKR
                whose permits have come to an  end,  it  is  again  entirely
                uncertain  unclear  whether  the  Appellant   could   obtain
                employment, this being purely speculative. He has no  family
                or friends for support in the IKR.  The Respondent suggested
                in the written submissions that the Appellant  could  travel
                from Baghdad by air to the IKR one-way ticket,  costing  the
                equivalent of �108 but this suggestion is  simply  ludicrous
                because the Appellant would not be in the position to  raise
                such a large sum of money. Realistically, he  would  not  be
                able to finance the lengthy journey from  Baghdad.  Internal
                relocation cannot be  said  to  be  clearly  viable  as  the
                Respondent claimed. Part E  of  the  Annex  is  relied  upon
                particular at 20 (a), (b) and  (c)  to  show  that  internal
                relocation to the IKR is unreasonable and unduly harsh.




            13. In conclusion, it  is  nonsensical  for  the  Respondent  to
                suggest that the  Appellant  could  return  to  Baghdad  and
                resume  his  life  thereby  finding  gainful  employment  or
                alternatively relocate to the IKR.   The  Respondent  stated
                that the Appellant would have family support in the IKR  and
                that the FTT Judge found this to be the case. However,  that
                finding was flawed at paragraph 28 of the  decision  because
                the Judge said the Appellant was from the IKR and had family
                support there when in fact  he  was  from  Mosul  which  the
                Respondent accepted.




            14. In light of the guidance given in AA(2017), it is  submitted
                that the Appellant would not be able to  return  to  Baghdad
                because he is not in possession of the  current  or  expired
                Iraqi passport or  a  laissez  passer.   Regardless  of  the
                feasibility of the Appellants return, there is no reasonable
                likelihood that he will be able to obtain a CSID either from
                the Iraqi Embassy in London as the Respondent  suggested  or
                indeed in Iraq itself.  Internal  relocation  either  within
                Iraq or within the IKR is  simply  not  practicable  and  it
                would  be  unreasonable  and  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
                Appellant to be able to relocate for all the reasons set out
                above.




            15. The Tribunal is therefore invited to allow the appeal on the
                issue of relocation."

   18. As is the reality of  life  in  Iraq,  the  situation  has  moved  on
       considerably since the appellant left his home area.  On  25  October
       2016 a news item published by Al Jazeera records 'that the  offensive
       to reclaim ISIL's last major urban  bastion  in  Iraq  enters  second
       week, with fighting east and south of  Mosul'.  The  article  records
       that 'Iraqi forces fought their way into two villages near  Mosul  as
       the offensive to retake that city enters its  second  week  and  that
       Iraqi special forces began shelling ISIL  positions  before  dawn  on
       Monday near Bartella, a historically Christian town to  the  east  of
       Mosul that they had retaken last week.  After  entering  the  village
       they allowed more than thirty people, who had been sheltering in  the
       school, to escape the fighting'.

   19. This shows that the appellant's home area is now in  the  control  of
       the government of Iraq as indeed is  the  whole  of  the  Mosul  area
       following further fighting after the date of the article; culminating
       in the defeat of ISIL in Iraq. It is accepted there is  reference  to
       occasional pockets of resistance but it is clear  that  all  of  this
       area, outside the recognised boundaries of the IKR, is now under  the
       control of the government of Iraq.

   20. It is also the case that the fact the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  may
       have mistakenly thought that Mosul was in the IKR, or that because of
       the appellant's ethnicity he had a right of return  directly  to  the
       IKR, does not mean the other adverse findings made are susceptible to
       challenge. The Upper Tribunal has found that  the  findings  of  fact
       made by the Judge shall stand  which  includes  the  finding  of  the
       availability of support from family members in Iraq. It is of  course
       possible that such support exists within the IKR now as many who fled
       in advance by ISIL in areas such as  Mosul  sought  safety  from  the
       Kurdish authorities in the IKR.

   21. It is not disputed that the appellant may find it difficult to settle
       in Baghdad as a result of his lack of  a  sponsor  although  language
       issues and employment opportunities are matters he has shown he might
       realistically be able to overcome on the  basis  of  a  knowledge  of
       Arabic and transferable skill as a tiler. The term 'settle' refers to
       a more permanent status than that of a  person  visiting  or  passing
       through.

   22.  In  relation  to  documentation,  the  appellants  claim   regarding
       documents has been found not  to  be  credible  by  the  Judge.  This
       specifically includes the claim that ISIL took his National  Identity
       Card although leaving him with his  Iraq  Citizenship  Card.  As  his
       claim to have been abducted by  ISIL  has  been  found  to  lack  any
       credibility his claim his National Identity Card was  taken  by  this
       group must also lack credibility. The Iraqi National Identity Card is
       very important as  it  replaced  the  Nationality  Certificate  Civil
       Identity document from 1 January 2016 and by 2018  will  replace  the
       Residency Card. The fact the appellant claims to have had a  National
       Identity Card must mean that since the introduction of this  document
       he was able to provide sufficient evidence to the  Iraqi  authorities
       to establish his entitlement to the same. The National Identity  Card
       was first issued on 1 January 2016.

   23. The National Identity Card is connected to the Iraqi Civil System  by
       way of an embedded chip with an individual's details recorded on  the
       same. As the appellant has not  established,  on  the  basis  of  any
       credible evidence, to have lost his National Identity Card he  cannot
       discharge the burden upon him to  show  that  this  document  is  not
       available or that he is undocumented. He does not claim it  was  left
       at home but claims it was in his  possession  before  ISIL  took  the
       same. Possession of such document  will  therefore  allow  the  Iraqi
       authorities to undertake the necessary identity checks from which the
       Embassy in London will be able to issue  a  replacement  passport  or
       laissez passer document. The card will also allow  the  appellant  to
       access service in the same way as those possessing a CSID.

   24. I find it not made out that the appellant will not be able to  return
       with relevant documentation, including a passport or temporary travel
       document, or that he is not able to obtain as CSID if one  is  indeed
       required as the National Identity Card is replacing  the  CSID  as  a
       means of identifying an individual and their entitlements.

   25. Those being returned to Iraq may also be entitled to the benefit of a
       Relocation Package from the respondent in addition  to  support  from
       the authorities, similar to that paid to IDP's, on return.  One  such
       element of a Relocation Package of this nature is  the  provision  of
       funds to assist with the costs of travel to a person home area.

   26. It is not made out that the appellant will not be able  to  obtain  a
       domestic flight within  Iraq  to  the  IKR.  The  appellant  has  not
       expressly plead the same referring only to the cost of obtaining  the
       required ticket.

   27. Even if a Relocation Package was not available it has not  been  made
       out that the appellant does not have  support  in  Iraq  from  family
       members who will either be able to meet him on his return to  Baghdad
       or to provide for him once he is able to fly to the IKR.  It  is  not
       made out the family do not have adequate resources especially  as  it
       is claimed the  appellant's  uncle  paid  $6,000  to  facilitate  the
       appellant's journey to the United Kingdom.

   28. It is not made out the appellant has any adverse profile  that  would
       give rise to suspicion  based  upon  his  having  lived  in  an  area
       previously under the occupation of ISIS. The appellant  has  been  in
       the United Kingdom and his  presence  here  can  be  vouched  for  if
       required.

   29. It is not made out the appellant will not be able to enter  the  IKR.
       In relation to family support the appellant has family in  Iraq.  The
       appellant claimed not to be in contact with his  family  members  but
       his evidence in relation to the core  of  his  claim,  which  I  find
       includes family contact, has been  found  to  lack  credibility.  The
       claim to have no contact with family is not made out.

   30. I find it not made out that the appellant will be returned to the IKR
       as a person without family support from either his parent(s) or other
       family members. It is not made out that family support  will  not  be
       available to assist the appellant in reintegrating into  Iraq  or  to
       assist with the provision  of  accommodation  and/or  employment.  As
       noted the appellant worked in Iraq as a floor tiler indicating he has
       a skill that should enable him to secure employment.

   31. The appellant is no more than a failed asylum seeker as found by  the
       First-tier Tribunal. No real risk has been made out  on  return.  The
       appellant has not established he has any adverse  profile  that  will
       make him of interest to any of the authorities. It is  not  made  out
       the appellant cannot be returned to Baghdad and fly from  Baghdad  to
       the IKR and secure entry. It is not made out the appellant  will  not
       have family support or  assistance  to  enable  him  to  re-establish
       himself either in the IKR or his home area if he is returned there by
       the Kurdish authorities. It is not made out  the  appellant  will  be
       undocumented.

   32. The burden of establishing an entitlement to international protection
       falls upon the person so alleging. I do not find  the  appellant  has
       discharged the burden of proof upon him to the required  standard  to
       establish such an entitlement. It is accepted that with the  upheaval
       that has occurred in Iraq the appellant may  find  matters  difficult
       but this does not entitle  a  person  to  a  grant  of  international
       protection per se.

Decision

   33. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed

  Anonymity.

   34. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26 March 2018

