
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08950/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2020                   |On 7 February 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms Harris.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1993 and is a male citizen of Iraq.
    He appealed against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  29
    August 2019 refusing him international protection.  The  appellant  has
    been in the United Kingdom since  2016;  an  earlier  appeal  had  been
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in June 2018. The appeal which  is
    subject of these proceedings arose after  the  appellant  made  further
    submissions. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  14
    November 2019, allowed the appeal. The Secretary of State now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's account of past events in Iraq had been rejected by the
    First-tier Tribunal in  2018.  The  appellant's  credibility  had  been
    roundly rejected. The success  of  the  second  appeal  turned  on  the
    question of the appellant's contact or  lack  of  contact  with  family
    members still living in Iraq. The judge [17]  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was unable to obtain the necessary identity documents in  the
    United  Kingdom  (there  is  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant had attempted to obtain documents from the Iraqi  Embassy  in
    London) and that the appellant would be highly unlikely to be  able  to
    obtain proof of his Iraqi identity once in Iraq itself. The judge found
    that 'it is apparent that [the appellant's] family are  no  longer  way
    they were when he left Iraq. The correspondence between [the appellant]
    and the Red Cross strongly supports his contention  that  he  does  not
    know the whereabouts of his family.'

 3. The Secretary of State challenges the decision on the  basis  that  the
    judge has failed properly to take account of the findings  of  fact  of
    the previous tribunal subject to the guidance in Secretary of State for
    the Home Department v D (Tamil) [2002]  UKIAT  00702  *.  The  previous
    Tribunal had found that the appellant was not telling the truth when he
    said that he was no longer in touch with his family. The second  should
    have taken the findings of the first Tribunal as his starting point  in
    the assessment of the credibility of the evidence. His failure to do so
    was an error of law.

 4. Although the case for the Secretary of State was advanced eloquently by
    Ms Jones, I find that the appeal should be dismissed.  First,  I  agree
    with Ms Harris, who appeared for the appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, that the judge was well aware  of  the
    findings of the first Tribunal. At [13], he acknowledged the concession
    made by Ms Harris that the appellant did not seek to revisit  the  bulk
    of  the  issues  (many  concerning  the  credibility  of  his  account)
    considered by  the  previous  Tribunal.  The  judge  records  that,  in
    consequence of that concession, the Presenting Officer  limited  cross-
    examination to the supplementary questions raised  by  Ms  Harris.  The
    answers to those questions appear [13] to have  elicited  the  response
    that the appellant was actively seeking to locate his family  with  the
    help of  the  Red  Cross.  Significantly,  Ms  Drogma,  the  Presenting
    Officer, did not seek to challenge the credibility of  the  appellant's
    claim that he lost touch with his family.  Ms  Harris  submitted  that,
    whilst the previous Tribunal in 2018 had made an unchallenged   finding
    that the appellant was not telling the truth regarding contact with his
    family, the second judge was required to make findings as at  the  date
    of the hearing before him that is, October 2019. It had  been  open  to
    the Secretary of State  to  submit  that  the  appellant's  answers  in
    October 2019 should be treated as unreliable but he chose not to do so.
    In the absence of any  challenge  to  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    claims regarding his family in October 2019, I  agree  with  Ms  Harris
    that the judge has not obliged to reject the  appellant's  evidence.  I
    acknowledge that  a  different  judge  may  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion; however, that is not the point. I am satisfied that, in the
    light of the manner in which the hearing proceeded  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and, in particular, the submissions put or not put to him
    by the Presenting Officer, the judge reached findings available to  him
    and the evidence and in accordance with the  principles  of  D  (Tamil)
    [2002] UKIAT 00702 * .

 5. I also agree with Ms Harris that, even if the judge had found that  the
    appellant was in contact with his family or able to contact them, then,
    as the judge puts it at [18], 'there is no guarantee that  [the  family
    members] would have retained the appellant's identity documents'  which
    are required for him to obtain a CSID or INID. That finding is in  line
    with existing country guidance (see  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC)).

 6. The remaining grounds of appeal founder on the fact that I  uphold  the
    judge's finding that the appellant has lost touch with his  family.  In
    line with SMO, I am satisfied that the appellant cannot obtain identity
    documentation whilst in the United Kingdom (there was no  challenge  to
    the judge's findings in respect of the appellant's embassy  visit)  and
    the fact that he cannot contact his family in  Iraq  and/or  that  they
    would not be able to provide him with the documents which are  required
    indicate that he cannot access  such  identity  documentation  once  in
    Iraq. It follows that he would be  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR if returned at the present time.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date 5 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
