
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08956/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2018                              |On 05 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 Mohamed [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss K Wass, Counsel instructed by David Benson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka,  has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge Ransley of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent  on
    30  March  2017  dismissing  on  grounds  of  adverse  credibility  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision made by the  respondent  on  12
    August 2016 refusing his protection claim.

2.   There is really only one ground of  appeal  advanced:  that  the  judge
    erred in his assessment of  the  evidence  produced  by  a  Sri  Lankan
    attorney Mr A A Seneviratne.  This evidence was produced to support the
    appellant's claim that a couple of days after his return to  Sri  Lanka
    (from Qatar) on 10-11 December 2014 he was arrested and detained by the
    CID for two days and accused of having direct dealings and contact with
    the LTTE through his business of supplying SIM cards in connection with
    anti-regime activities.  The attorney's evidence stated that on 6  July
    2016 he had attended at the CID in Colombo and was  informed  that  the
    Magistrates' Court had issued an arrest warrant.  The grounds focus  on
    the judge's remarks at paragraphs 56-57:

         "56. I am prepared to accept the author of the letter, namely Mr  A
             A Senviratne, is a member of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.
              In the letter dated 27th July 2016  he  stated  that  at  the
             Appellant's request he attended at the CID in Colombo on  26th
             July 2016 to enquire as to why there had been frequent  visits
             in search of the Appellant.  The letter stated:


                  'The CID informed  me  that  the  Magistrates'  Court  had
                  issued an arrest warrant  against  [MS]currently  and  the
                  warrant is pending for  a  considerable  period  of  time.
                  Therefore the state authority visited my client's house in
                  search of [MS].  ... I was only gathering information that
                  CID has an adverse interest which is [MS] and CID  refused
                  to provide any further information regarding case  details
                  against [MS].  Therefore I am unable to obtain  any  court
                  documents or copy of the warrant against [MS].  ...'


         57.  Mr Williams argued that the lawyer's letter should be accepted
             as 'independent evidence'.  I disagree.  It  is  necessary  to
             assess the lawyer's letter in the light of  all  the  evidence
             before this Tribunal.  When looked at in this  light,  I  find
             that the lawyer's letter was written for the specific  purpose
             of explaining away  a  lacuna  in  the  Appellant's  evidence,
             namely the absence of any documentary evidence to substantiate
             the Appellant's claim that an arrest warrant had  been  issued
             against him.  When the rest of the Appellant's evidence is  so
             lacking in credibility,  I  am  not  prepared  to  accept  the
             lawyer's letter as reliable evidence (Tanveer Ahmed*)."

3.   The grounds are  not  numbered  but  (giving  them  my  own  numbering)
    contend that the judge's treatment of  the  attorney  evidence  evinces
    legal error because (i) it fails to explain why  the  evidence  of  the
    attorney is not  evidence  independent  of  the  appellant's;  (ii)  it
    wrongly  criticises  the  appellant  for  failing  to   provide   other
    documentary evidence to substantiate that an arrest  warrant  had  been
    issued against him; (iii) the respondent had tendered  no  evidence  to
    suggest the attorney was lying;  (iv)  the  judge  did  not  apply  the
    approach set out by the Court of Appeal in PJ (Sri Lanka)  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1011; and (v)  as a result of the aforesaid errors the judge  erred
    in her assessment of risk on return.

4.   I am grateful to Miss Wass and Mr Bates for their submissions.

5.   I am not persuaded that the judge materially erred in law.

6.   Before setting out my views on the attorney evidence, it  is  important
    to bear in  mind  the  judge's  other  findings;  none  of  which  were
    challenged by the appellant.  The judge found,  inter  alia,  that  the
    appellant gave inconsistent  evidence  about  his  claimed  arrest  and
    detention by the army in March 2011 (paragraphs  29-33);  that  he  had
    failed to satisfactorily explain why he chose to return to Sri Lanka in
    June 2014 and to stay there until 10 September 2014 even though on  his
    own account armed uniformed men had visited his parents' house  at  the
    end of August 2014 saying the appellant was required to report  to  the
    CID in Colombo (paragraphs 29-34); that he had failed to satisfactorily
    explain how he had had no problems entering, staying in and exiting Sri
    Lanka during this period (paragraphs 35-37);  that  he  had  failed  to
    satisfactorily explain why he had yet again returned to  Sri  Lanka  in
    December 2014 and had stated he had  done  so  with  the  intention  of
    settling down permanently and starting a business  (paragraphs  42-43);
    that he did not satisfactorily explain why the CID who arrested him  in
    December 2014 would not have taken his passport  to  prevent  him  from
    leaving the country (paragraph 46) or how he had been able to leave the
    country  without  problems  (paragraph  51);  that  he  had  also   not
    satisfactorily explained why he had travelled in and out of  Sri  Lanka
    in December 2015 (paragraph 51); and  that  the  appellant's  delay  in
    claiming asylum was damaging to his credibility (paragraphs 62-64).

7.   Turning to the judge's treatment of the attorney  evidence,  I  see  no
    error in her assessment that it was  not  "independent"  evidence.   Of
    course, it was to be regarded as  independent  evidence  in  the  trite
    sense that it was not from the appellant; but  the  judge  was  clearly
    aware from the documentary evidence (especially the affidavit from  the
    appellant's father) that Mr Seneviratne was a  family  lawyer  who  was
    said to have been instructed by him to make enquiries about why his son
    was experiencing problems with the CID.  Given that the attorney was  a
    family lawyer and that no explanation had been given for why the father
    had not asked this attorney to make enquiries nearly two years  earlier
    (as soon as the police had visited the father's home in  August  2014),
    it was open to the judge to regard the motivation for the production of
    this evidence as being to remedy a lacuna in the  appellant's  evidence
    and to attach adverse weight to that fact.

8.   Miss Wass sought to argue  that  the  judge's  statement  in  the  last
    sentence of paragraph 57 stated that she had made up her mind that  the
    appellant was not credible before assessing the attorney's evidence.  I
    cannot agree with  that  submission.   At  paragraph  57  in  the  last
    sentence the judge stated "[W]hen the rest of the Appellant's  evidence
    is so lacking in credibility, I am not prepared to accept the  lawyer's
    evidence as reliable evidence (Tanveer Ahmed)".  She clearly  meant  to
    convey here that she was applying the holistic approach to  documentary
    evidence enjoined by  the  Tribunal  in  Tanveer  Ahmed,  it  was  very
    relevant in this case  that  the  rest  of  the  evidence  had  serious
    shortcomings.  That is the  logical  consequence  of  a  Tanveer  Ahmed
    approach to a case when, apart from the documentary evidence, virtually
    everything else points against credibility of the appellant's  account.



9.   As regards ground (ii), I fail to see that  the  judge  criticised  the
    appellant for an alleged failure to provide other documentary evidence.
     The focus was on what evidence the appellant had sought to provide. As
    regards (iii), it  was  not  incumbent  on  the  judge  to  expect  the
    respondent to prove the attorney was  lying:  the  judge  assessed  the
    attorney's evidence as unreliable and the  respondent  did  not  allege
    false representations.  As to (iv), the principles set out in  PJ  (Sri
    Lanka) support the judge's  approach  (e.g.  that  the  involvement  of
    lawyers  does  not  create  a  rebuttable  presumption  that  they  are
    reliable) and no specific failure on the part of the judge to follow PJ
    is identified.  All I need say about (v) is that Mr Pratt  conceded  it
    was dependent on  a  successful  challenge  to  the  treatment  of  the
    attorney evidence, and thus must fall away with the other grounds.

10.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and her decision to dismiss the appeal must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  [pic]                               Date: 30 March 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal





