
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08093/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 December 2017                            |On 15 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                    [M T]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Rahman, Counsel, instructed by Edward Alam &
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr K Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity:

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on [ ] 1973, whose
    protection claim was refused by the respondent on 21 July 2016.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Judge Cockrill.  In a decision promulgated on 1 September 2017
    the judge dismissed the appeal.  The appellant is now appealing against
    that decision.

 2. The appellant entered the UK in July 2003 unlawfully.

 3. In July 2009 he applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of
    his private and family life under Article 8 ECHR. The application was
    refused and subsequent appeal dismissed.  A further application which
    was also unsuccessful was made under Article 8 ECHR in 2012.

 4. On 12 January 2016 the appellant lodged an asylum and human rights
    claim.

 5. The appellant claims that he has been a member of the Bangladeshi
    Nationalist Party (BNP) in Bangladesh since 1995.  He claims that his
    role was to organise party meetings and welcome party leaders as well
    as to distribute leaflets and flags.

 6. He also claims that he joined the BNP in the UK between 2008 and 2010
    and that he has attended BNP meetings in the UK.  He claims that the
    Bangladeshi Government has filed a case against him due to his
    involvement with BNP activities in the UK and that he has broadcast BNP
    meetings in this country that have been relayed to Bangladesh.

 7. He claims to fear that he will be killed by Awami League leaders due to
    his BNP involvement whilst in the UK.

 8. The respondent did not accept that the appellant had been a BNP member
    in Bangladesh or that he is full and active member in the UK.
    Accordingly, the protection claim was rejected.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The judge observed that the appellant's case centres on his involvement
    in and membership of the BNP in the UK.  The judge found that the
    appellant has demonstrated his association with the BNP particularly
    through the Cambridge Group.  However, the judge did not find the
    appellant credible and gave several reasons.

      a) Firstly, he attached very considerable weight to the respondent's
         document verification report which concluded that there was no
         substance to the appellant's claim to be subject to a case against
         him in Bangladesh and no weight to the documents provided by the
         appellant to counter the verification report.  At paragraph 44 the
         judge stated:

             "The short point is that the document verification report
             concludes that there is really no substance in what the
             appellant has been saying.  Although the appellant was anxious
             to try to counter that conclusion by reference to his lawyers'
             involvement in Bangladesh and communication from the police, I
             find that that document verification report is a document to
             which I attach very considerable weight.  What it tells me,
             and I have no hesitation in stating this, is that the
             appellant was simply not wanted, in the way that is described,
             by the Bangladesh governmental authority."

   b) Secondly, the judge took into account that there were no witnesses
      provided on the appellant's behalf to give oral evidence about his
      political engagements whilst in the UK.




   c) Thirdly, the judge found the appellant's credibility to be undermined
      by his explanation of why he left Bangladesh in 2003, a time when the
      BNP was in ascendency.  The appellant claimed that the reason that he
      left Bangladesh was that he received advice from a senior member of
      the party that he should leave because the BNP would not be successful
      in the next election.  The judge stated at paragraph 46:

             "The BNP back in 2003 really would not know whether or not
             they were going to be successful in the future and it does
             seem to me that it is an extraordinary state of affairs to be
             encouraging active members of your own party to be leaving the
             country rather than to stand by the party and to do the best
             to ensure continuance of the BNP in power."

Grounds of Appeal

10. The first ground of appeal argues that the judge's assessment of the
    respondent's verification report was irrational and/or lacking in
    sufficient reasoning.  The ground submits that the judge failed to give
    reasons why he did not rely on the letters received from the
    appellant's lawyer and the police officer in charge of the station. It
    was also submitted that the judge failed to explain why he placed very
    considerable weight on the verification report and that the judge
    failed to take into account the fundamental flaws in the report.  These
    flaws are said to be that the police officer is not named and that it
    is not credible that a British High Commission official could walk into
    a police station and demand to see confidential documents concerning
    criminal charges or have sight of information concerning complaints
    about other crimes.

11. The second ground of appeal concerns the appellant's sur place
    activities.  It is argued that the judge failed to assess the risk the
    appellant would face and has ignored the objective evidence which shows
    that activities outside of Bangladesh are monitored by the authorities.



Consideration

12. In order to support his claim to be a risk on return to Bangladesh, the
    appellant submitted a First Information Report (FIR), which was
    numbered 62/14, from the district of Sylhet, stating that he have been
    charged with the offence of "assisting and provoking [sic] in antistate
    activities and creating anarchy in the country in conspiracy of
    occupying power illegally being gather [sic] illegally..."

13. The respondent obtained and submitted a Verification Report, dated 28
    May 2017, which contained a statement from an Officer of the British
    High Commission (BHC) in Dhaka stating that on 16 May 2017 he visited
    an officer of Osmani Nagar Police Station, Sylhet, introduced himself
    as an official from the British High Commission, and asked if he could
    verify the FIR and Charge Sheet relevant to the appellant. The
    statement of the BHC officer says that the officer in the police
    station physically located the register and manually searched the
    records, before advising him that the FIR and Charge Sheet for the
    appellant did not exist. The BHC officer also states that he requested
    to look at the register himself, which he was permitted to do. He found
    that none of the names and dates in the documents submitted by the
    appellant matched the details contained in the register.

14. The appellant submitted a letter from his lawyer in Sylhet, dated 31
    July 2017, in which the lawyer stated that he conducted the case for
    the appellant in 2014. The letter expresses disbelief that the relevant
    documentation would not be at the police station.  The appellant also
    submitted a letter from the officer in charge of the police station
    where the verification report was obtained, stating that on 16 May 2017
    he was present at the police station and did not know that an
    investigating officer from the BHC came to the station. He also
    confirmed that the relevant FIR is in existence.

15. The judge had before him contradictory evidence about whether the
    appellant had, as he claimed, been charged with a crime in Bangladesh
    whilst he was living in the UK. On the one hand, there were the
    documents provided by the appellant (the FIR, letter from a lawyer and
    letter from a police officer) all of which pointed to there having been
    a case against him. On the other hand, there was a verification report
    obtained by the BHC which stated unambiguously that the names and dates
    submitted in the appellant's documents did not match that which was
    held at the police station.

16. Whilst it was a matter for the judge to decide upon the weight to give
    to the documents, it is difficult to see how any judge would not place
    substantially higher weight on the BHC verification report than on
    documents obtained by the appellant. It is challenging for a judge to
    assess whether a document purporting to be an FIR or a letter from a
    lawyer or police officer in Bangladesh is genuine. In contrast, absent
    evidence to suggest otherwise, it is clearly reasonable to assume that
    an official report provided by the BHC via the Home Office is genuine.
    The judge was entitled to give substantial weight to the BHC report and
    in doing so no error of law was made.

17. Mr Rahman argued that the judge did not give adequate reasons why the
    BHC report was believed over the material adduced by the appellant.
    Read as a whole, the judge's reasons are clear: the BHC report is
    accepted because it is from a UK governmental body carrying out an
    official function.

18. Mr Rahman also maintained that the verification report is so flawed
    that it was irrational for the judge to rely on it as what the report
    describes as occurring "simply could not happen".  The implication of
    Mr Rahman's argument is that the official from the BHC was dishonest -
    as if what the BHC official describes as occurring "could not happen"
    then he must be lying when he says that it did occur. I reject this
    argument. The BHC official describes visiting a police station and
    being provided with the FIR register so that he could ascertain for
    himself whether the appellant's case was recorded. It is not
    inconceivable that this occurred and the fact that the BHC officer
    describes it as occurring, is a strong indication that it happened.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that it was not irrational for the judge to
    rely on the BHC official's report.

19. The judge found that the appellant's sur place activities would not
    place him at risk on return.    The grounds argue that the judge erred
    by reaching this conclusion without considering the objective evidence
    which shows that dissidents from Bangladesh are watched and subject to
    surveillance.

20. The difficulty with this argument is that the judge found the appellant
    to not be a "dissident" from Bangladesh. The objective evidence about
    Bangladesh indicates that there is surveillance of BNP activities
    outside Bangladesh. However, it does not show (applying the lower
    standard of proof) that someone fitting the appellant's profile, as
    found by the judge (that is, someone who has never been of interest to
    or attracted the attention of the authorities who has got involved with
    the BNP in the UK to try and bolster an asylum claim), would be at risk
    on return to Bangladesh.



Decision


  21. The appeal is dismissed.


  22. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal stands.
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  17 December 2017     |

