
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08130/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th January 2020                 |On 21st January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     hz
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Fazli, pupil barrister at Sohaib Fatimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Courtney promulgated on 3 October 2019 in which the Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim  dated
    2 August 2019 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 26 July  1999,  who
    first arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 June 2013 and claimed  asylum
    that day.  His asylum claim was refused but he  was  granted  leave  to
    remain as an unaccompanied asylum seeking child to  15  December  2016.
    The Appellant appealed the refusal  of  his  asylum  claim,  which  was
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on 4 November 2013, in which First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Afako concluded that the Appellant's claim was  not
    credible and he was not at risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan  from  the
    Taliban, his family, or as an unaccompanied child.

 3. The Appellant made a further application  for  leave  to  remain  on  5
    January 2017, which was refused  on  2  October  2017.   He  then  made
    further submissions on asylum and human rights  grounds  on  8  January
    2019, primarily on the basis that he feared persecution  on  return  to
    Afghanistan by forcible recruitment to the Taliban  and  on  the  basis
    that he had become westernised and thus had  abandoned  the  values  of
    Islam, contrary to Taliban ideology.

 4. The Respondent accepted that the further submissions met the  threshold
    for a fresh claim under paragraph 353 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  but
    refused the application on the basis that the Appellant not be at  risk
    on return to Afghanistan,  having  previously  been  found  to  be  not
    credible and the background country information did not  in  any  event
    support his claim.  Further, the Appellant could internally relocate to
    Kabul if necessary.  The Appellant did not claim  to  have  any  family
    life established in the United Kingdom and in relation to private life,
    the Respondent did not accept as he met the requirements for a grant of
    leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules because
    there were no  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in
    Afghanistan.  The Respondent did  not  consider  that  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain and the
    Appellant did not meet the high threshold  for  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain under Articles 3 and/or 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights on medical grounds.

 5. Judge Courtney dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  3
    October 2019 on all grounds.  The decision referred to the findings  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Afako in 2013 and recorded the submission  on
    behalf of the Appellant accepting that there was no fresh  evidence  to
    displace those earlier findings about risk on  return.   It  was  found
    that the Appellant could safely return to his  home  area  with  family
    support, with no reason to suspect that the Appellant was not or  could
    not be in contact with his family and that he would be returning as  an
    adult who speaks Pashto.

 6. As to the risk of forced recruitment by  the  Taliban,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal concluded that this was no more than a  mere  possibility  for
    the Appellant on the same basis as any  member  of  the  population  in
    Afghanistan and  there  were  no  particular  factors  identifying  any
    specific vulnerability to forced recruitment.  There  was  no  risk  on
    return because of westernisation.  The First-tier Tribunal referred  to
    the very limited medical evidence, which did not contain any  diagnosis
    or urgency for investigation of the Appellant's symptoms and noted that
    healthcare was available in Afghanistan.  The Appellant did  not  claim
    to be incapable of working, nor was there any credible evidence that he
    would be unable to contact and live with his family on return.  In  all
    of the circumstances it was not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration into Afghanistan
    and no compelling circumstances either.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on three grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to consider the Appellant's claim  to  be  at  risk  on
    return to Afghanistan as an atheist, considering his lack of continuing
    adherence to Islam only under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  Secondly, that there  were  inadequate  reasons  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision as to the Appellant's  medical  problems
    and the findings made contrary to the medical evidence.  These  adverse
    findings  infecting  the  assessment  of  whether   there   were   very
    significant obstacles to return for the purposes of paragraph  276  ADE
    of the Immigration Rules.  Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal  fails
    to make any findings as to whether the Appellant's family members  were
    in the Taliban, relevant to the  risk  of  forced  recruitment  to  the
    Taliban on return.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the First-tier Tribunal should have considered the Appellant's claim to
    be an atheist; that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  give  sufficient
    weight to the medical  evidence  in  the  context  of  the  Appellant's
    ability to re-establish private life in Kabul; and it was arguable that
    a finding should be made as to whether the Appellant's family  included
    Taliban members.

Findings and reasons

 9. At the oral hearing, it became apparent that the grounds of appeal were
    largely  based  on  matters  considered  by   the   Appellant's   legal
    representatives only  upon  reading  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and were relied upon in the absence of  any  consideration  of
    the Appellant's claim as put to the First-tier Tribunal or evidence  in
    support of it.  Prior to the oral hearing, Mr Fazli had not  had  sight
    of the Appellant's skeleton argument for his appeal before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the Appellant being previously represented by  different
    solicitors and Counsel at the hearing) and it is unclear as to  whether
    there had been any detailed consideration of the Appellant's bundle  of
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal either.

10. For the reasons given below, all three grounds of  appeal  were  wholly
    unarguable because in essence they relied upon a claimed failure by the
    First-tier Tribunal to consider, and/or make findings on matters  which
    were not expressly in evidence or relied upon by the  Appellant  before
    it.  With the exception of Robinson obvious points (of which there  are
    none in the present appeal), a First-tier Tribunal cannot be criticised
    for determining matters not relied upon before it and it is not the job
    of a First-tier Tribunal  judge  to  rummage  around  the  evidence  to
    discern the Appellant's claim on wider  grounds  than  those  expressly
    relied upon, in particular in circumstances  where  the  Appellant  was
    legally represented throughout.  There is no even arguable error of law
    on this basis, the grounds essentially seek to reargue the  Appellant's
    appeal on a different basis to that which was pursued previously.

 1. The first ground of appeal was that the First-tier  Tribunal  fails  to
    consider whether the Appellant was at risk on return to Afghanistan  as
    an atheist.  However, at its highest, there was a  statement  from  the
    Appellant with his further submissions dated 9 February 2017 that he no
    longer saw himself as a Muslim.   This  was  not  relied  upon  in  the
    covering letter with the further submissions, which  focused  primarily
    on a claimed based on Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive
    based on country conditions in Afghanistan  and  that  the  Appellant's
    medical condition made him more vulnerable to such harm.

 2. A skeleton argument was prepared for the  First-tier  tribunal  hearing
    which set out in paragraphs 10 to 14 the Appellant's claim.   Paragraph
    11 states that the Appellant's fear on return  to  Afghanistan  was  of
    forcible recruitment by the Taliban and/or that he would be subject  to
    serious harm at  the  hands  of  the  Taliban  because  he  had  become
    westernised and had thus abandoned the practices and  values  of  Islam
    and his native country.  The reason for this is identified in paragraph
    12 was imputed political  opinion  or  in  the  alternative,  that  the
    Appellant is a member of a particular social group, a young man who has
    reached fighting age.  There is no reference at all  to  the  Appellant
    fearing persecution on return as an atheist on the basis  of  religion.
    The  Respondent's  decision  letter  does  not  cover  that  point  and
    therefore it is further noteworthy that there  was  no  application  on
    behalf of the Appellant to rely on  this  is  a  new  matter,  nor  any
    permission for the same given by  the  Respondent  in  accordance  with
    section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. Although Mr Fazli accepted orally that the Appellant did not  expressly
    rely on fear on return to Afghanistan on the basis of atheism,  it  was
    suggested that from the single sentence in his written statement  which
    accompanied his  further  submissions  that  he  no  longer  considered
    himself to be Muslim, this was a Robinson obvious point that the First-
    tier Tribunal should have considered applying anxious  scrutiny  to  an
    asylum claim.  However, the Appellant was legally represented,  and  at
    no point before the Respondent or the First-tier Tribunal did he  claim
    to be at risk on return to Afghanistan as  an  atheist,  there  was  no
    supporting background evidence of risk on this basis relied upon and it
    cannot rationally be said on any view that in  the  circumstances  this
    was a Robinson obvious point that the First-tier Tribunal  should  have
    dealt with.  There is no arguable error of law in the first  ground  of
    challenge, to the  contrary,  it  is  unarguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law  by  not  considering  a  ground  of  asylum  not
    expressly relied upon or evidenced before it.

 4. The second ground of appeal focused on the conclusions reached  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the Appellant's medical condition,  specifically
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in paragraph 28 by finding it
    "highly surprising" that the Appellant would  have  attended  a  boxing
    club if he had genuinely serious health concerns of the nature claimed.
     This issue is  said  to  be  relevant  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    consideration of whether the Appellant can internally relocate to Kabul
    and about whether he would face significant obstacles to  reintegration
    in Afghanistan.

 5. In paragraphs 25 to 27 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  the
    evidence in relation to the Appellant's medical issues is  set  out  in
    some detail, including Counsel's submissions on behalf of the Appellant
    accepting that there was "minimal medical  evidence"  and  noting  that
    there was no diagnosis or prognosis about  the  Appellant's  condition.
    On that occasion, Counsel also  submitted  that  it  was  difficult  to
    evaluate the  overall  significance  of  the  Appellant's  episodes  of
    fainting and merely submitted that the Appellant had  not  been  cured.
    In paragraph 30 of the decision,  the  Appellant's  written  statement,
    referring to it being unreasonable for him to be expected  to  live  on
    his own without support in Kabul with a real risk that  he  could  pass
    out at any time was recorded.  However, there was a significant lack of
    detail in relation to the Appellant's claimed  medical  condition.   It
    was accepted that he was suffering from headaches  and  blackouts,  but
    the only independent medical evidence confirmed that these matters were
    under investigation.  There was no evidence  from  the  Appellant,  nor
    those treating  him  as  to  how  often  such  episodes  occurred,  the
    immediate effects of them,  or  the  general  impact  of  them  on  the
    Appellant's daily life, ability to work and integrate.

 6. In these circumstances, there was simply nothing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal that could have been considered in any more detail to lead  to
    a positive finding that  the  Appellant's  ability  to  reintegrate  or
    relocate to Kabul would  be  impaired  or  adversely  affected  by  his
    health.  The comment in paragraph 28 about boxing is immaterial to  the
    overall conclusion, as taking the Appellant's  claim  at  its  highest,
    there was simply no evidence beyond that which was considered expressly
    in the decision which could have even arguably altered the  outcome  of
    the appeal.

 7. At the oral hearing before me, Mr Fazli suggested either that the First-
    tier Tribunal should have adjourned the hearing of its  own  motion  to
    seek further medical evidence from the Appellant about  his  condition,
    and/or should have questioned him directly on its impact on  his  daily
    living and private life.  Those submissions are wholly untenable  where
    the burden is on the Appellant to establish his  claim  and  where  the
    Appellant was legally represented throughout.  The conclusions  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal were rational, adequately reasoned and open  to  it
    on the limited evidence available.  For these reasons there is also  no
    error of law on the second ground of appeal.

 8. The third and final ground of appeal was that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to make an express finding as to whether the Appellant's  family
    were Taliban members, relevant to the risk of forced recruitment to the
    Taliban on return.  This ground of appeal is wholly unarguable for  two
    reasons.  First, in 2013, Judge Afako found that the Appellant was  not
    at risk on return from the Taliban his family and the Appellant's claim
    that his father was murdered by other members of the  family  who  were
    Taliban members was not found to be credible.   Before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal more recently, Counsel for the Appellant  expressly  confirmed
    that there was no fresh evidence relied  upon  which  could  alter  the
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal in 2013 and in accordance with
    the principles in Devaseelan, those findings are the starting point for
    the latest Tribunal.  In circumstances where there are  clear  findings
    that the Appellant is not at risk on return from the Taliban or  family
    members contained in the earlier decision, there is no error of law  in
    the later Tribunal not expressly remaking findings on the same issues.

 9. Secondly, this is yet a further example of a ground of  appeal  bearing
    no relation to the case actually put to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Appellant's skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal deals with
    forced recruitment by the Taliban in paragraph 19 by reference only  to
    general background country information.  There is no  express  reliance
    or suggestion of any particular vulnerabilities  of  the  Appellant  in
    this regard and no further reference here to the Appellant  maintaining
    his claim that members of his family were part of the Taliban and  that
    he would be of any  increased  risk  of  forced  recruitment  for  that
    reason.  It is not sufficient, as suggested by Mr Fazli,  that  in  the
    Appellant's written statement, he  maintained  his  initial  claim  for
    asylum including his claimed family circumstances which have  not  been
    accepted by the Respondent nor the First-tier Tribunal in 2013  and  on
    which there is no further evidence.

10. In these circumstances, no further or express findings were required of
    the First-tier Tribunal in relation to whether or not  members  of  the
    Appellant's family were in the Taliban.  This was  simply  not  a  live
    issue before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to forced recruitment,
    risk on return or otherwise.  There is therefore no error of law in the
    failure to make any such express findings.

11. For the reasons set out above, this is an appeal which should not  have
    been pursued by the Appellant  on  any  of  the  grounds  put  forward.
    Although I accept that permission to appeal was granted on all grounds,
    this was on the basis of grounds of appeal which were less  than  frank
    as to the way that the Appellant's claim had been put before the First-
    tier Tribunal and as to the full findings of the First-tier Tribunal in
    2013, which was  accepted  there  was  no  fresh  evidence  to  justify
    departure from.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     16th January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

