
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08490/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 November 2018                        |On 14 November 2018               |
|                                          |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           HABIB BISSENtO BAZABOKO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not present or represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I will refer to the appellant as the respondent and the  respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Habib  Bissento  Bazaboko,  was  born  on  9
    December 1974 and is a citizen of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    (DRC).  The appellant claimed to have entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    1992 but there was no evidence before the Tribunal that he had  arrived
    in that year.  The appellant  had  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 24 August 1999 having claimed asylum as a  dependant  of  his
    sister (Ms  Boko  Baza).   On  11  November  2002,  the  appellant  was
    convicted at Wood Green Crown Court of two counts of  wounding  and  he
    was sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment.  On appeal,  his  sentence  was
    varied to 4.5 years'  imprisonment.   The  appellant  claimed  that  he
    became a British citizen in 1997 but there was no evidence  at  all  to
    show that this was the case.  On 10 May 2004, the appellant was  served
    with a decision to make a deportation order.   The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision and it appears that  the  appeal  lapsed.   On  1
    April 2005, the appellant was released from prison.  On 12 August  2010
    at Stratford Magistrates' Court the appellant was convicted  of  common
    assault, two counts of destroying or damaging property, two  counts  of
    failing  to  surrender  to  custody  at  an  appointed  time  and  also
    disorderly behaviour.  He was sentenced to 12 weeks' imprisonment.   In
    the light of his latter convictions, a decision was made to deport  the
    appellant on the basis that his  presence  was  not  conducive  to  the
    public good.

 2. There followed a series of communications between the appellant and the
    Secretary of State, the details of which are set out in the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision [6-10].  Ultimately, by a  decision  dated  20  March
    2014, the  Secretary  of  State  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  for
    international protection.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Notice of appeal was not lodged until 29 August  2017.   The
    First-tier Tribunal noted that "the appeal was  received  out  of  time
    however further to  consideration  of  the  reasons  for  this  it  was
    accepted there were good reasons for the late lodging of  the  appeal".
    The delay seems to have been very serious indeed but the "good reasons"
    referred to by the judge are not particularised.   In  any  event,  the
    appeal came before Judge Raikes on 26 June  2018  in  Manchester.   The
    judge heard evidence from the appellant in English and  also  from  the
    appellant's sister (Ms Baza) in  Lingala  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter.

 3. The judge rejected the appellant's appeal on asylum and Article 3  ECHR
    grounds and upheld the decision under Section 72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  However, he  allowed  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.  It is against that decision that the Secretary
    of State now appeals, with permission.

 4. The initial hearing was listed before me at  Manchester  Civil  Justice
    Centre on 6 November 2018.  Mr McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer, appeared for the Secretary of State.  The  appellant  did  not
    appear, nor was he represented.  The  court  file  indicates  that  the
    appellant was served "by hand" on 5 October 2018.  There was nothing on
    the  file  to  indicate  that  the  appellant  has   provided   any/any
    satisfactory  reason  for  his  failure  to  attend  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In the circumstances, I proceeded with the  hearing  in  the
    appellant's absence.

 5. I find that the judge's analysis is confused.   The  judge  appears  to
    have applied a number of  different  tests  in  respect  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules and also in respect of Section 117 of  the  2002  Act
    and as regards compelling circumstances.  Ultimately, he concluded that
    the appellant would suffer a disproportionate breach to his family life
    rights if he were to be deported.  The appellant's family life  appears
    to rest solely upon his relationship with his sister.   Otherwise,  the
    judge noted [30] that the  appellant  represents  a  moderate  risk  of
    violent reoffending.  The judge did not  have  the  judge's  sentencing
    remarks [29] though he  does  appear  to  have  had  regard  to  expert
    psychological  evidence.   At  [33]  the  judge  considered  that   the
    appellant did "constitute a danger to the community".  In the light  of
    those findings, he upheld the Section 72 decision of the  Secretary  of
    State.

 6. Turning to the appellant's relationship  with  his  sister,  the  judge
    wrote at [65]:

         Whilst I do not accept the appellant cannot speak  any  Lingala  at
         all his sister gave her evidence in the language and indicates  she
         spoke poor English, I accept that he  would  have  difficulties  in
         respect of this and accept that his sister  is  a  British  citizen
         upon whom the appellant is wholly reliant  as  his  family  member.
         Whilst he has another sister and brother, I accept that it  is  his
         sister, who gave evidence today and albeit an adult, who forms  the
         whole basis of his private and family life and has done so for many
         years.

 7. That paragraph represents,  in  my  opinion,  a  series  of  assertions
    unsupported by reference to any of the evidence.   At  [64]  the  judge
    wrote:

         This [the judge's acceptance that the appellant has a  relationship
         with his sister which can attract the protection of Article 8 ECHR]
         is because I am satisfied having heard evidence from both  him  and
         his sister today that whilst he does not live with her in a  family
         now and again despite the fact she is an adult relative  he  has  a
         close and interdependent relationship with her which began  in  the
         UK when he was a young child.  I note that having arrived in the UK
         in either 1991 1992 when he states he was around 10 years, although
         the respondent given his date of birth  states  he  was  around  11
         years old, that was nearly 26 years ago.  Whilst he was added as  a
         dependant on his sister's asylum claim in 1992 in the  UK  and  she
         was granted leave to remain outside  the  Rules  under  exceptional
         grounds in what appears to be as a result  of  the  time  taken  to
         consider her case, the fact remains that when he entered the UK  as
         a child he was wholly reliant on her and her circumstances.  I note
         he was then granted indefinite leave to remain  in  the  UK  on  24
         August 1999 nearly twenty years  ago.   I  am  therefore  satisfied
         particularly   when   taking   into   account    very    compelling
         circumstances, that the appellant's length of stay  in  the  UK  is
         significant and indeed has been the majority of his life.

 8. The reasoning is confused.  Earlier in  the  decision,  the  judge  has
    recorded the fact that the appellant had not produced any  evidence  to
    show  when  he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  in  this
    paragraph, he appears to accept the appellant's claim to  have  entered
    the country in 1991/1992.  Secondly, whilst the judge does not  suggest
    that the appellant is able to satisfy the Rules as to  long  residence,
    he appears to be applying here a "near miss"  principle  on  the  basis
    that the appellant has been in the United Kingdom for nearly 20  years.
    That observation, in turn, is not supported by any evidence,  nor  does
    the Secretary of State accept that the appellant has been  resident  in
    the United Kingdom for as  long  as  he  claims.   Further,  the  judge
    asserts  that  the  appellant   has   a   "close   and   interdependent
    relationship" with his sister but fails completely to particularise the
    nature of that relationship and why, given that it is  between  adults,
    it should attract the protection of Article 8 ECHR (see Kugathas [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31).  The judge leaves begging the question of the appellant's
    relationship with his other sister and brother and does not explain why
    the relationship with Ms Baza differs from his relationship with  those
    other siblings.  The judge appears  to  have  concluded  that  (i)  the
    appellant has been in the United Kingdom for a long time, and (ii) must
    be close to his adult sister because they came to the United Kingdom as
    children and the  appellant  was  a  dependant  on  her  asylum  claim.
    Frankly, I find that  that  is  inadequate  reasoning  to  support  the
    judge's  decision.   There  has  been  no  proper  examination  of  any
    psychological  problems  which  the  appellant  may  have   and,   very
    significantly, as Mr McVeety  pointed  out,  Ms  Baza  (upon  whom  the
    appellant was found by the judge to be wholly dependent) does not  even
    live in the same house as the appellant.  No findings  have  been  made
    regarding the frequency of contact between the appellant and Ms Baza.

 9. The judge does not provide any reasons to address these rather  obvious
    concerns but offers only a number of further assertions.  At  [69]  the
    judge asserts that "the effect  of  [deportation]  on  the  appellant's
    sister and her family would be significant and  ...  unduly  harsh  and
    give rise to very compelling circumstances".  At [81] it is asserted by
    the judge that "[the appellant] has formed a strong family life  beyond
    normal emotional ties with another adult an individual  who  he  relied
    upon in the absence of his parents at a young age and  a  private  life
    once granted ILR in 1999 (sic)".  Here, the judge appears to have found
    that, in 2018, there existed exceptional  emotional  ties  between  the
    appellant and his sister simply because, in the past, the appellant, as
    a child, may have relied upon Ms Baza in the absence  of  his  parents.
    The fact that Ms Baza and the appellant  may  have  had  a  very  close
    relationship as children does not mean that they must enjoy  a  similar
    relationship now that they are both adults.

10. I am not satisfied that the reasoning of the judge may stand.   In  the
    circumstances, I set aside the decision.  I have re-made the  decision.
    First, I note that the burden rested upon the appellant to  prove  that
    he had been living in the United Kingdom continuously  for  the  period
    which he claims.  Having  considered  very  carefully  the  documentary
    evidence on the file, and also the record of the  oral  evidence  which
    was before the First-tier Tribunal judge, I am not  satisfied  that  he
    has discharged that burden.  Secondly, even if I were  to  accept  that
    the appellant entered the United Kingdom in 1991 or 1992,  he  has  not
    been here long enough to satisfy the requirements of  HC  395.   Unlike
    Judge Raikes, I am unable to find any evidence before me to  show  that
    the appellant is "wholly reliant" upon Ms  Baza.   He  is  plainly  not
    reliant upon her for his daily requirements at least  in  part  because
    they do not live in the same household.  Whilst I  am  aware  that  the
    appellant and Ms Baza may have been in the United Kingdom together when
    children, I am now concerned  with  identifying  the  nature  of  their
    relationship in 2018.  I have very little evidence at all  which  would
    indicate that the relationship is so strong that it exceeds the  normal
    emotional ties one would expect to exist between adult siblings.

11. I do not disturb the judge's findings in respect of Section 72  and  on
    asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.  I set aside the judge's findings in
    respect of Article 8.  I find that the evidence does not show,  as  the
    appellant appears to claim in the papers, that his relationship with Ms
    Baza is so strong that his removal would breach Article 8 ECHR.  In the
    circumstances, his Article 8 ECHR appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  10
    July 2018 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.   I
    have re-made the  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and
    Article 3 ECHR grounds  is  dismissed.   The  appeal  is  dismissed  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 8 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 8 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane










