
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08931/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 July 2019                               |On 18 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                              ARAM MAHMUD AHMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born on 11 November 1991 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    Iraq. He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  5  September  2014  claimed
    international  protection.  By  a  decision  dated  3  July  2018,  the
    Secretary of State refused his application. The appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal which, in the decision promulgated on 15  April
    2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge decided that he need not follow the existing country guidance
    for Iraq (see AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG  UKUT  00212  (IAC)).  He  found,  on  the
    particular facts,  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  a
    replacement CSID either before he left the United Kingdom or  with  the
    assistance of others in Iraq. The possession of a CSID would enable the
    appellant to exercise internal flight and travel from  Baghdad  to  the
    IKR. Both parties accept that the appellant is from Kirkuk and that  he
    cannot be expected to reside there. The grounds of appeal challenge the
    judge's analysis. Mr Hussain, who appeared for the appellant before the
    Upper Tribunal, submitted that there was no reliable evidence  to  show
    that the appellant could safely reach the IKR and that  the  judge  had
    indulged in speculation as to the appellant's  ability  to  re-document
    himself. Mr Mills, who appeared for the Secretary of  State,  submitted
    that the existing country guidance did not set out an  exhaustive  list
    of means by which an individual might obtain a new or replacement CSID.
    Each case had been determined according to its own specific facts.  The
    judge had reached  findings  of  fact  which,  on  the  evidence,  were
    available to him.

 3. The judge found that  the  appellant  had  fought  against  ISIS  as  a
    Peshmerga; that he had worked for the police force in Iraq and would be
    able to obtain the assistance of former colleagues  and/or  his  former
    employer in obtaining fresh documentation; he would  also  be  able  to
    obtain assistance from a Captain Daniel for whom  he  had  acted  as  a
    bodyguard; that he would also be  able  to  obtain  assistance  from  a
    Lieutenant Hayder, with whom he had fought with the Peshmerga; that the
    appellant had not made any 'significant  efforts'  to  locate  his  own
    family using the assistance  of  the  Red  Cross;  that  the  appellant
    previously worked as a carpenter and is an able-bodied  young  man  who
    would be able to use his skills,  together  with  support  from  former
    Peshmerga  colleagues,  to  re-establish  himself  in  employment   and
    accommodation in the IKR. In  short,  he  found  that  the  appellant's
    connections with institutions and individuals in Iraq  were  such  that
    the judge was able to distinguish his case from that of an undocumented
    Kurd who, on arrival at Baghdad, could not call upon others for help.

 4. I agree with Mr Mills that the country guidance cases do  not  seek  to
    describe the only means by which an  individual  who  has  no  identity
    documents may obtain a CSID. It follows that each case must be  decided
    according to its own facts and I find that that  is  exactly  what  the
    judge has done in this case. It was, in my opinion, open to  the  judge
    to find that, on the  particular  facts  before  him,  this  appellant,
    notwithstanding that he had no CSID  or  passport,  would  be  able  to
    obtain such documents as would be necessary to  enable  him  to  travel
    without delay from Baghdad to the IKR. By doing so,  he  would  not  be
    exposed to a real risk of harm in Baghdad. I consider that this  is  an
    instance where the Upper Tribunal should  hesitate  before  interfering
    with reasoned findings made by a judge who has  properly  analysed  the
    relevant evidence. In short, I find that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    reach the findings which he did in respect of internal flight and  that
    he has not erred in law for the reasons  advanced  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal or at all. In consequence, the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 2 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane








































