

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/08526/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st September 2017                 |On 17th October 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                  MrS B.S.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

 Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Boyle of Halliday
For the Respondent:  Mr Diwnycz,Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity. Her claim for
   protection was refused by the respondent and her appeal before First tier
   Tribunal Judge Head Rapson was unsuccessful.

2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the judge
   made a material error in finding the appellant could return to Kirkuk.
   The country guidance decision of AA(Article 15 (c) Rv 1) Iraq
   CG[2015]UKUT 544 held that Kirkuk is a contested area. Furthermore, the
   appellant in fact was not from there but was from the town of Makhmur.A
   further ground of argument was that the judge did not apply the country
   guidance in relation to the route to the IKR and her ability to support
   herself.

3. At hearing Mr Boyle confirmed he was not seeking to challenge the
   judge's rejection of the underlying claim. However, he submitted the
   judge erred at para 60 in suggesting the appellant could return to
   Kirkuk, incorrectly described as her homeland and from there relocate to
   Erbil or Sulymaniyah.She was from Makhmur which is not in the IKR and is
   a contested area. There is a map showing it  northwest of Kirkuk and
   outside the recognised autonomous region and in the Minewa Province.
   Consequently, she could not be returned there. Although she is not from
   Kirkuk it to is a contested area in any event. As she is not from the IKR
   the judge did not consider how she could get there or establish herself.

4. Mr Diwnycz relied on the rule 24 response which refers to changes in the
   country since AA(Article 15 (c) Rv 1) Iraq CG[2015]UKUT 544 and the gains
   made by Kurdish forces.

5. The respondent had accepted she could not return to Makhmue.The
   respondent took the view she could go to the Erbil in the IKR and her
   claimed lack of documentation could be overcome. At para 60 the judge
   errs in stating she could go to Kirkuk and then from there go to Erbil.
   As someone who was not from the IKR the route back would be via
   Baghadad.She could only go directly to the IKR is she was from there. The
   judge therefore did not consider these matters which would require
   consideration of her ability to manage in Baghdad, the question of a CSID
   and the ability to establish herself in the IKR.

6. My conclusion is that the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Head
   -Rapson materially errs in law on the issue of return.Consequently, this
   aspect will have to be remade.

Decision

   The decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Head- Rapson is set aside and
   the appeal is to be heard de novo in respect of the question of return
   only. The judge's  rejection of the underlying claim is preserved.





   Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Farrelly
   13th October 2017








