
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: PA/08755/2019     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 May 2021                   |On 14 June 2021                  |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Doubt Phiri
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Senior Presenting Officer
For  the  Respondent:      Ms   Butler,   Solicitor,   Fountain   Solicitors
(Manchester)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals, with permission
    granted by a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT"),  against  FtT
    Judge Cox's decision to allow Mr Phiri's appeal against the refusal  of
    his human rights claim.

 2. To avoid confusion, I will refer to the parties as they were before the
    FtT: Mr Phiri as the appellant and the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department as the respondent.

 Background

 3. The appellant is a Zimbabwean national who was born on 4 January  1983.
    He first came to the attention of the UK authorities when  he  attended
    the Asylum Screening Unit in Liverpool  on  12  March  2009.   He  left
    before completing a screening interview but after  having  been  served
    with a notice to an illegal entrant.

 4. The appellant was treated as an absconder  and  his  asylum  claim  was
    deemed to be withdrawn.  A few months later, on 25  November  2009,  he
    claimed asylum at the Asylum Screening Unit in  Croydon.   He  accepted
    that he had previously claimed asylum.  He underwent interviews and  it
    was decided that his claim should be treated as  a  fresh  claim  under
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

 5. That claim was refused on 4 January 2010, however,  and  the  appellant
    lodged an appeal.  The appeal was dismissed by FtT  Judge  Levin  on  6
    April 2010 and the appellant was refused permission to  appeal  against
    his decision.  He became appeal rights exhausted on 5 July 2010.

 6. The appellant made further applications to the respondent  and  he  was
    eventually granted leave to remain on the basis of his family  life  in
    the UK until 3 December 2015.  His application to extend that leave was
    rejected over a fees issue on 3 December 2015.

 7. On 4 December 2015, the appellant was convicted by a jury at  Liverpool
    Crown Court of two sexual offences.  The first was sexual assault on  a
    female by penetration.  The second was rape of a female aged  16  years
    or over.

 8. The offence occurred on 14 July 2014.  The appellant met a young  woman
    for a first date.  They drank alcohol and then went to a park near  her
    home to smoke cannabis together.  The appellant penetrated  the  victim
    with his fingers without her consent and then  raped  her.   Sentencing
    the appellant to a total of seven years' imprisonment, HHJ Wright noted
    that the encounter had been  painful  for  the  victim;  that  she  had
    believed herself to be pregnant as a result of it;  and  that  she  had
    been left emotionally scarred.

 9. The respondent made known to the appellant that it was her intention to
    deport him from  the  United  Kingdom.   This  caused  him  to  make  a
    protection and human rights claim on 1 July 2016.  He  stated  that  he
    had a British partner and three British children, born  in  2010,  2013
    and 2015, and that he had a strong  bond  with  his  family.   He  also
    stated that he had a daughter from a  previous  relationship,  who  had
    been born in 2007.  He made reference to  the  political  situation  in
    Zimbabwe.  He stated that he had made the UK his home and that  he  was
    appealing against  his  conviction.   A  letter  from  the  appellant's
    partner accompanied the appellant's representations. She  confirmed  in
    that letter that he was a good father and that she continued  to  visit
    him in prison.  Also attached to that letter were the children's  birth
    certificates, evidence of the public funds they received as  a  family,
    and details of the Sky television package to which they had subscribed.



10. After an exchange of further correspondence, the respondent refused the
    asylum and human rights claims on 2 September 2019, on which  date  she
    also made a deportation order against the  appellant.   She  considered
    that the appellant had committed a particularly serious crime and  that
    he represented a danger to the community of the  United  Kingdom,  such
    that s72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  applied.
    The respondent did not accept, in any event, that the appellant was  at
    risk on return to Zimbabwe.  The respondent accepted that the appellant
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner and children
    but not that it would be unduly harsh to deport  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellant appealed to the FtT, contending that he would be at  risk
    on return to Zimbabwe and that  his  removal  would  be  in  breach  of
    Article 8 ECHR.   His  appeal  was  heard  by  the  judge,  sitting  in
    Bradford, on 6 January 2021.   The  appellant  was  represented  by  Ms
    Butler, as he was before me.   The  respondent  was  represented  by  a
    Presenting Officer.  The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant
    and  submissions  from  both  representatives  before   reserving   his
    decision.

12. The judge's reserved decision is lengthy and carefully structured.   He
    found that the appellant had failed to rebut the  presumptions  in  s72
    and that  his  appeal  fell  to  be  dismissed  on  protection  grounds
    accordingly: [35]-[40].  He nevertheless found that the appellant would
    not be at risk of ill-treatment on return to Zimbabwe: [41]-[46].

13. As regards Article 8 ECHR, the judge considered the respondent to  have
    made an appropriate concession about the existence  of  a  family  life
    between the appellant, his partner and their children: [55].  The judge
    reviewed the authorities on Article 8 ECHR  and  deportation  at  [59]-
    [64].  He considered the appellant to have  committed  a  very  serious
    offence: [66].  The fact that the appellant continued to  maintain  his
    innocence and had not  addressed  his  offending  behaviour  served  to
    increase the public interest in his deportation: [67].

14. At [68]-[91], the judge explained why he considered that the effect  of
    the appellant's deportation on his children would be unduly harsh.   At
    [92], however, he considered that the effect on the appellant's partner
    would not be unduly harsh.  He then proceeded to consider whether there
    were very compelling circumstances which overcame the  public  interest
    in the appellant's deportation.  He  stated  that  he  had  found  this
    difficult and that the issues were 'finally balanced': [93].  He  noted
    again that the appellant had committed two very  serious  offences  and
    that his decision to maintain his  innocence  served  to  'enhance  the
    already elevated threshold'.  The judge then gave the following reasons
    for finding that there were very compelling circumstances:

         "[95]    Nevertheless, in my view the factors that tip  the  appeal
         in the  Appellant's  favour  are  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's
         relationship with his family (particularly his  children)  and  the
         likely impact his deportation will have on their  future  financial
         circumstances.

         [96] I appreciate that [the appellant's partner]  is  misguided  in
         her belief that the Appellant is innocent.  Nevertheless,  what  is
         striking in this appeal, is that the  Appellant's  defence  to  the
         charges was that the victim had consented to a sexual  relationship
         and yet [the appellant's partner] has continued to support him.  In
         fact, she encouraged the children to maintain a  relationship  with
         the Appellant during his imprisonment and then welcomed him back to
         the family home.  In my view, a reasonable inference to  draw  from
         these matters is that she recognised the significance of  his  role
         within the household, not only on a practical day to day basis, but
         as she noted, the importance  of  his  role  as  a  father  to  the
         children for their future development and well-being.  In  my  view
         this is telling and had been as [sic] significant  factor  weighing
         in  the  Appellant's  favour.   Since  not  only  does  it  clearly
         demonstrate the very close relationship that the Appellant has  not
         only with his children, but also his  importance  to  their  future
         development.

         [97] Further, it is highly likely that they will remain reliance on
         public funds for the foreseeable future and his partner is unlikely
         to be able to find any meaningful employment.  In my view,  she  is
         likely  to  struggle  to  find  any  employment  in   the   current
         circumstances, especially as she has been out of work  for  over  8
         years.  I appreciate that there are many single families in the UK,
         who face similar difficulties.   Nevertheless,  it  helps  tip  the
         balance in his favour.

         [98] Having carefully considered all the evidence and having regard
         to the enhanced public interest in the appellant's  removal,  I  am
         satisfied that there are very compelling  circumstances,  over  and
         above those described in exception 2.   In  this  context,  I  also
         attached  weight  to  my  finding  that  his  partner   will   face
         significant difficulties (albeit that the impact on her  personally
         would not be unduly harsh).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. The respondent sought  permission  to  appeal  in  grounds  which  span
    thirteen  paragraphs  but  raise  what  is,  in  substance,  a   single
    complaint.   The  submission  made  is  that  the  judge  gave  legally
    inadequate reasons for  concluding  that  there  were  very  compelling
    circumstances which  outweighed  the  strong  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's deportation.

16. Permission was granted by FtT Judge Adio, who  considered  it  arguable
    'that there is an error of law in the application by the judge  of  the
    relevant considerations'.

17. In a response to the grounds of appeal  under  rule  24  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Rules, Ms Butler submits that the judge gave adequate  reasons
    for his findings and that the respondent's grounds amount, in truth, to
    nothing more than a disagreement with his assessment.

18. In his submissions, Mr Avery  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    submitted that  the  judge's  decision  was  inadequately  reasoned  or
    otherwise irrational.  What was fundamentally  missing,  he  submitted,
    was anything which  could  even  begin  to  be  identified  as  a  very
    compelling  circumstance  which  outweighed  the  deportation  of  this
    particular appellant.  The test was obviously more  exacting  than  the
    test of undue harshness but the judge's analysis of whether there  were
    very compelling circumstances merely harked back  to  his  analysis  of
    undue harshness.  What was clear from  the  authorities  was  that  the
    analysis required by s117C(6) of the 2002  Act  was  a  proportionality
    consideration.  Here, however, the judge had failed  to  weigh  various
    matters against the appellant in that balancing exercise, including the
    seriousness of the appellant's offending, his lack of remorse  and  the
    fact that he had upheld the certificate under  s72  of  the  2002  Act.
    Nothing had been said by the judge  in  the  relevant  section  of  his
    decision to show that those matters had been taken into  account.   Nor
    had he identified any factors which set the  case  apart  from  one  in
    which the consequences of deportation were as expected.

19. Ms Butler submitted that the respondent's grounds  represented  nothing
    more than disagreement with the result.  The judge was plainly aware of
    the public interest in the appellant's deportation and  the  respondent
    had failed to establish either that  the  reasons  given  were  legally
    inadequate or that the outcome  was  perverse.   The  judge  had  taken
    relevant authority, including HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1176;
    [2021] 1 WLR  1327  into  account.   There  was  a  suggestion  in  the
    respondent's grounds that the conclusions  of  the  Independent  Social
    Worker were in some way 'generic' but that was plainly not  so  as  the
    report had been written about  this  particular  family.   I  asked  Ms
    Butler whether she was able to assist me in understanding how  and  why
    the judge had attached  weight  to  the  appellant's  family  being  on
    benefits.  She referred me to [21]-[22] of her skeleton argument before
    the FtT, in which it had been submitted that  the  appellant  would  be
    able to secure employment and contribute to the family  income  in  the
    event that he remained in the UK.  Whilst there was no express  finding
    that the appellant would be able to secure employment in the  UK,  that
    appeared to be the basis upon which he had proceeded.  The evidence  in
    support of that apparent conclusion was the report of the ISW  and  the
    appellant's own evidence.

20. Ms Butler submitted that the judge had considered whether the appellant
    would be able to support his children from Zimbabwe and  had  concluded
    for good and proper reason that he could not.  She also submitted  that
    the judge had been entitled to conclude that the appellant would not be
    an additional drain on public funds if he remained  in  the  UK.   That
    finding was not at odds with what had been said by the Supreme Court in
    Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58; [2019] Imm AR 452, she submitted.

21. In reply, Mr Avery submitted that it was not  easy  to  understand  the
    basis upon which the judge had reached his decision in this  case  that
    there were very compelling circumstances.  The  assessment  of  whether
    there were very compelling  circumstances  was  a  short  part  of  the
    decision and the judge had failed in that section to undertake any sort
    of balancing exercise.  Mr Avery reminded me that the challenge was  to
    the  judge's  assessment  of  whether  there   were   very   compelling
    circumstances and did not encompass a challenge to the conclusion  that
    the effect of the appellant's deportation  on  his  children  would  be
    unduly harsh.

22. I reserved my decision.

Statutory Framework

23. Sections 117B and 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 provide as follows:

    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

      1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
         interest.

      2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
         the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially
         independent, because such persons-

         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)  Little weight should be given to-

         (a)  a private life, or

         (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
         person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

    (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
             United Kingdom.

    117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
    criminals

      1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

      2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

      3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies.

      4) Exception 1 applies where-

         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,

         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

      5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

      6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.

      7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken into
         account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.



Analysis

24. The First-tier Tribunal  (IAC)  is  an  expert  Tribunal  charged  with
    administering a complex area of law in challenging  circumstances.   It
    is  probable  that  in  understanding  and  applying  the  law  in  its
    specialised field the Tribunal will have got it right.  The decision of
    the FtT is to be read as a whole.  Its reasons are not to be  subjected
    to an unduly critical analysis  on  appeal.   Its  decision  is  to  be
    respected unless it is quite clear that it misdirected itself  in  law.
    Appellate courts should not rush to find misdirections  simply  because
    they might  have  reached  a  different  conclusion  on  the  facts  or
    expressed themselves differently.

25. The importance of these dicta (of Lord Hope and Baroness Hale in SSHD v
    AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49; [2008] Imm AR 289) is underlined  in  recent
    decisions of the Court of Appeal including UT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1095 and Lowe v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ 62.  I  have  borne  what
    was said in those cases firmly in mind and have  also  reminded  myself
    that the judicial restraint  should  be  exercised  when  evaluating  a
    submission, as made by Mr Avery in this case, that the reasons given by
    the FtT are legally inadequate to justify its conclusion: R  (Jones)  v
    FtT and CICA [2013] UKSC 19; [2013] 2 AC 48, cited by  Floyd  LJ  (with
    whom Coulson LJ agreed) at [26] of UT (Sri Lanka).

26. Ms Butler  submits  orally  and  in  her  rule  24  response  that  the
    respondent fails to identify, let alone to establish,  a  single  legal
    error in the decision of the FtT.  She submits that  the  reasoning  of
    the FtT is cogent and demonstrates a keen knowledge of the  law  and  a
    detailed analysis of the facts.   In  many  respects,  I  accept  those
    submissions.  The judge's decision is clearly the  product  of  careful
    reflection.  He evaluated the oral evidence before him with  care,  and
    with the benefit of a Social Services assessment and a detailed  report
    from an Independent Social  Worker  named  Ms  Harris:  [22]-[34].   He
    undertook an individualised assessment of the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's  children  and  a  holistic  assessment  of  the   family's
    circumstances in considering whether (as a precursor to his analysis of
    whether there were very compelling circumstances)  the  effect  on  the
    partner and children would be unduly harsh: [72]-[92].

27. The judge also demonstrably placed Part 5A of the 2002 Act at the heart
    of his analysis and  he  appreciated,  for  example,  that  the  public
    interest in the deportation of an  offender  varied  depending  on  the
    seriousness of the  offence.   He  evidently  understood  and  attached
    weight to the multi-faceted  nature  of  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals, as is clear  from  [93].   The  judge
    also cited relevant authority and extracted  relevant  principles  from
    that case-law, as is clear from the references to KO (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2018] UKSC 53; [2019] Imm AR 400, Hesham Ali v SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60;
    [2016] 1 WLR 4799, NA Pakistan v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662; [2017] 1 WLR
    207, SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213  and  HA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2020] EWCA Civ 1176; [2021] 1 WLR 1327.

28. When I come to analyse the judge's consideration of whether  there  are
    very compelling circumstances which outweigh the strong public interest
    in the appellant's deportation, however, I am driven to the  conclusion
    that he erred in law in several respects.  Those errors are as follows.

29. Firstly, although the judge was alert to some  of  the  facets  of  the
    public interest in the deportation of  this  appellant,  he  omitted  a
    crucial consideration from the 'balance sheet' of  the  proportionality
    analysis required by s117C(6) of the 2002 Act.  The  appellant  is  not
    simply a foreign criminal who received a sentence of seven years for  a
    particularly serious offence.  He is also a man who,  on  the  findings
    reached by the judge at [35]-[40] of his decision, had failed to  rebut
    the presumptions in s72 of the 2002 Act.  The  judge  found,  in  other
    words, that the appellant was unable to rebut the presumptions that  he
    had committed a particularly serious crime and that  he  represented  a
    danger  to  the  community  of  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was   these
    conclusions that required the judge to dismiss the appeal insofar as it
    was  brought  on  asylum  grounds.   Both  of  those  conclusions,  but
    particularly the latter,  were  evidently  relevant  to  the  balancing
    exercise required by s117C(6) of the 2002 Act.  There was no  reference
    to those considerations in the relevant section of the decision  and  I
    am unable to assume (in contrast to the approach of the Court of Appeal
    in UT (Sri Lanka), at [25]) that the judge had not lost sight  of  this
    point in undertaking the proportionality assessment at the end  of  his
    decision.  There is simply no indication in the relevant section of the
    decision that the judge turned his mind to the fact that the  appellant
    was excluded from the Refugee Convention as a result of his criminality
    and the ongoing risk that he was held to pose to the United Kingdom.

30. Secondly, the basis upon  which  the  judge  found  that  the  family's
    financial circumstances helped to 'tip the balance' in the  appellant's
    favour is not clear from his decision.  Aspects of the judge's decision
    suggest that the family would remain on Universal Credit whether or not
    the appellant remained in the UK.  That  appears  to  be  the  approach
    adopted by the judge at [97], which  I  have  reproduced  above.   This
    caused the respondent to  query  in  her  grounds  of  appeal  how  the
    maintenance of the status quo  could  justify  a  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's deportation would bring about unduly harsh consequences  or
    very compelling circumstances.  Other parts  of  the  judge's  decision
    suggest that the appellant's presence would  somehow  be  of  financial
    benefit to the family.

31. This was clearly a point which concerned the judge, as is apparent from
    the references to it at [83], [85], [91], [95] and [97].   I  asked  Ms
    Butler to explain the origin of the judge's concern.  She was  able  to
    take me to paragraphs [21]-[22] of the skeleton argument she had relied
    upon before the FtT.  Under the heading 'Financial  consequences',  she
    submitted as follows:

         "[21]    It is in the children's best interests for their father to
         be granted leave so that  he  may  contribute  financially  to  the
         household.

         [22] As set out at section 9, page 29  of  the  Independent  Social
         Worker report:

             [The appellant's partner] advised that he only  other  support
             available was from  her  mother,  who  works  three  jobs  and
             therefore has limited availability.  This  support  would  not
             match what Mr Phiri can provide."

32. What the judge made of this submission is at its clearest in his  [85],
    where he concluded that the appellant 'may be able to find  employment'
    or his partner may be able to 'pursue her career within  childcare'  in
    the event that he remained in the UK.  These were merely  possibilities
    and  speculations,  however.   The  judge  referred  briefly   to   the
    appellant's employment history at [53] but he has not been permitted to
    work since he was released from detention and it  is  evidently  likely
    that a man with a conviction such as his, who is required to  sign  the
    Sex Offenders Register for life, will have some difficulty in  securing
    employment in the UK.  The judge took no account of that.  Nor  did  he
    consider the likelihood of the appellant's partner securing  employment
    in childcare; a field in which she  has  not  previously  worked.   The
    judge's error was therefore to elevate what began at  [85]  as  a  mere
    possibility that the appellant or his partner might be able  to  secure
    employment and reduce their dependency upon public funds into a finding
    that the appellant's deportation would have a  'likely  impact  ...  on
    their future financial circumstances', as  he  stated  at  [95].   That
    error demonstrably played a material part  in  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the scales of proportionality tipped in the appellant's favour.

33. Thirdly, and most importantly, I accept Mr Avery's submission that  the
    judge failed, in the relevant section of his decision, to identify  any
    factors 'over and above' those which he had  identified  in  concluding
    that  the  appellant's  deportation  would  bring  about  unduly  harsh
    consequences for his children.  Paragraphs [95]-[97]  of  the  decision
    show that the only factors  which  the  judge  considered  to  tip  the
    balance in favour of the appellant were the very factors which had  led
    him to conclude that the  appellant's  deportation  would  have  unduly
    harsh consequences for the children.  Despite his  extensive  reference
    to authority and his finding at [98] that there were factors 'over  and
    above those described in exception 2' the judge failed  to  demonstrate
    by his reasoning why he considered  the  appellant  to  have  what  has
    variously been described as a 'very strong claim indeed'  (Hesham  Ali,
    at [38]) or a case of 'extra unduly harsh' or  'especially  compelling'
    circumstances:  SSHD  v  JG  (Jamaica)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  982  and  NA
    (Pakistan) refer.  The circumstances of the  appellant's  children  and
    his partner were not ring-fenced matters which could not feature in the
    assessment under s117C(6) but what the judge was required to do, having
    found  undue  harshness  in  respect  of  the  children  but  not   the
    appellant's partner was

         "to look to see whether any  of  the  factors  falling  within  the
         Exceptions 1 and 2 are of such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or
         taken in conjunction with any other relevant factors not covered by
         the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2,  as  to  satisfy
         the test in section 117C(6). (NA (Pakistan), at [37],  per  Jackson
         LJ)."

34. Even reading the decision in the manner  required  by  the  authorities
    cited at the start of my analysis, and even considering the decision as
    a whole,  I  am  unable  to  conclude  that  the  judge  undertook  the
    evaluative exercise required by s117C(6), or that he  provided  reasons
    which were sufficient for the respondent to understand the basis of his
    decision.  The decision shows clearly why the judge considered that the
    appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on his children  but  not
    why the consequences were of such force that they outweighed the strong
    public interest in deportation.

35. In the circumstances, I find that the decision of the FtT is  erroneous
    in law and that it must be set aside.  The question which must then  be
    considered is whether the decision should be set aside in full or  only
    as regards the assessment under s117C(6).  The answer is to be found in
    what I have said at  [30]-[32].   The  judge's  speculation  about  the
    family financial circumstances in the event of the appellant  remaining
    in the UK was  an  error  which  featured  in  his  assessment  of  the
    questions posed by s117C(5) and  s117C(6).   His  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's deportation would bring about unduly harsh consequences for
    the children is necessarily unsafe for that reason and I will set aside
    the decision as a whole.

36. I add  a  further  observation  about  the  structure  of  the  judge's
    reasoning and the content of his undue harshness analysis,  although  I
    emphasise that it has played no part in my decision to  find  that  the
    decision is erroneous in law and should be set aside.   As  I  explored
    with  Ms  Butler  at  the  hearing,  the  judge  introduced  immaterial
    considerations into his analysis under s117C(5).  The  judge  evaluated
    the undue harshness submissions made by Ms Butler  from  [68]  onwards,
    and he expressed his conclusion on the subsection at  [91]-[92].   Just
    before he reached those conclusions, the judge stated at [90]  that  he
    was going to 'consider the remaining factors raised by  section  117B'.
    But section 117B had no part to play in the assessment under  s117C(5);
    the focus under that subsection is on the position  of  the  child  (KO
    (Nigeria), at [32]), and it was an error for  the  judge  to  introduce
    consideration of s117B in his analysis of this exception.

37. Having taken that wrong turn, however, the  judge  also  erred  in  his
    application of s117B.  He concluded, amongst  other  things,  that  the
    appellant's partner was 'already in receipt of public funds'  and  that
    the appellant  spoke  excellent  English.   In  the  circumstances,  he
    considered that s117B 'adds little to my assessment'.  Insofar  as  the
    latter conclusion concerned the appellant's English  language  ability,
    it cannot be faulted.  Insofar  as  it  concerned  the  requirement  in
    s117B(3) (financial independence), the judge misdirected himself in law
    in his approach to the fact that the appellant's partner is already  in
    receipt of public funds.  The question was not - as Ms Butler sought to
    suggest before me - whether the appellant's presence would lead  to  an
    additional  burden  on  the  public  purse;  it  was  whether  he   was
    financially independent of the state: Rhuppiah, at [55].   That  cannot
    be said of the appellant and his family, who are  entirely  reliant  on
    public funds.  The judge therefore erred in his consideration of s117B.

38. Given my conclusion that the judge's decision falls to be set aside  as
    a whole, the proper course is for the appeal to be remitted to the  FtT
    so that it may be considered afresh by a different judge.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors of law  and  it  is
set aside in full.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
considered de novo by a judge other than Judge Cox.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                                 28 May 2021
