
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08826/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 January 2017                   |On 30 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                Mohammad [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Haque, Solicitor from SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has appealed against a Decision  and  Reasons  by  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Fox) (FtT) who in a determination  promulgated  on
    15 November 2016 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a refusal  to
    grant asylum made by the respondent.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh  and  he  claimed  asylum  on
    political grounds.  His claim is summarised in paragraphs 4  and  5  of
    the FtT Decision and Reasons.

Grounds for Permission

3.   In grounds of  application  for  permission  it  was  argued  that  the
    majority  of the Decision  and  Reasons  bore  no  resemblance  to  the
    details of the appellant's claim nor  to  the  evidence  given  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and is thus in  the  absence  of
    any other explanation, there was a procedural error which  amounted  to
    unfairness to the appellant.  The appellant cannot  therefore  be  sure
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  gave  his  appeal  proper  and  adequate
    scrutiny.

Permission to Appeal

4.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan,  who  found
    an arguable material error of law.

The Error of Law Hearing

5.   This matter was listed before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or
    not there was a material error of law.  The appeal was not  opposed  by
    the Secretary of State who confirmed  that  position  in  the  Rule  24
    response.

6.   I had no further detailed submissions from either  representative.   It
    was common ground that the  Decision  and  Reasons  contained  material
    errors of law as set out in the grounds.

Decision

7.   I am  satisfied  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination which I shall set aside. The FtT failed to show that  the
    appeal was given anxious and proper scrutiny because the main  body  of
    the decision and reasons did not refer to the appellant.   No  findings
    are preserved.  The appeal is to be reheard in the First-tier  Tribunal
    at Taylor House on a date and time to be arranged (excluding First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fox).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 27.1.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 27.1.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

