
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08011/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2018                           |On 18 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     MN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, MN, was born in 1988 and is a male citizen of  Pakistan.
    He entered the  United  Kingdom  in  October  2011  as  a  student  and
    thereafter claimed asylum.  By  a  decision  dated  19  July  2016  the
    Secretary of State refused the application.  There was an appeal to the
    First-tier Tribunal but the Tribunal's decision was set aside on appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  The  appeal  was  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge  Dearden)  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  27
    February 2018, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's partner is a citizen of Indonesia.  The couple  have  a
    child together who was born in February 2015 and is aged 3 years.   The
    appellant claims that, because he and his partner have a child born out
    of wedlock, his parents and extended family in Pakistan would carry out
    their threats to kill him or cause  him  serious  harm.   Accommodation
    checks would be made if the appellant attempted  to  exercise  internal
    flight within Pakistan and this would, in  turn,  lead  to  his  family
    knowing his whereabouts.

 3. Judge Dearden rejected the appellant's  asylum  claim.   He  also  made
    findings regarding the appellant's relationship with  his  partner  and
    the child.  When determining whether or not the appellant's partner and
    child would go to live in Pakistan with the appellant he noted that the
    appellant's partner was not prepared to  do  so  because  she  was  not
    prepared to wear a hijab.  She also said that she would be unable to go
    to Indonesia because she  would  be  at  risk  there  from  her  former
    husband.  The judge rejected the partner's account. He relied upon a UK
    entry clearance application made by the appellant's  partner  in  April
    2012 in which she indicated that she is not married  but  single.   The
    judge found this to be a "marked discrepancy in the witness's account".
     The application  apparently  contains  a  photograph  of  the  partner
    wearing a hijab.

 4. The first ground of appeal  relates  to  that  finding.   Both  parties
    appear to agree that the  judge  had  regard  to  the  entry  clearance
    application only following the conclusion of the hearing.   During  the
    hearing, it was asserted  that  the  documents  relating  to  the  visa
    application had been served as far as back as December 2016.   However,
    the Tribunal did not have a copy on file and the appellant's Counsel at
    the initial Upper Tribunal hearing was not in  possession  of  a  copy.
    Both parties agree that the documents and their contents were  not  put
    to either witness during the course  of  the  hearing.   The  appellant
    submits that the  judge  should  not  have  had  regard  to  the  entry
    clearance application without  the  appellant  and  his  representative
    having  the  opportunity  to  comment  upon  the   contents   of   that
    application.

 5. I make the following observations on the ground of  appeal.   First,  I
    accept that the judge should not  have  referred  in  his  decision  to
    evidence upon which the appellant had been unable to comment.   I  find
    that amounts to an  error  of  law.   The  question  remains,  however,
    whether the error is material and, in particular, whether I  should  in
    consequence of it set aside the judge's  decision.   I  note  that  the
    error only goes to the question  of  whether  the  appellant's  partner
    could travel to Indonesia.  Having rejected the  asylum  claim  of  the
    appellant, the judge had moved  on  to  consider  Article  8  ECHR  and
    concluded that the family could relocate  to  Pakistan.   Prima  facie,
    that finding is unaffected by any  unfairness  concerning  the  judge's
    consideration of the entry clearance application.   Indeed,  the  first
    ground of appeal does not engage with the appellant's own claim to fear
    return to Pakistan.  The judge's findings against the appellant on that
    issue remain undisturbed.  I find that, although the judge did  err  in
    law, I should not set aside his decision on account of  his  error.   I
    shall proceed to consider the challenges to the  judge's  finding  that
    the family can relocate to Pakistan.

 6. As I have noted above, I see no error in the judge's finding  that  the
    appellant's asylum claim should be  dismissed  and  that  there  is  no
    asylum or Article 3 ECHR impediment to the family returning together to
    live in Pakistan.  The remaining challenges  to  the  judge's  decision
    concern the appellant's relationship with his partner and child.  These
    findings are, on the face of them,  somewhat  peculiar.   At  [46]  the
    judge found:

         "In this appeal I find the appellant and witness [the partner] have
         a child together.  However  for  reasons  stated  above  I  am  not
         satisfied there is an ongoing relationship  between  the  appellant
         and the witness and therefore between the appellant and the  child.
         I find the appellant does not have family life with his child."

 7. I accept Mr Holmes' submission that the judge has wrongly conflated  an
    assessment of the relationship between the appellant  and  the  partner
    and the appellant and the child.  The parties agree that the  child  is
    the natural child of the appellant and his partner.  The fact that  the
    appellant may no longer  have  a  relationship  which  is  genuine  and
    subsisting with the partner does  not,  as  Judge  Dearden  appears  to
    believe, inevitably mean that he does not have a relationship with  the
    child.  That is a non sequitur and, considering that  the  family  live
    together in the same home, borderline perverse.

 8. Again I have to consider whether the judge's error should  lead  me  to
    set aside his decision.  Mr Holmes urged me to exercise caution  before
    finding that the judge's error made no difference to the outcome of the
    appeal.  The judge found that, even if  the  appellant's  asylum  claim
    were true, it would be possible for the appellant to exercise  internal
    flight within Pakistan. He concluded that the appellant  would,  living
    other then in his home area of Azad Kashmir, "be safe  to  a  practical
    standard".  I can find no error with that finding.  Indeed, I can  find
    no error with the judge's rejection of the appellant's claim to  be  at
    risk in his home area.  The question, therefore, is whether the  family
    can relocate to  Pakistan.   At  [42]  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant's  partner  does  not  speak  Punjabi  but  could  learn  the
    language.  The procedural unfairness referred to in ground  1  concerns
    the partner's reluctance to wear the hijab.  I find  that,  whether  or
    not the appellant's partner is reluctant to wear  a  hijab,  she  would
    conform to the dress codes of Pakistan if she returned to live in  that
    country with  the  appellant  and  the  child.   In  other  words,  her
    reluctance  would  not  render  the   family's   return   to   Pakistan
    unreasonable.  To that extent, the judge's error is not material.

 9. Mrs Pettersen submitted that whilst troubling, the judge's  errors  did
    not justify a rehearing of  this  appeal  since  the  outcome  remained
    inevitable.  I agree.  I refer to what I have said above regarding  the
    partner's reluctance to  wear  the  hijab.   That  finding  effectively
    disposes of ground 1.  This is an unusual case in which the  procedural
    irregularity does not justify a rehearing of the appeal.   The  judge's
    somewhat egregious attitude towards relationships  within  this  family
    are, for the reasons I have given, not material; I  have  proceeded  on
    the basis that the appellant, his partner and the  child  enjoy  family
    life together and that the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the child.  There is no impediment, in my opinion, to
    the family continuing that  family  life  in  Pakistan  either  in  the
    appellant's home area or, if there is any danger to him there (which  I
    find there is not), then elsewhere within that  country.   That  is  my
    primary finding; I also find it there are no obstacles  preventing  the
    family relocating without fear of ill-treatment or  without  disruption
    to their  family  life  together  to  the  partner's  home  country  of
    Indonesia.

10. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

11. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

