
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08342/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 January 2019                     |On 19 February 2019               |
|                                       |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     p r
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Albania.  He appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 8th April 2016 to
    make a deportation order against him.

2.   Following a hearing at  Field  House  on  25  September  2018  a  panel
    consisting of the Honourable Lady Rae sitting as a Judge of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and myself  found  material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision and as a consequence directed that the matter  be  reheard  in
    the Upper Tribunal.  The judge had allowed the  appeal,  but  we  found
    that he had failed to take into account further  issues  of  deterrence
    and the need to express society's revulsion at criminality as  elements
    to be taken account of and considering the public interest side of  the
    balance that has to be considered.  In addition, we were concerned that
    the judge had not properly applied the correct test when analysing  the
    issue of undue harshness.

3.   In her submissions  Ms  Rutherford  said  that  there  was  no  further
    evidence other than a letter from a consultant surgeon  concerning  the
    appellant's son.  The operation referred to was due to  take  place  in
    March 2019.

4.   The parties were in agreement as to the  relevant  law.   In  light  of
    what had been decided by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018]  UKSC
    53, in assessing undue harshness reference was not to be  made  to  the
    criminality of the appellant.  The question was whether on the facts as
    found the Tribunal is satisfied  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    separate the child from his father.  It had  been  made  clear  at  the
    previous hearing that the respondent was not  arguing  that  the  child
    could be expected to relocate to Albania.

5.   The appellant was the child's primary carer as his  wife  worked  full-
    time on a night shift.  If he had to leave the United Kingdom  she  had
    no realistic alternative support available.  Her evidence to the First-
    tier Tribunal had been that her family could not help  with  childcare.
    She would have to give up her job as a consequence if he were  required
    to leave the United Kingdom.  The respondent might argue that  she  had
    coped while the appellant was in detention, but at that  time  she  was
    dealing with a finite period whereas here it would be  removal  for  an
    indefinite period.  The child  was  aged  4  and  had  numerous  health
    problems and required developmental assessment  and  was  due  to  have
    surgery.  Her job was not just a matter of the money provided but was a
    matter of career progression.  She would again be required to  rely  on
    benefits and the child would lose his primary carer.   Taken  together,
    the lack of realistic support for the mother, the need for her to  give
    up her job, her child's ongoing health  issues  and  the  mother's  own
    health issues leading to a likely deterioration and  the  consequential
    effect on her parenting meant that the appeal fell to be allowed.   The
    child was close to his father and  this  could  lead  the  Tribunal  to
    conclude that it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  be  separated
    from his father.

6.   Mr Melvin relied on and  developed  the  points  made  in  his  written
    submissions.  It was not accepted that the appellant  was  the  primary
    carer for his son other than in a practical manner while his  wife  was
    at work.  She was the primary carer.  None of these factors got to  the
    higher threshold of undue harshness when taking into account the public
    interest and this involved protection of the public and the  deterrence
    factor and it could not be enough  to  rely  on  the  child.   To  find
    otherwise  would  be  to  demonstrate  a  lack  of  confidence  in  the
    Immigration Rules.  The requirement to leave would not be unduly  harsh
    on the facts of the case.

7.   By way of reply Ms Rutherford argued that it was not  just  a  question
    of reliance on the child but on the basis of the circumstances  of  the
    family and the particular difficulties that the  appellant's  wife  and
    child would face.

8.   I reserved my determination.

9.   The relevant provisions in reply to this case are  as  follows.   Under
    section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is set
    out the following.

10.  Section 117C(3) "In the case of a foreign criminal ('C')  who  has  not
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or  more,  the
    public  interest  requires  C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1   or
    Exception 2 applies".

11.  Exception 2 is the relevant  exception  in  this  case  and  states  as
    follows:

         "(5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh."

12.  Paragraph 399 of HC 395 is a similar provision in the case of a  person
    who has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a  child
    under the age of 18 years who is in the United Kingdom and it would  be
    unduly harsh for the child to remain in the United Kingdom without  the
    person who is to be deported.

13.  The essential facts of this case where relevant are that the  appellant
    was convicted on 8 April 2016 of an offence involving money  laundering
    and received a 30 month custodial sentence.  Clearly therefore  as  the
    offence was one where he was sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
    less than four years, the  public  interest  requires  his  deportation
    unless Exception 2, referred to above, applies.   It  is  important  to
    bear in mind the point made by Mr Melvin, that in  light  of  what  was
    decided by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)  the  criminality  of  the
    appellant is not to be taken into account in assessing whether  or  not
    the separation of the child from the father would be unduly harsh.

14.  The appellant's son was born on 7 August 2014.  The  judge  had  before
    him evidence as to the child's health problems.  It  is  summarised  at
    paragraph 106 of the judge's decision.   The  child  was  delivered  by
    emergency caesarean section for absent fetal movements.  He was born in
    a poor condition and required  ventilation  via  a  facemask.   He  was
    intubated after four hours, due to worsening respiratory parameters and
    required 48 hours of ventilation.  He also suffered from cardiovascular
    instability requiring inotropic  support.   The  letter  sets  out  the
    treatment he received before discharge and concluded by saying that  he
    would  be  followed  up  by  the  team  and  would  require  long  term
    neurodevelopmental follow up.   In  the  letter  from  Mr  Clifton  the
    consultant ENT surgeon, there was a reference to a diagnosis  of  sleep
    disorder breathing and overnight oximetry suggesting moderate to severe
    OSA.  The child was due to be operated on  for  adenotonsillectomy  but
    that was postponed.  He was to be referred onwards for treatment  at  a
    tertiary centre as it was thought desirable for him to have surgery  in
    a tertiary hospital with backup facilities.

15.  Returning to the judge's decision,  there  was  further  correspondence
    concerning the ongoing developmental check-ups required by  the  child.
    He had recently developed glue ear which would require surgery but  the
    reports did not show any serious  developmental  issue  at  this  early
    stage though the parents  were  concerned  about  delayed  speech.   As
    noted,   the   medical   correspondence   did   recommend    continuing
    developmental  assessment.   The  judge  accepted  evidence  that   the
    healthcare facilities in Albania were inferior.  That is however by the
    way, since the issue is not whether the child would go to  Albania  but
    the impact on him and on the family generally of  separation  from  the
    appellant.

16.  The appellant's wife has suffered from depression in the  past.   While
    her husband was in prison she was  able  to  support  the  child  while
    relying on state benefits.  The judge accepted her evidence that it was
    a particularly difficult period for her  especially  in  light  of  the
    concerns over the child's development.

17.  The consequences of the appellant's removal would be, as Ms  Rutherford
    suggested, that his wife would have to give up work.  She would  return
    to the situation that she was in when he was in  prison  of  having  to
    rely on benefits, as she would have to be at  home  in  order  to  look
    after her child.  In the longer run when he is at school it may be that
    she would be able to return to work, but of course the available  hours
    for her to do that would be limited, in the absence  of  family  backup
    for help with the child.  There would also be an impact on her, bearing
    in mind her history of depression and the difficulties she  experienced
    in looking after the child during the time when the  appellant  was  in
    prison.  I  bear  in  mind  Ms  Rutherford's  point  that  there  is  a
    difference between coping with a difficult situation  which  is  finite
    and one which is, in relative terms, infinite.

18.  The essential issue I have to decide is whether the effect of the
appellant's deportation on his child would be unduly harsh.  It is clear
also that in assessing the public interest in deportation I must attach
weight to the need to deter other potential offenders and to take into
account the need to express society's revulsion at the appellant's offence.


19.  At paragraph 23 in KO (Nigeria) the Supreme Court said the following:

         "23. On the other hand the expression 'unduly harsh' seems  clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             'reasonableness' under section 116B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word 'unduly' implies an  element  of  comparison.
             It assumes that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is
             a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant
             context.  'Unduly' implies something going beyond that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent ..."

20.  Inevitably cases are fact sensitive, but the guidance in  KO  makes  it
    clear that what the test involves is a degree of harshness  as  I  have
    said going beyond what would necessarily  be  involved  for  any  child
    faced with the deportation of a parent.

21.  No doubt it will be more difficult for the appellant's wife and son  if
    he is removed from the United Kingdom.  But in my  judgment  that  does
    not extend beyond harshness to undue harshness.   The  child  has  some
    medical problems, but not  of  a  serious  nature.   In  the  audiology
    initial assessment on 31 January 2018  it  was  said  that  he  has  no
    significant medical history but there is reference to a speech problem.
     It seems he had a mild hearing loss in the right ear  and  a  mild  to
    moderate hearing loss in the left ear.  As the judge said, the  medical
    reports had not thrown up any serious developmental  issue.   There  is
    however the recommendation of continuing developmental assessment.   As
    I say,  these  are  matters  which  though  as  concerned  parents  the
    appellant and his wife are bound to be  anxious  about,  they  are  not
    indicative of anything at all approaching a major problem.

22.  Also as regards the impact on the appellant's wife, and on  the  family
    generally, as in the case of any wife or partner of a deported man  who
    has pre-school children, it is likely that they would have to  give  up
    work in order to look after the child or children.  That  is  a  matter
    which would necessarily occur in the circumstances set out.  It is  not
    a  matter  of  undue  harshness  but  although  undoubtedly   a   harsh
    consequence for a wife/mother and child,  it  is  no  more  than  that.
    Again, the mental health problems of the  appellant's  wife  appear  to
    extend to no more than to the depression that she  has  experienced  in
    the past.  It is relevant to bear in mind that she was able to  support
    her child and cope in the past while relying on state benefits,  and  I
    again bear in mind Ms Rutherford's  point  that  this  will  be  for  a
    potentially significantly longer period.

23.  However, bringing these matters together, I  do  not  consider  it  has
    been shown that the effect of the appellant's deportation on his  child
    or partner would be unduly harsh in the sense in which that test is  to
    be considered as a matter of law.  Accordingly, his appeal against  the
    respondent's decision is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 8 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
