
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08308/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2019                      |On 9 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                   YANNICK OLIVIER DANBEL DANDOU-BIBIMBOU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Cronin of Counsel instructed by Wesley Gryk
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which were
    given ex tempore at the end of the hearing on 22 July 2019.

 2.  This  is  an  appeal  by  the  appellant  against  the  decision  (the
    'Decision')  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  Rodger  (the   'FtT'),
    promulgated on 12 March 2019, by which she  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal under article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    ('ECHR') (the ground was made out but the respondent would  not  remove
    the appellant to Congo Brazzaville because of  the  potential  risk  of
    breach of article 3); dismissed his appeal under article  8;  and  also
    dismissed his appeal against revocation of his refugee status  pursuant
    to section 72(10) of the 2002 Act.

 3. The appellant had been convicted on 24 October 2015 of possession  with
    intent to supply crack cocaine,  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  30
    months' imprisonment.  He had a previous conviction on 24 October  2008
    for possession of a false identity document,  for  which  he  had  been
    separately sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment.

 4. In essence, the appellant's claim involved the following  issues:  that
    he remained in need of international protection  and  that  whilst  his
    offence was serious, it was not 'particularly serious', and he was  not
    a danger to the community for the purposes of section 72  of  the  2002
    Act.  He claimed to have rebutted the presumption under section 72.

The FtT's Decision

 5. It is clear that the FtT  made  a  careful  analysis  of  the  evidence
    running from paragraphs [33] to [54] of the Decision.   The  FtT  noted
    the remarks of the sentencing Judge at [25], including the  description
    of the offence as a 'very serious offence'.  The FtT was not  impressed
    by what appeared to be the appellant's lack of acceptance that  he  had
    not supplied for financial gain, at [40] to [41] of the  Decision.  The
    FtT also referred to  the  appellant's  apparent  lack  of  honesty  in
    claiming a single person's council tax reduction at paragraph  [42]  of
    the Decision, although she described that matter as not  one  of  great
    weight.  The FtT concluded that the supply  of  crack  cocaine,  was  a
    particularly serious  offence,  at  paragraph  [44]  of  the  Decision,
    considering the well-known authority of  EN  (Serbia)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 630.  The FtT noted  that
    the appellant had not reoffended, at  paragraph  [46],  but  noted  the
    proximity that the appellant's release to the immigration hearing;  and
    the limited weight she attached to a letter of a Lesley Lamptey,  which
    did not appear to be in the format of an OASys Report.  There was,  for
    example, no attendance by the appellant at rehabilitation courses.  The
    FtT noted that the appellant was in a relationship with an EEA national
    but he could continue to have a family life with  his  partner  despite
    revocation of his refugee status.

The Grounds of Appeal and Grant of Permission

 6. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially:

      a) there is an incongruity between Sections 72(10) and  84(3)  of  the
         2002 Act, noting the authority of Essa  (Revocation  of  protection
         status appeals) [2018] UKUT 244 (IAC);

      b) the FtT had erred  in  concluding  that  the  most  recent  of  the
         appellant's offending was particularly serious and that  he  was  a
         danger to the community.  The sentencing Judge  had  described  the
         appellant in a lesser role, meriting a sentence below the  starting
         point of three years;

      c) the FtT had focused unduly on whether the appellant  had  committed
         the offence of financial gain, ignoring his repeated  admission  of
         his error and the evidence of his  partner  and  his  behaviour  on
         release;

      d) the FtT erred in  failing  to  consider  that  the  appellant  must
         constitute a real danger to the community, not  making  assumptions
         on what were termed 'reasonable grounds' of such danger; and

      e) it was unfair to criticise Ms Lamptey's correspondence  because  of
         concerns which it was  said  were  only  raised  and  addressed  in
         closing submissions.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson  initially  refused  permission  to
    appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  this  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Eshun on 17 June 2019.  Judge Eshun concluded that there
    were arguable errors of law in the  Decision  although  these  arguable
    errors were not identified.  The grant of permission, however, was  not
    limited in its scope.

The Hearing Before Me

The appellant's submissions

 8. Ms Cronin, who also appeared before the FtT, indicated that it was  not
    open to  the  FtT  dismiss  the  appeal,  following  the  more  limited
    'functional' jurisdiction, as a result of appeal rights being  narrowed
    following the Immigration Act 2014.  While the  Vice  President,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Ockelton had, in the well-known authority of Essa, found
    that the ground of appeal should succeed but at the same time  the  FtT
    was bound to dismiss the appeal, in fact the decision of the  court  in
    Essa should have been that it no longer  had  a  power  to  dismiss  an
    appeal in these circumstances, noting the incongruity  between  section
    72 and sections 84 to 86 of the 2002  Act.   I  was  referred  in  this
    regard to the authority of EN (Serbia) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department & Anor [2009] EWCA Civ 630.

 9. What the FtT should have considered  was  that  somebody  with  refugee
    status should have that  status  left  intact  and  indeed  there  were
    practical consequences of its failure  to  do  so.   For  example,  the
    respondent had given no indication of what  consequences  would  follow
    the revocation of status; what leave would be granted; or what work  or
    restrictions would be applied.  For example, there may be the provision
    of a six-monthly 'rolling' leave to remain which did  not  provide  the
    same security of protection  as  afforded  by  a  full  recognition  of
    refugee status.  There was also an open question about what happened in
    terms of restrictions to reside or undertake work, to  claim  benefits,
    or, for example, have access to  a  travel  document  and  the  working
    assumption had to be that this would be rescinded.  At the very least I
    should consider that these issues had been raised at the  FtT  and  had
    not been considered.   It was  said  that  I  should  therefore  assume
    therefore that no leave would be granted.

10. The FtT also further failed with regard to its consideration of whether
    the appellant in this case had satisfied the  requirements  of  section
    72, in respect of which there were separate considerations.  Ms  Cronin
    began by suggesting that the  statutory  presumption  was  not  on  the
    appellant in these circumstances to rebut, but in fact was,  by  virtue
    of EN (Serbia) a burden that the respondent had to discharge.  However,
    following  further  discussions   with   Ms   Cronin,   she   accepted,
    particularly  by  reference  to  paragraph  [80]  of  the  EN  (Serbia)
    decision, that in fact the concept of the statutory presumption was one
    that indeed remained and so that  was  a  question  that  I  needed  to
    consider.  It was said that the FtT  had  also  fallen  into  error  by
    assuming that by virtue of the period of imprisonment,  the  effect  of
    that automatically meant  that  the  offence  in  question  was  indeed
    particularly serious.  I had to consider the authorities of SSHD  v  TB
    (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ  977  and  also  Mugwagwa  (s.72  -  applying
    statutory presumptions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 338.

11. I needed to consider in particular the sentencing Judge's remarks.   It
    is at this point worth repeating some of them.  At  paragraph  [25]  of
    the Decision, the sentencing Judge is referred to the appellant  having
    pleaded not guilty.  He was eventually convicted on DNA  evidence.   In
    his favour, the Judge noted he  was  an  intelligent  man,  capable  of
    better things and the Judge was  sure  that  it  was  due  to  economic
    circumstances the appellant became involved.  He also  noted  that  the
    appellant did not have previous convictions  to  do  with  drugs.   The
    Judge referred to the starting point for sentencing for street  dealing
    in class A drug of three years, with a range of  between  two  to  four
    years.  The sentencing Judge placed him below the  starting  point  for
    two reasons highlighted: the absence of previous  convictions  relating
    to the drug offence, and the fact that this was  a  small  quantity  of
    crack cocaine, although the Judge bore in mind that  in  sentencing  it
    was still a policy to deter drug dealers from  dealing  in  the  street
    which causes  problems  to  innocent  members  of  the  public  and  is
    difficult to detect.  The sentence  on  that  basis  was  therefore  30
    months.  The Judge recounted it seemed highly unlikely  that  any  Home
    Secretary or Minister of Justice would want a 'class A' drug dealer 'on
    the streets of this country'.   The  Judge  described  it  as  'a  very
    serious offence and I warn you  now  in  clear  terms  because  of  the
    sentence I have had to impose on you that you may well be  deported  at
    the conclusion of your sentence'.

12. In essence, I was asked to note that the sentence had  been  below  the
    starting point which reflected the  fact  that  it  was  not,  in  this
    regard, a particularly serious crime.  The FtT was also  said  to  have
    erred in a second consideration of whether the appellant constituted  a
    danger to the community of  the  UK.   In  this  regard  there  was  an
    apparent application of a test of 'reasonable grounds,' referred to  at
    paragraphs [43], [44], [46], [48] and [51] where,  for  example,  there
    was a reference to a lack of 'persuasive evidence'.

13. In terms of the prior offence involving a passport, I was  referred  to
    the criminal authority of Attorney General Reference Nos 1 &  6  [2018]
    EWCA Crim 677 whereby those who had previously been refused  protection
    claims and were awaiting the outcome of a  further  submission  on  the
    point had relatively  limited  sentences  where  they  had  used  false
    documentation and effectively needed some way  to  support  themselves.



14. On the issue of credibility the appellant had been candid that  he  had
    been advised by his lawyers to put the Crown to  strict  proof  of  the
    drug offence and he gave a different story, asserting that he  had  not
    dealt in drugs at all, as opposed to buying them for a friend.  The FtT
    had erred in focusing on the appellant's  apparent  refusal  to  accept
    that he had been dealing crack cocaine for financial gain,  as  opposed
    to his genuine remorse, ignoring evidence from the appellant's  partner
    and his own statement and letters expressing  remorse.   The  appellant
    was said to have broken friendships with drug users and I  should  also
    consider the context of his drug use, in particular the fact  that  his
    mother had sadly been killed by the Congolese authorities.   There  had
    also been no reference by the FtT to two statements of  supporters  who
    gave evidence as to the appellant's good character.   The  evidence  of
    the partner had in particular been unchallenged.  It was also suggested
    that the council tax statement at page [195] of the appellant's bundle,
    which referred to a single person's council tax discount was explicable
    by the fact that it was delivered to his  home  in  December  2015,  by
    which time he was in prison.   Correspondence  at  page  [233]  of  the
    appellant's  bundle  was  testament  to  the  difficulties  which   the
    appellant faced when trying to organise his financial affairs whilst he
    was in prison.

15. There was also, it was said, a clear misdirection in  relation  to  the
    Probation Letter from Lesley Lamptey, which was on headed notepaper and
    at paragraph [46] of the Decision, the FtT had  effectively  discounted
    it entirely questioning whether it was genuine at all.  In any event we
    now had a fuller letter from the Probation Service who had set out  the
    basis on which there was a low risk of offending.  I did  explore  with
    Ms Cronin why a fuller OASys Report had not been sought by reference to
    a Freedom of Information Act Request.  It was suggested a copy had been
    asked for though she clarified, having taken instructions, that it  had
    not in fact yet been requested  under  a  Freedom  of  Information  Act
    Request but was 'about to be  requested'.   In  any  event,  the  OASys
    findings were made clear in the summary document which was produced  in
    the additional evidence which had been submitted to the Upper Tribunal.
     That clearly attested to the status and identity of the author of  the
    original correspondence and indicating the appellant to have a low risk
    of reoffending.

The respondent's submissions

16. In response, the Senior Presenting Officer, Mr Tarlow,  indicated  that
    he would rely both on the Rule 24 reply and the initial refusal of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson to grant  permission.   In  reality
    this was a mere disagreement with the findings of the FtT.  The FtT had
    given careful consideration to the appellant's convictions, recited the
    sentencing remarks at paragraph [39].  Those reasons  were  within  the
    remit of the FtT.  She had also considered the question of the  council
    tax at paragraph [42] which was also addressed at the document at  page
    [454]  of  the  appellant's  bundle.   The  question  was  whether  the
    appellant had rebutted the presumption and  there  was  not  sufficient
    evidence for that presumption to have been rebutted.

17. On the question of whether I should follow the authority of Essa it was
    contended that I should and therefore the FtT  reasoning  disclosed  no
    error of law.

Decision on Error of Law

18. I conclude that there are no errors of law in the FtT's  decision.   My
    reasons for these conclusions are as follows.

19. First, it was suggested that the  FtT  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to
    dismiss the appeal in circumstances where there is a revocation such as
    this.  It was said  that  the  Vice  President,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Ockelton, had not considered the limitation of the functional powers of
    the Upper Tribunal  by  virtue  of  the  reduced  appeal  rights.   The
    consequence was that a dismissal of the appeal under section 72 was  no
    longer open to the FtT  - all the FtT could do was  uphold  or  dismiss
    the appeal on the ground under sections 82 to 84 of the 2002 Act.  I do
    not accept the suggestion that Vice President had ignored or failed  to
    consider the  consequences  of  the  narrowing  of  appeal  rights  and
    'functional abilities', as Ms Cronin described them, to dismiss claims.
     Indeed, at paragraphs [17] to [18] of the decision in Essa he referred
    expressly to those and it is worth reciting elements of those.

         "17. In the  circumstances  in  which  it  applies  Section  72(10)
             requires an appeal to be dismissed even though the  ground  of
             appeal is based on  the  Refugee  Convention  alone  and  even
             though the provisions of the Refugee Convention would  require
             the appeal to be allowed.  This perhaps surprising  result  is
             in fact consistent with the structure of Section 72 itself".

    He continues:

             "An officer of the Secretary of State is entitled  by  Section
             72 to presume that Article 33(2) applies to persons within the
             categories set out, and therefore to make a decision to remove
             him; and, likewise, a Tribunal considering the  same  question
             is required to come to a specific  conclusion.   Despite  sub-
             Section (1), these are not assessments made  by  reference  to
             the Refugee Convention in its  single  autonomous  meaning  in
             international law as the decision of the  House  of  Lords  in
             SSHD v R  (Adan)  [2000]  UKHL  67  would  require:  they  are
             assessments made solely by reference to national law.....

         18.  That interpretation of section 72(10) allows it to stand  with
             our preferred interpretation of Sections 82 and  84.   To  sum
             up: (1) an appeal under section 82(1)(c) is an appeal  against
             revocation of the basis on which  the  leave  referred  to  in
             82(2)(c) was granted; (2) the appeal is to  be  determined  by
             reference to the provisions of the Refugee Convention, as that
             is the only ground allowable under Section 84(3)(a);  but  (3)
             where section 72(10) applies, it requires  the  appeal  to  be
             dismissed even though the ground is made out.

         19.  We note in closing this discussion that even the last  of  the
             above propositions does not constitute a  contradiction.   The
             amendments under the 2014 Act  also  deleted  those  parts  of
             Section 86 of the 2002 Act that required a Tribunal  to  allow
             or dismiss an appeal: the only requirement now is  usually  to
             determine any matter raised as a  ground  of  appeal  (section
             86(2)(a)).  Thus the way is open for a determination that  the
             ground in section 84 is made out but a decision dismissing the
             appeal because of the mandatory requirement of section 72".

20. Therefore, the essential  challenge  on  the  first  ground,  namely  a
    claimed incongruity between sections 72 and 84 to 86 of the  2002  Act,
    is not born out by the analysis in Essa,  and  the  decision  upholding
    dismissal of the appeal under section 72 was unarguably open to the FtT
    to make, provided that the statutory presumption is not rebutted.

21. The second ground of appeal is in relation to the distinct elements  of
    section 72, namely whether the appellant had rebutted  the  presumption
    of  conviction  of  a  particularly  serious  crime  and   whether   he
    constitutes a danger to the community of the UK.

22. In essence, it was said that the FtT had ignored the sentencing remarks
    of the Judge who had placed the appellant's sentence below the starting
    point and therefore it was not a particularly serious crime.  Whilst  I
    accept that a sentence will not necessarily  be  determinative  of  the
    question of whether the offence is one of a particularly serious crime,
    and indeed that is why the presumption is  rebuttable,  nevertheless  I
    regarded the FtT as aware of that fact and in  doing  so,  she  clearly
    considered the  sentencing  remarks  which  she  quoted  in  detail  at
    paragraph [25].   I  conclude  that  she  was  unarguably  entitled  to
    conclude that by virtue of dealing even of  a  small  amount  of  crack
    cocaine, that was a particularly  serious  crime.   In  doing  so,  she
    considered in detail, the circumstances of his conviction, to which she
    referred in the Decision.  Her conclusion discloses no error or law and
    was adequately reasoned.

23. It was argued that the FtT erred in answering the  second  question  of
    risk to the community, in focussing unduly on the appellant's  apparent
    disavowal of any responsibility for  dealing  in  drugs  for  financial
    gain, by asserting that he merely intended to pass them  to  a  friend.
    It is fair to say that  that  discussion  took  up  some  part  of  the
    Decision  between  paragraphs  [40]  to  [42].  Nevertheless,  it   was
    unarguably open to the FtT to assess the appellant's continuing attempt
    to refuse responsibility for dealing for financial gain as relevant  to
    the danger to the community of the UK, something which  the  sentencing
    Judge had clearly rejected.  The FtT was also  unarguably  entitled  to
    take into account the appellant's previous conviction for fraud, not on
    the question of past persistent offending, but more in relation to  the
    question of the appellant's credibility, when assessing his  claim  not
    to intend to reoffend  in  the  future,  and  indeed,  it  was  in  the
    credibility assessment that the FtT raised the issue.

24. I do not accept the reference at [42] of the  Decision  to  the  single
    person council tax reduction as undermining  the  overall  findings  in
    relation to the risk that the appellant poses to  the  community.   The
    FtT made clear that she did not regard it as  being  a  matter  of  any
    great weight.

25. Next was Ms Cronin's assertion that underlying the findings was a theme
    of a test of 'reasonable grounds' for  regarding  the  appellant  as  a
    danger to the community, when the test should be whether he presented a
    real danger.  However, that same assertion began in the context  of  Ms
    Cronin's abandoned assertion that the burden was on the  respondent  to
    prove a particularly serious crime and that the appellant was a  danger
    to the community, without the application of a  statutory  presumption.
    Having reviewed the Decision, references made by Ms Cronin to  the  FtT
    not being satisfied that there was 'persuasive evidence,'  such  as  at
    [47], cannot, when read as a whole, be taken  to  mean  more  that  the
    appellant had not rebutted the statutory presumption, rather  than  the
    application of a higher, 'reasonable grounds' test.

26. The final element of the appeal relates to  what  is  said  to  be  the
    failure to consider evidence as to the danger posed by the appellant to
    the community, including an unfair criticism of the  Probation  Service
    correspondence, which  the  appellant  says  is  bolstered  by  further
    submission of a more detailed letter to the Upper Tribunal; and failing
    to place  weight  on  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  partner  and
    supporters.

27. In relation to the Probation  Service  evidence,  the  FtT  had  indeed
    criticised the correspondence from Lesley Lamptey  at  [46].   The  FtT
    noted that the letter was undated and the electronic signature appeared
    to be relatively  illegible,  with  no  evidence  for  the  FtT  to  be
    satisfied that the document had been signed by the  person  claimed  as
    its author.  Further, the letter was very short and whilst it  referred
    to the appellant having been assessed as posing a low risk of harm  and
    there were no concerns that arose, nevertheless there was no detail  as
    to who had assessed him as posing a low risk of that harm and  on  what
    information they had based that assessment on.  For  example,  the  FtT
    noted that in the absence  of  being  provided  a  copy  of  the  OASys
    assessment, it was difficult to know whether the assessment  was  based
    on the appellant  accepting  his  guilt  in  street  drug  dealing  for
    financial profit or whether it was based on the  appellant  relying  on
    the account  that  he  has  subsequently  relied  on  as  part  of  his
    immigration appeal,  namely  not  for  financial  profit.   This  would
    clearly be relevant to any assessment in the level of danger  he  poses
    to the community.   There was insufficient  detail  in  the  letter  of
    Lesley Lamptey for the FtT to be able to find that the contents of that
    letter were sufficient, whether on their own or in conjunction with the
    appellant's lack of conviction since being on bail to  make  a  finding
    that he is not a danger to the community.  Further, the FtT  noted  the
    absence of  reliable  evidence  that  he  has  attended  rehabilitation
    courses and was now remorseful of the impact that his offending has had
    on drug addicts and the wider UK community.

28. Whilst there is some force to the challenge that the FtT's doubt  about
    the provenance of the letter was made without him having the chance  to
    meet this concern,  it  is  not  enough  to  merit  setting  aside  the
    Decision.  The authenticity of the letter was only one discrete  aspect
    of the FtT's analysis and her  wider  concerns,  noting  at  [61],  the
    brevity of the  letter  -  referring  to  details  of  the  appellant's
    imprisonment, being released on licence and  being  supervised  by  the
    author.  The letter refer to the appellant wishing  to  be  a  personal
    trainer and engaging well; and an assessment of him  as  posing  a  low
    risk of harm and  no  concerns  arising  with  regard  to  reoffending.
    However, the FtT was unarguably entitled to conclude that this did  not
    even begin to amount to a full OASys report assessment, nor indeed  did
    the subsequent correspondence that was provided to the Upper  Tribunal,
    whilst more detailed, provide much more than conclusions,  rather  than
    explain the analysis by which those conclusions were reached, which the
    FtT might review,  by  reference  to  the  acceptancy  of  dealing  for
    financial gain and the risk factors (such as adequate  financial  means
    in the future).  I take judicial notice of  the  fact  that  such  full
    OASys reports are frequently lengthy and detailed and it is open to FtT
    Judges in these  circumstances  to  review  the  analysis  when  asking
    whether the statutory presumption is rebutted.  In  simple  terms,  the
    FtT was unarguably entitled  to  place  limited  weight  on  a  summary
    letter, in circumstances where even by the date of the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing, and despite legal representation, it was open to  him  to  ask
    for a full copy of that report  under  a  Freedom  of  Information  Act
    request, but he has  not  done  so,  without  explanation.   While  the
    Probation Service documents are genuine, the  FtT  considered  them  on
    their face, regardless of her concerns about their provenance, and  did
    not commit an error of law when placing limited weight on them  in  the
    absence of a full report.

29.  On  the  issue  of  consideration  of  the  wider  evidence  from  the
    appellant's partner and supporters, as  to  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant had sought to turn his life around, the FtT had  specifically
    considered the relationship between the appellant and his  partner  and
    indeed, there was an active consideration of that  in  the  context  of
    article 8.  There is no requirement to specifically refer to all of the
    evidence,  particularly  where,  as  here,  the  FtT  has  referred  to
    considering all of the evidence and submissions at [30].  The FtT heard
    live evidence from the appellant's partner, but despite  the  partner's
    assurances  as  to  the  limited  risk  posed  by  the  appellant,  was
    unarguably  entitled  to  place  limited  weight  on  this,   and   the
    appellant's supporters, in light of the absence of  objective  evidence
    such as the OASys report.

30. In my view there are no errors of law in the Decision.  The appellant's
    challenge fails and the Decision shall stand.

 Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   J Keith                    Date         30 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   J Keith                    Date         30 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


