
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08577/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 16 January 2019                   |On 3 April 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     YMA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For YMA: Mr T Hussain instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors.
For the Secretary of State for the Home Department: Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home
Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

      1. Both YMA and the  Secretary  of  State  appeal  with  permission  a
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis who at [55-57] of  the
         decision under challenge wrote:

             "55. The Asylum Appeal is inadmissible as  the  Appellant  has
                  failed to show he faces a  real  risk  of  persecution  on
                  return to his country of origin for a reason recognised by
                  the Refugee Convention.

             56.  The Qualification Directive is made out as the  Appellant
                  has failed to show he is at real risk of ill-treatment for
                  a reason outside the terms of the Refugee Convention.

             57.  The Human Rights Appeal is not made out as the  Appellant
                  has failed to show that his claim  engages  the  terms  of
                  articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
                  Rights."

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born  on  13  June  1974  who
         arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  7  September  2017  claiming
         international protection as a refugee on arrival.

      3. At [7] the Judge records:

             "7.  It was agreed by the parties  at  the  beginning  of  the
                  hearing that  the  Appellant  did  not  pursue  his  claim
                  pursuant to Article 15 (c) of the Qualification Directive,
                  paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules or Article 8 of
                  the European Convention on Human Rights.  The  Appellant's
                  appeal is on the basis that he is a member of a Particular
                  Social Group, namely, a teacher and a member of  the  sub-
                  clan of the Darood tribe in Somalia who has  come  to  the
                  adverse attention of the Islamic extremist group known  as
                  Al Shabab who took exception  to  him  teaching  boys  and
                  girls together in the same class as they regarded this  as
                  a serious breach of Islamic law.

      4. The reference at [56] set out above is clearly infected by arguable
         legal error in which it is said the claim under  the  Qualification
         Directive is made out even though the appellant had failed to  show
         he is at real risk of ill-treatment  on  return.  It  is  accepted,
         however, that this is likely to be as a result of the typographical
         error by the omission of the word "not", with this paragraph really
         intending to read that the Qualification Direction is not made out,
         especially in light of [7] above and [51]  of  the  decision  under
         challenge.

      5. The Judge sets out findings as to credibility and fact between  [26
         - 50] of the decision under challenge, which are summarised below.

The Judges Findings

      6. The Judge  finds  the  appellant's  age,  gender,  nationality  and
         Islamic faith are not in dispute in the appeal [26].

      7. The Judge notes at [32] the appellants claim he  cannot  return  to
         Mogadishu as Al Shabab will quickly learn that he has  returned  to
         Somalia and locate him there and that he is from the wrong tribe to
         live in Mogadishu which is controlled by majority tribe other  than
         the Darood, the Hawiye.

      8. The appellant's response question AI39 that "himself and the  other
         teachers were trying to get children together  until  the  families
         came and got them, so they could be safe as the  children  who  had
         fled the school" was inferred to be a reference to the  attack  and
         closing of the school on 1 January  2017  which  was  found  to  be
         inconsistent with the appellant's account set out  in  his  witness
         statement, at paragraph 9, where he sought to clarify he was not at
         the school on 1 January 2017 [35].

      9. The Judge found inconsistent the claim by the appellant to  try  to
         get the children back to the school because  there  were  no  other
         schools around and no one would fund  another  school,  the  school
         being a source of income for the teachers,  and  that  he  did  not
         understand the question put at interview, which the Judge  inferred
         was a reference to a letter of the  1  January  2017  found  to  be
         inconsistent with the appellant's claim at the hearing that he went
         into hiding the day the school was closed down and left the country
         or alternatively the city. The Judge found inconsistencies  as  the
         appellant could not be seeking to get the children back  to  school
         after it had closed if he had left his home area  or  alternatively
         Somalia [37].

     10. The Judge finds a chronology submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
         showing that Al Shabab attended the appellant's school  and  killed
         his brother on the same day, namely 8 December  2016,  inconsistent
         with the account during cross examination in  which  the  appellant
         claimed Al Shabab killed his brother in mid-December. The Judge did
         not find it credible that Al Shabab would threaten the appellant on
         8 December 2016 then kill his brother later the same day when  they
         could not find the appellant [38].

     11. The Judge did  not  find  it  credible  the  appellant  would  have
         continued to teach at the school from 8 December 2016 to 1  January
         2017 as claimed in his witness statement after Al Shabab killed his
         brother on either 8th December or mid December 2016.  It  was  also
         found not credible that the appellant would be able to teach at the
         school during the period Al Shabab looking for him in order to kill
         him. The Judge found it inconsistent he  did  not  go  into  hiding
         until 1 January 2017 when Al Shabab had abducted the headmaster and
         his colleagues and he suspected  them  to  have  been  killed,  and
         equally inconsistent with the  appellant's  claim  that  Al  Shabab
         killed his brother at his  shop  he  was  watching  football  at  a
         friend's home with his mobile telephone turned off [39].

     12. The Judge finds the appellant internally inconsistent in his  claim
         he was able to go into hiding from 1 January  2017  until  he  left
         Somalia on 14 March 2017 without Al Shabab being able to  find  him
         when he claimed both in his oral testimony  and  witness  statement
         that Al Shabab knew everything that was going on  in  the  town  as
         they have spies working for them and it was easy for Al  Shabab  to
         find out anything that happens in the town and it would  have  been
         easy for them to have got his number [40].

     13. The Judge describes the above as being merely a number of  numerous
         examples  of  when  the  appellant's  account   was   significantly
         internally inconsistent.

     14. The Judge also sets out in the following paragraphs:

             "44. I conclude, on examples of the Appellants inconsistencies
                  in his account set out above, and the evidence taken as  a
                  whole that the Appellant is not a  credible  and  reliable
                  witness. In reaching this conclusion  I  do  not  conclude
                  that the Appellant was never a teacher as claimed and find
                  that the photographs submitted in the AB are sufficient to
                  show, to the lower standard required, he was, in fact  the
                  teacher in Somalia at some time. The  photographs  however
                  do not show the name of the school or the  date  on  which
                  they were taken. Additionally, there are no photographs to
                  show  that  the  school  was  ransacked  as  claimed.   I,
                  therefore,  conclude  that  the   only   aspect   of   the
                  Appellant's  account  that  this  is  supported   by   the
                  photographs is the fact that he  was  a  teacher  at  some
                  stage and not necessarily the dates he claims  he  was  in
                  the core aspects of his Protection Claim.

             45.  I am grateful to Mrs Maewaha  for  her  very  proper  and
                  helpful submissions that the evidence before the  Tribunal
                  that the Appellant's claim to be a member of the sub- clan
                  of the Darood majority  clan  will  put  him  at  risk  of
                  persecution  and/or   ill-treatment   on   relocation   to
                  Mogadishu or any other  part  of  Somalia  is  solely  the
                  Appellant's own account. Neither she nor I have found  any
                  evidence in the background material  that  would  indicate
                  that this is the correct state of affairs. I  conclude  on
                  the evidence taken as  a  whole  that  the  Appellant  has
                  failed to show that he  would  not  be  protected  by  the
                  majority Darood clan of which his sub- clan is  a  member.
                  I, of course, bear  in  mind  that  an  Appellant  is  not
                  required to provide any documentary corroboration  of  any
                  aspect of his Protection Claim. I have taken into  account
                  is simply one factor to be weighed in the balance that the
                  Appellant has produced no evidence from the elders of  the
                  Darood clan, either Somalia  or  any  that  exist  in  the
                  United Kingdom, that the Darood clan would not  offer  him
                  any clan protection on return to Somalia due to  the  fact
                  that he is merely a member of a sub- clan.

             46.  In reaching the above findings I conclude  that  internal
                  relocation and sufficiency of protection  are  not  issues
                  that need to be resolved in this appeal."

     15. The Judge considers the guidance set out in  the  country  guidance
         case of MOJ and Others before concluding, in the alternative to the
         primary finding the claim lacks credibility, at [48 - 49]:

             "48. I, therefore, conclude on the evidence taken as  a  whole
                  that the Appellant can safely  relocate  to  Mogadishu  on
                  removal to Somalia if I am wrong in my assessment  of  his
                  lack of credibility and reliability in the core aspects of
                  his claim.

             49.  The Appellant has failed to show,  to  the  low  standard
                  required, that he faces a real risk of death,  persecution
                  or ill-treatment on removal  to  Somalia  for  any  reason
                  recognised by the Refugee  Convention  or  that  permit  a
                  grant of Humanitarian Protection for any reason whatsoever
                  and, in particular, as a member  of  a  Particular  Social
                  Group or, alternatively, his religious beliefs."

     16. The challenge by the Secretary of State  is  to  the  contradiction
         apparent on the face of the decision that the Judge  dismissed  the
         appellant's asylum appeal but allowed it  under  the  Qualification
         Directive which was found to be contrary to other  aspects  of  the
         claim. Permission was granted by a judge of the First-Tier Tribunal
         in the following terms:

             "The grounds are arguable. From the rest of  the  decision  it
             seems clear that the Judge intended to dismiss on all grounds.
             That is a  simple  point,  but  the  appellants  grounds  also
             justify consideration,  as  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge
             restricted consideration to clan only; and having  found  that
             the appellant was  a  teacher,  he  was  arguably  obliged  to
             consider that aspect of the claim (particularly as it was  the
             core of the appellant's account)."

Error of law

     17. It was not disputed at the hearing that so far as the Secretary  of
         States application is concerned there is arguable merit. The  issue
         therefore turned upon whether there was any merit in the appellants
         contention.

     18. Mr Hussain argued on the appellant's behalf that the Judge had  not
         considered the situation for the appellant in Mogadishu in relation
         to how he would survive, and that risk was the only issue raised.

     19. In the appellant's bundle, at page 64, is  reference  to  a  report
         from  the  Global  Coalition  to  Protect  Education  from  Attack'
         Education and Attack 2018: Somalia, 10 May 2018,  which  refers  to
         attacks  on  school  students,  teachers  and   other   educational
         personnel. There is reference to 100 cases during the 2013  -  2017
         reporting period with  security  forces  being  responsible  for  a
         smaller number of violations. The report  states  the  majority  of
         such cases occurred in the southern and central states  of  Somalia
         with sporadic cases reported in Puntland.  There  is  reference  to
         2013 media monitoring  reports  identifying  several  cases  of  Al
         Shabab abducting more than 100 Quranic  schoolteachers  in  central
         and southern Somalia, in most cases for refusing to comply with the
         group's demands. There are a number of references in 2014 and  2015
         to similar  incidents.  More  relevant  developments  in  2017  are
         recorded in the following terms:

             'In 2017, al Shabab  posted  an  online  video  in  which  the
             group's spokesperson threatened to harm teachers  and  parents
             who continued to send their children to Western-style schools.
             [1888] There were also two attacks, including one targeting  a
             Ministry  of  Education  official  and  including  one  attack
             affecting schoolchildren.

             On April 10, 2017, a Ministry of Education officer  reportedly
             died after a bomb planted on his car  exploded  in  Hamarweyne
             district, Mogadishu.

             On October 14, 2017 a large truck bomb detonated in Mogadishu,
             killing more than 300 people and injuring hundreds,  according
             to the Guardian. Among those killed  were  15  primary  school
             children who were on a school bus at the time of the blast.'

     20. There is reference at page 228 of  the  applicant's  bundle  to  an
         incident in April 18 to 2017, when unidentified  opposition  forces
         fired mortar shells that landed on a primary school  in  Mogadishu,
         Benazir  region.  Reports  indicated  that  between  one  and  four
         students were killed, and that seven or eight other civilians  were
         injured.

     21. Other material on that page repeats that found in  the  article  at
         page 64. referred to above.

     22. At page 59 of the applicant's bundle is a reference from the United
         Nations at [148] stating "attacks on 64 schools were  verified,  58
         of which were attributed to Al Shabab. Cases include the  detention
         of teachers refusing to adopt  Al  Shabab's  curriculum  or  school
         closures. For instance, on 24 February, Al  Shabab  closed  up  the
         Madras in Ceel Garas  town,  Galguduud  Region,  and  arrested  the
         teacher, who declined to refers students for military  training.  A
         10 verified attacks on hospitals, 6 were attributed to Al Shabab."

     23. Mr Hussain argued that the material in the appellant's bundle refer
         to attacks on schools in 2017 leading to a submission that  as  the
         appellant will be returned as a teacher and had to make his  living
         as a teacher the risk faced needed to be assessed in light  of  the
         country information as teachers are a group that  are  specifically
         targeted and that  if  there  is  a  real  risk  of  harm  internal
         relocation cannot be said to be reasonable. Mr Hussain also  argued
         the appellant faced a real risk travelling to and from the  schools
         and government institutions.

     24. It is not disputed that there have  been  attacks  on  schools  and
         teachers in the past. As  noted  in  the  country  information  the
         motivation for such attacks by Al Shabab appears to be their belief
         that some teachers in some of the schools, primarily in areas under
         their control, are not following the curriculum they believe should
         be taught to children or refusals by teachers to handover  children
         for the purposes of military training.

     25. It is not disputed that a school bus containing children was caught
         up in a bomb blast, but it is not made out that  that  the  bombers
         were specifically targeting the children or  teachers.  It  appears
         more likely to have been  an  act  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
         relation to which the children were, unfortunately,  in  the  wrong
         place at the wrong time.

     26. The appellant on return to Mogadishu has a skill set  which  is  in
         demand namely that as an experienced teacher. What Mr  Hussain  was
         unable to refer the Upper Tribunal to was country information  that
         shows teachers face the degree of  risk  whilst  undertaking  their
         professional occupation in Mogadishu on 16 January 2019  sufficient
         to warrant a finding the  appellant  is  entitled  to  a  grant  of
         international protection or a finding that it  is  unreasonable  to
         expect him to relocate to Mogadishu.

     27. The appellant did not produce evidence to show that if returned  to
         Mogadishu he will become destitute. He is an  educated  experienced
         individual with a particular skill set that is in demand.   It  was
         not made out, if he does not wish to return to  teaching,  that  he
         could not secure employment elsewhere. There is a lot  of  evidence
         provided in the appellant's bundle regarding risk to teachers which
         is that referred to by Mr Hussain. It is not made out the Judge did
         not take such evidence into account.

     28. It is particularly noted there is no country guidance case  law  to
         which the Upper Tribunal has been referred which holds teachers per
         se face a real risk on return such that  they  are  entitled  to  a
         grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

     29. The evidence before the Judge, properly considered by him, does not
         support the applicant's claim the Judge has erred in law. The Judge
         did not find the appellant's claim credible with the  exception  of
         the fact that he was a teacher. While some  government  departments
         or members of the government  are  targeted  and  whilst  there  is
         indiscriminate violence in some parts of Somalia, it  is  not  made
         out the Judge failed to  consider  the  risk  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant or made a decision contrary to the country  material.  In
         relation to internal relocation the appellant had  not  established
         that it is unreasonable in all the  circumstances  for  him  to  be
         returned to Mogadishu in light of the factual matrix of this  case,
         relevant country information, and country guidance case law.

     30. In conclusion:  I  find  the  appellant  has  failed  to  establish
         arguable legal error  material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
         appeal. I find the respondent has established arguable legal  error
         in relation to [56] of the decision under challenge and in the part
         of the determination headed 'Notice of Decision' in which the Judge
         allowed the appeal under the Qualification Directive.  I substitute
         a decision dismissing the appeal under this head as a result of the
         error being typographical when the content of  the  decision  under
         challenge is considered as a whole, compounded by what  appears  to
         have been a lack of care when proofreading the  decision  prior  to
         promulgation.



Decision

     31. There is no material error of law made  out  by  the  appellant  in
         relation to the Judge's decision in  dismissing  the  appeal.  That
         part of the decision shall stand.

     32. I find  the  Secretary  of  State  has  made  out  that  the  Judge
         materially erred in law. I set aside the decision of  the  original
         Judge allowing the appeal under the Qualification Directive.

     33.  I remake decision as follows. The appeal is dismissed.



    Anonymity.

     34. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18 March 2019

