
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08911/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2018                             |On 16 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                Groovies [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Bassiri-Dezfouli, Counsel instructed by A2
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


 1. This is an appeal in the case of Mr Groovies [A].  Mr [A] is a  citizen
    of Ghana who had been refused his protection and human rights claim and
    had appealed against that decision.  Unfortunately, in the course of  a
    decision which was promulgated  on  17  July  2018  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, there were very obvious  and  numerous  errors  in  the
    decision in the sense that the judge had clearly incorporated into  his
    decision a series of  factors  which  were  unrelated  to  the  present
    appellant and which clearly related to another  person.   Consequently,
    many of the factual recitals in the decision were simply incorrect.

 2. Rather than seek to set aside his own decision the judge promulgated  a
    fresh decision on 24 July 2018 which purported to  remedy  those  clear
    errors in his earlier decision by omitting those parts which  were  not
    factually accurate.  We are satisfied that that was  not  a  course  of
    action which was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   It  is  clear
    that the earlier decision had been promulgated on 17 July 2018 and  had
    indeed been made the subject of an appeal by the Secretary of State and
    consequently there was no provision enabling the judge to issue a fresh
    corrective decision however much he would have wished to have done  so.
    His judicial function was then complete.

 3. The issue before us is what the judge should have done and it is  clear
    that in the Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  2014  there  are  a  number  of
    provisions which permit mistakes to be rectified in a way which  avoids
    a full hearing.  However, they are limited.  In  paragraph  31  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014, the  Tribunal  is  given  the  right  to
    rectify clerical mistakes and accidental slips or omissions.  It cannot
    properly be said that this was a simple clerical mistake and, whilst it
    may have been accidental, it cannot be treated as an  accidental  slip.
    Consequently paragraph 31 had no role to play.

 4. Rule 32 contains provision for setting aside a decision which  disposes
    of proceedings and the power is to  be  exercised  subject  to  various
    conditions, but those conditions were not satisfied in this  case.   It
    followed that the only means by which this error could be rectified was
    by service of a notice of appeal.  That was done on 20  July  2018  and
    paragraph 34 provides that, on receiving an application for  permission
    to appeal, the Tribunal must  first  consider  whether  to  review  the
    decision in accordance with Rule 35.

 5. That is the course of action that should have been adopted by the First-
    tier Tribunal, and, had  such  consideration  been  conducted,  it  was
    inevitable that  the  decision  would  have  been  reviewed.   Rule  35
    provides the Tribunal  may  only  undertake  a  review  of  a  decision
    pursuant to Rule 34 on receipt of  an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal and if it is satisfied that there was an error  of  law  in  the
    decision.  It followed therefore that once a notice of appeal had  been
    served that triggered the necessity of conducting  a  review  and  that
    review would inevitably have led to an error of  law  being  found  and
    consequently the decision being set aside without further ado.

 6. As it happened, there has been a considerable amount of to-ing and fro-
    ing in relation to the notices of appeal, the grants of permission  and
    whether they refer to one decision or the other decision, but all  that
    is really water under the bridge.  The fact is  that  this  case  comes
    before the Upper Tribunal legitimately  as  a  result  of  a  grant  of
    permission, and therefore it is for us  to  replicate  what  might  and
    should have been done; replicate in the  sense  of  setting  aside  the
    decision as involving an error of law and  remitting  the  case  to  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal before another judge.   Both  parties
    are agreed that that is the appropriate course of action  and  that  is
    the order that we will make.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.

DECISION

          i) The  decision  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was
             promulgated on 17 July 2018 contains errors of law and is  set
             aside.
         ii) The decision purportedly made by the First-tier Tribunal which
             was promulgated on 24 July 2018 is  invalid  through  want  of
             jurisdiction and, insofar as is necessary, is set aside.
        iii) The appellant's appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
             for hearing afresh.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                           10th October 2018


