
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/08779/2017
                                                               PA/08781/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2018                   |On 12 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                    [M M]
                                    [M B]
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Mehr, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised the  appellants'  names  because  this  decision
          refers  to  sensitive  matters  relating  to  their  international
          protection claims.

       2. The appellants are citizens of Iran.    They  fled  Iran  together
          in fear of family members and the authorities, because they  claim
          that they have been in a relationship that the second  appellant's
          family members are vehemently opposed to.

Appeals linked

       3. It is unclear whether the appellants'  cases  have  been  formally
          linked.  For the avoidance of any doubt, and with the  consent  of
          the parties I link the appeals now.  It  is  entirely  appropriate
          for these appeals to be linked: they relied upon  the  exact  same
          factual matrix as to what happened in Iran; both  appellants  left
          Iran together on 13 March 2017 and claimed asylum in the UK on  24
          March 2017; their asylum interviews took place  on  the  same  day
          albeit at different times; the reasons provided by  the  SSHD  for
          refusing their respective claims are overlapping albeit  contained
          in two different letters, but of the same date - 25 August 2017.

First-tier Tribunal hearing and decision

       4. In two separate decisions both dated 27 March 2018,  by  the  same
          First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')  (Judge  Lloyd),  each   appellant's
          appeal was dismissed.  The FTT did not accept the  credibility  of
          each claimed account.

       5.  It is very difficult to  see  why  two  separate  decisions  were
          reached in the light of the matters set  out  at  [3]  above.   In
          addition,  both  the  appellant's  appeals  appear  to  have  been
          considered at one hearing together.  The second  appellant's  file
          does not contain a record of proceedings.   The  record  contained
          in the first appellant's file demonstrates that the hearing  began
          at 12.06.  the  first  appellant  began  his  evidence  at  12.12.
          There was a short break at  13.02  after  the  completion  of  the
          first appellant's evidence.  The hearing  resumed  at  13.07  with
          the second appellant giving evidence.   At  13.33  the  SSHD  made
          submissions  concerning  both  appeals,  followed  by  submissions
          commencing  at  13.40  by  the   appellants'   solicitor.    These
          submissions  are  recorded  as  including   the   following:   "As
          corroborate each other. And consistent."   The  hearing  ended  at
          13.48.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

       6. The grounds of appeal dated 10 April 2018 include  the  submission
          that the FTT failed to engage with  or  give  any  weight  to  the
          consistencies between the accounts  provided  by  the  appellants.
          When granting permission to appeal  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
          Doyle observed all the grounds to be arguable.

       7. At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Tan  acknowledged  that  it  was
          regrettable that the FTT provided  two  separate  decisions,  when
          there was clearly a single hearing.   In  providing  two  separate
          decisions, the FTT ran the risk of failing to  take  into  account
          evidence from one appellant capable of corroborating that  of  the
          other.  Given this, I invited Mr Tan to take me to aspects of  the
          two  decisions  in  which   the   FTT   addressed   the   apparent
          consistencies between the two appellants' evidence and the  mutual
          potential corroboration that resulted.  He was unable to do so.

       8. I am satisfied  that  in  failing  to  engage  with  the  apparent
          consistencies between the appellants'  detailed  accounts  and  in
          failing to give any reasons for rejecting the  corroboration  each
          was able to offer for the other, the FTT has  erred  in  law.   By
          way of example the decision concerning the first appellant  refers
          to his witness statement and him giving oral evidence.   There  is
          no reference to the second appellant's witness statement  evidence
          and little reference to her oral evidence.  Whilst I  accept  that
          the FTT must have had in mind the evidence  from  both  appellants
          and appears to refer to this at  [40]  of  the  first  appellant's
          decision  and  [42]  of  the  second  appellant's  decision,  when
          reaching its credibility  findings,  there  has  been  a  complete
          failure to reason why weight was not given  to  the  consistencies
          in the evidence.  In addition, there are elements  of  the  second
          appellant's decision which indicate that it was 'cut  and  pasted'
          from the first  appellant's  decision.   By  way  of  example  the
          second appellant is wrongly referred to as a "he" at  [10],  [43],
          [45] in the second appellant's decision.

       9. The error set out above is sufficient to vitiate the decision  but
          there  is  a  further  obvious  error  of  law   undermining   the
          credibility findings (not referred to in the  grounds  of  appeal)
          which I set out briefly.  The FTT has inverted the  correct  lower
          standard of proof at [44], [45] and [46] of the first  appellant's
          decision.  These  errors  are  repeated  almost  verbatim  in  the
          second  appellant's  decision  at  [48]  and  [50].   The  correct
          application of the standard of proof is a fundamental  requirement
          in the determination of an asylum appeal.


      10. It follows that the FTT's conclusions on credibility are  vitiated
          by errors of law and unsafe.

Disposal

      11. Given the nature and extent of further  fact-finding,  the  matter
          is remitted to the FTT to be remade on  a  de  novo  basis.   When
          deciding  these  linked  appeals,  the  FTT  shall  need  to  make
          entirely fresh findings of  fact.   If,  as  appears  likely  (the
          second appellant is pregnant)  the  relationship  is  accepted  as
          credible, the FTT shall need to address whether,  irrespective  of
          the  acceptance  of  any  family  disapproval  in  the  past,  the
          appellants will be  treated  as  having  committed  adultery  upon
          return to Iran.



Decision


      12. The decision of the FTT involved the making of  a  material  error
          of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      13. The appeal shall be remade by the FTT de novo.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:

7 December 2018

