








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08844/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 23 November 2018              |On: 5 December 2018                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                Mr Evar Rahim
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert of counsel, instructed by B.H.T.
                    Immigration Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Iraq, of Kurdish nationality, born on 1
      January 2001. He appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  3
      September  2018,  dismissed  his  appeal  against   the   respondent's
      decision, dated  29  June  2018,  refusing  his  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and human rights claims.

   2. The appellant was an unaccompanied  child.  The  respondent  contended
      that he could relocate within Iraq, away from his home town of Hawija,
      Kirtkuk Governate.

   3. The Judge at [23] had regard to a letter dated 6 August 2018  from  Ms
      Louisa Tomlinson, who described herself as a counsellor with  children
      and young people. He noted that she did  not  claim  to  have  medical
      qualification, let alone a qualification in psychiatry. In  the  final
      paragraph of her report, she said  that  it  is  her  belief  that  on
      account of the appellant's vulnerability, if  he  were  sent  back  to
      Iraq, he would not be able to cope  mentally  or  emotionally  and  it
      would have a devastating, long lasting effect that would likely end in
      the taking of his own life.

   4. However, the Judge gave no weight to  that  opinion.  He  stated  that
      before an opinion of that type can be given any credence or weight  it
      needs to come from  a  suitably  qualified  medical  professional  who
      understands  his/her  duty   to   the   Tribunal;   has   demonstrated
      independence  and  objectivity  in  his/her   consideration   of   the
      circumstances and has  so  certified  by  giving  the  usual  Experts'
      declaration. He was thus far from satisfied that she  had  brought  to
      bear  the  required  level   of   objectivity   or   independence   of
      consideration [24].

   5. He set out his findings at [36]. He was satisfied that upon return  to
      Iraq, he could and would return to his family and in  all  probability
      take up the role of being the senior male figure therein. There was no
      objective background evidence in support of the proposition  that  the
      appellant would face a real risk of harm from indiscriminate  violence
      in and around Kirkuk or whilst en route to the family home [38].

   6. In granting permission to appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrews
      found it arguable that the Judge did not clarify whether he considered
      that the appellant to be a vulnerable witness, having been asked to do
      so by his  representative.  Further,  he  did  not  consider  all  the
      evidence before him, in particular the  evidence  of  two  independent
      social workers and the report of Dr Fateh, which he dismissed as being
      generic. Nor did he consider  paragraph  339K  of  the  Rules  or  the
      possibility of his destitution.

   7. In the grounds of appeal prepared by Mr Gilbert, who  represented  the
      appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, he contended that the  Judge
      failed to record whether he was treating the appellant as a vulnerable
      witness in assessing his evidence. Nor did he consider the appellant's
      vulnerability  in  assessing  his  evidence,  contrary  to  the  Joint
      Presidential Guidance Note  Number  2:  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
      Sensitive Appellant Guidance which provides that

     a) the Tribunal must consider  the  evidence,  allowing  for  possible
        different degrees of understanding by witnesses and  the  appellant
        compared to those  who  are  not  vulnerable,  in  the  context  of
        evidence  from  others  associated  with  the  appellant  and   the
        background evidence before the Tribunal.

     b) where there are clear  discrepancies  in  the  oral  evidence,  the
        Tribunal is to consider the extent to which the age,  vulnerability
        or sensitivity of the witness was an element of that discrepancy or
        lack of clarity.

     c) the decision should record whether the Tribunal has concluded  that
        the appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable  or  sensitive,
        the effect the Tribunal considered the identified vulnerability had
        in assessing the evidence before it and thus whether  the  Tribunal
        was satisfied whether the appellant had established his case to the
        relevant standard of proof. In  asylum  appeals  weight  should  be
        given to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to a
        state of mind.

   8. Mr Gilbert submitted in Ground 1 that the  First-tier  tribunal  Judge
      erred as the appellant is a child; the  respondent  has  accepted  his
      overall traumatic account as truthful; the  Tribunal  was  invited  to
      treat the appellant as a vulnerable  witness;  there  was  independent
      evidence of his trauma/vulnerability in the  psychotherapeutic  report
      dated 6 August 2018 after weekly sessions in the previous four  months
      that he exhibits typical symptoms of PTSD.

   9. He also submitted in Ground 2 that the Judge failed  to  consider  the
      relevant evidence of two independent social workers  produced  in  the
      appellant's bundle at AB 11-14. This was relevant to the  question  of
      the appellant's vulnerability and credibility and to the weight to  be
      attached to the psychotherapeutic report dated 6 August 2018.

  10. He also failed to consider relevant evidence of the  Country  Guidance
      expert, Dr Fateh, or made a perverse or  irrational  finding  at  [28]
      that it was of little or no significance, despite its relevance to the
      determination of core issues.

  11. He also contended that the Judge failed to consider material  relevant
      to his findings  as  to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim
      including his influence by agents en-route to the UK and the fact that
      he had not made a claim for asylum earlier. His passport was destroyed
      by  the  agent  and  he  had  stated  that  he  obeyed  his   mother's
      instructions to follow the agent's  instructions.  If  the  Judge  did
      consider it, he failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  its  implicit
      rejection.

  12. Mr Gilbert also relied on other grounds, including the assertion  that
      the Judge failed to apply paragraph 339K  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
      Past harm to his family was relevant to the assessment of whether they
      faced harm after the appellant left.

  13. It was also contended that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  relevant
      matters pertaining on the circumstances  on  return  relevant  to  the
      issue  of  destitution  and/or  Article  15C  of   the   Qualification
      Directive. The  material,  (including  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
      relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212, showed that  as  a  child,  the
      appellant would be unable to work and his mother would  be  unable  to
      support them. That affected the overall assessment of Article 3 of the
      Human Rights Convention, Article 15(C) of the Qualification  Directive
      and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

  14. During the course of Mr Gilbert's submissions,  Ms  Kiss  informed  me
      that although she would contend that the report of Ms Louisa Tomlinson
      was inadequate, she nevertheless considered that the Judge had  failed
      to consider the evidence of two independent  social  workers,  one  of
      whom had worked with the appellant since his arrival in the UK in 2017
      as well as that of the supervising social worker, at  pages  45-46  in
      the appellant's bundle produced to the Upper Tribunal.

  15. She  therefore  accepted  that  the  failure  to  consider  those  two
      statements which supported the opinion of  Louisa  Tomlinson  rendered
      the decision unsafe.

  16. In the circumstances, she submitted that the decision  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal should  be  set  aside  and  re-made.  In  passing,  she
      expressed her surprise that no proper psychiatric  or  medical  report
      had been obtained. Both parties  agreed  that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.

      Assessment

  17. I find that the concession by Ms Kiss was properly made. It is evident
      that the Judge did not take into account in the credibility assessment
      that the appellant was to be treated as a vulnerable  witness  in  the
      circumstances. In that respect, all the  Judge  stated  was  that  the
      appellant would be a minor for a few more months as  at  the  date  of
      hearing. That meant that he must keep in mind  s.55  of  the  Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

  18. Nevertheless, it does not appear that in evaluating his  evidence,  he
      treated the appellant as vulnerable. Further, I am also satisfied that
      the Judge failed to consider  the  evidence  of  the  two  independent
      social workers which was relevant to  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
      vulnerability and accordingly his credibility. It was also relevant to
      the weight to be attached to the report of Ms Tomlinson.

  19. In the circumstances, I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law and  I  set
      it aside. I am satisfied that the  extent  of  judicial  fact  finding
      which is necessary in order for the decision to  be  re-made  will  be
      extensive. I find that it is just and fair to remit the case.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside. The appeal  is  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a fresh decision to be made
      by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed: Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer      30 November 2018

