
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/08887/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 27 January 2021                   |on 17 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                        MARTA GLORIA CUELLAR VALENCIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Olabamiji, of DMO Olabamiji, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 10 January 2020, FtT Judge Doyle dismissed
    the appellant's appeal  on  asylum  (Refugee  Convention)  grounds  but
    allowed it on grounds of humanitarian protection and of articles 3  and
    8 of the ECHR.

 2. By a decision promulgated on 2 June 2020, UT Judge Finch set aside  the
    decision of Judge Doyle in so far as it dismissed the appeal on  asylum
    grounds and retained the case in the UT "to be remade de  novo  without
    prejudice  to  the  decision  on   the   appellant's   entitlement   to
    humanitarian protection, in the alternative."

 3. A transfer order was made to enable another UT judge  to  complete  the
    decision.  The technology enabled an effective remote hearing.

 4. As Mrs Pettersen pointed out an earlier hearing,  section  104  of  the
    2002 Act applies to the effect of statutory abandonment.  The appellant
    has not given notice under  that  section  to  preserve  her  "upgrade"
    appeal and is out of time to do so.

 5. Mr Olabamiji explained he is the only fully qualified  practitioner  in
    his office; matters was not attended to initially because  he  was  off
    work (with covid); and the file, unfortunately,  was  then  overlooked.
    Mrs Pettersen, very reasonably, did not object to the  appellant  being
    permitted to give notice orally at the  hearing,  and  did  not  oppose
    extension of time.

 6. I considered that it was preferable for the case to be resolved on  its
    merits; excused the appellant's procedural lapses; extended  time;  and
    allowed the appeal to proceed.

 7. Representatives agreed that the one issue for the UT  was  whether  the
    facts, as found by the FtT, disclose a Refugee Convention category.   I
    am obliged to them both for submissions which were succinct and to  the
    point; having heard which, I reserved my decision.

 8. The facts are that gangs tried to recruit the appellant's son  (who  is
    still a  minor);  when  he  resisted,  they  beat  him,  assaulted  the
    appellant, threatened her with rape, and threatened the  lives  of  her
    and her children; and the appellant and her family then fled,  in  fear
    of being attacked or even killed by gangs if they returned.

 9. The appellant cited R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, ex p De  Melo  and
    De Arujo [1997] Imm AR 43 and Shah & Islam [1999] UKHL 20.

10. It is convenient to take this digest of the case law  from  Macdonald's
    Immigration Law and Practice, 9th ed + supplements, at [12.85]:

         The  family  is  the  social  group par  excellence,  and  family
         membership may form the basis of a 'particular social group'.1  The
         question which has emerged from the case law but which has now been
         resolved by Fornah v Secretary of State for the Home Department2 is
         whether it is enough to be persecuted because of  membership  of  a
         family  regardless  of  the  reason  for  that  family's   original
         persecution, or whether another Convention reason  must  be  behind
         the initial persecution. In Ex p De Melo  and  De  Arujo3 Laws  J
         adopted the reasoning of the Tribunal in Hernandez4 to the effect
         that although the murder of the head of the family  by  drug  gangs
         might not be for a Convention reason, persecution of family members
         because of their family relationship to the dead man could  be.  He
         rejected the Secretary of State's argument that the  non-Convention
         reason advanced against the principal continued to operate  against
         the family, and concluded that membership of a social group  was  a
         distinct Convention reason and not  a  sub-group  that  had  to  be
         qualified by another Convention reason such as  political  opinion.
         The Court of Appeal in Quijano,5 however, narrowed the application
         of the definition to exclude circumstances where  ill-treatment  of
         family members by a drug cartel  was  a  fortuitous  by-product  of
         criminal activities, as likely to have been directed  at  employees
         as family members, and persecution was not therefore for reasons of
         membership of the family. The House of Lords in Fornah v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department held that De Melo had been right
         and Quijano was  wrong.  Much  depends  on  the  reason  for  the
         targeting.  Thus  in Jaramillo-Aponte6 (another  case  involving
         Colombian asylum seekers) a tribunal found  Convention  persecution
         because the claimants were at  risk  'as  members  of  the  Escobar
         family'.7 Although membership of a family is the basis  of  'blood
         feuds', which specifically target adult male members of the  target
         family, a blood feud was held in Skenderaj not to give rise to  a
         refugee claim based on membership of  a  particular  social  group,
         because the family in question was not regarded as a distinct group
         by the claimant's society, while reliance on the  attitude  of  the
         other party to the feud would be artificial.8 It is  questionable,
         in the light of Fornah whether this decision is correct; as  Lord
         Hope emphasised, it was not necessary for society  to  recognise  a
         particular social group as being set apart from the rest of society
         - 'it is sufficient that the asylum seeker can be seen  objectively
         to have been singled out  by  the  persecutor  or  persecutors  for
         reasons of his  membership  of  a  particular  social  group  whose
         defining characteristics existed  independently  of  the  words  or
         actions of the persecutor'.

11. It is unnecessary to include any further case citations.

12. The appellant also relies on UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines, March  2016,
    to support the propositions that the refusal of a youth to join a  gang
    may show a need for  refugee  protection  based  on  particular  social
    group, on imputed political opinion, or other Convention  grounds;  and
    that the same need may extend to family members.

13. Mrs Pettersen's argument was that the appellant  "muddies  the  waters"
    between imputed political opinion,  in  the  case  of  the  child,  and
    particular social group, in the case of the mother; the refusal of  the
    child to join the gang  did  not  involve  imputation  of  a  political
    opinion, but was  only  for  purposes  of  violent  crime;  no  Refugee
    Convention was disclosed; as the FtT had found, the appellant  and  her
    children were "innocent victims of  a  violent  society",  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection but not to asylum.

14. I am not persuaded that targeting of the appellant's son  falls  within
    the Refugee Convention.  UNHCR is a guide, but not an authority on  the
    law, and its statements on this subject are vague and unreasoned.

15. Absence of a Convention reason for the initial  persecution  is  beside
    the point.  The  subsequent  targeting  of  the  appellant  (and  other
    relatives) is due to family relationship, and nothing  else.   At  that
    stage, the family constitutes a  particular  social  group  within  the
    meaning of the Convention.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has  been  set  aside,  to  the
    extent set out above.  The decision substituted is that the  appeal  is
    allowed also on asylum (Refugee Convention) grounds.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



    Hugh Macleman


    28 January 2021
    UT Judge Macleman






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.




