
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08697/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 15th March 2019                 |On 01st April 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                              SHAMIL RAMAZANOV
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr R Liakhat, Anderson Rizwan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is brought against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal David Clapham dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellant is a Russian national from Dagestan.   His faith is
      Islam and he follows the teachings of Said Nursi.  The Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal accepted that the appellant has been detained
      twice by the authorities in Dagestan.  The judge did not accept,
      however, that the appellant was badly mistreated during his second
      detention and left for dead.  The judge found the appellant had
      exaggerated the extent of his mistreatment.  The judge noted that the
      appellant left Russia using his own passport and concluded that the
      authorities had no continuing interest in him.  The judge found that
      the appellant did not have a well-founded fear of persecution.

Permission to appeal
   3. The grant of permission to appeal was based on several grounds.  The
      first of these was that the judge arguably erred by failing to address
      the issue of whether there was a sufficiency of protection for the
      appellant as a victim of violence at the hands of the authorities in
      Russia.  The second ground was that the judge arguably erred by
      failing to consider whether the appellant's removal would result in
      "extreme consequences", in accordance with Cart [2011] UKSC 28, [2011]
      Imm AR 904.  A third ground was raised in the application for
      permission to appeal.  This was a contention that the judge failed to
      have proper regard to an expert report by Professor William Bowring.
      Although permission to appeal was not specifically granted on this
      ground it does not appear to have been expressly excluded from the
      grant.  The grant of permission stated merely that the report was
      considered at the end of the decision.

   4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who granted permission to appeal
      added two additional grounds which were not specifically raised in the
      application.  The first of these was that it was not clear why the
      appellant's account of his departure from Russia was not accepted by
      the First-tier Tribunal.  The second, following from this, was that it
      was not clear why the First-tier Tribunal did not accept that the
      appellant was of ongoing interest to the authorities.  Mr Govan
      questioned whether it was proper for the grant of permission to appeal
      to include matters which were not in the application.  I pointed out
      that it was open to the judge granting permission to raise obvious
      points where the judge arguably erred.  The parties had been given
      adequate notice of these in the grant of permission.

   5. I raised a further point about the origin of the phrase "extreme
      consequences".  This phrase was used as part of a test used in
      deciding whether to grant leave in an application for judicial review.
       It was not part of the substantive law on entitlement to
      international protection, where the proper test was one of "serious
      harm".  The grant of permission to appeal should be read as if by the
      phrase "extreme consequences" was meant "serious harm".  I did not
      consider that this correction to the terminology was material to the
      basis on which permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions
   6. In the course of his submission Mr Liakhat said that the appellant's
      evidence, recorded at paragraphs 29-30 of the decision, was that when
      departing from Russia he was accompanied by an agent.  Although there
      was a "watch list" in Dagestan the country information indicated that
      this was not a strictly legal process.  It was possible the appellant
      left using his own passport.  Although the appellant was likely to be
      on the watch list he had not been charged, unlike the leaders of his
      group.  The appellant was subjected to pressure and harassment.  The
      core of the appellant's claim was found to be credible.  The
      respondent had suggested internal relocation but for cultural reasons
      the majority of Salafis in the Russian Federation live in Dagestan.

   7. For the respondent Mr Govan relied upon a rule 24 response of 19th
      December 2018.  The judge's approach to the issue of state protection,
      the first ground on which permission to appeal was granted, was
      correct.  In relation to the second ground, the judge found the
      appellant had embellished his claim of ill-treatment in detention.
      The judge found the appellant was detained and questioned.  The
      appellant's profile was not such as to make him of interest to the
      authorities in future.

Discussion
   8. In my view the judge of the First-tier Tribunal who granted permission
      to appeal correctly identified the principal weakness in the decision.
       This was the finding at paragraphs 68-69 of the decision that because
      the appellant was able to leave his country using his own passport he
      was not of continuing interest to the authorities.  In making this
      finding the judge referred only to the appellant's evidence that there
      was no warrant for his arrest.  The judge neglected to refer to the
      appellant's evidence of the involvement of the agent who accompanied
      him when he left and the judge did not have regard to the relevant
      country information covering, for example, the legal status of the
      "watch list".  In consequence there was inadequate reasoning in the
      judge's decision to support his finding that the appellant was not of
      continuing interest to the authorities.  The judge's decision is
      accordingly set aside to be re-made on the issue of risk on return,
      taking into account the positive credibility findings made by the
      judge.  The judge found that the appellant was detained twice, though
      he had not been ill-treated as severely as he claimed.

   9. Having informed the parties of my decision on the question of whether
      the First-tier Tribunal erred in law, the parties agreed to return in
      the afternoon to make submissions on risk on return.

  10. When the hearing resumed Mr Govan helpfully informed me that having
      read the country information and expert report, and having regard to
      the finding that the appellant had been detained twice, the respondent
      would concede the appeal.  The country information covered
      disappearances and the use of torture.  Having been detained twice
      already the appellant would be at risk by reason of his religion.

  11. I have had regard to the evidence to which Mr Govan referred.
      Professor Bowring is clear in his conclusion that if the appellant
      returns to any part of Russia he will be subject to persecution, as
      demonstrated by the arrest and sentencing of the appellant's friends,
      of which Professor Bowring has independent evidence.  In Dagestan the
      appellant may have the benefit of a trial but this was not likely to
      be fair and there was a high likelihood of torture or inhuman and
      degrading treatment.

  12. Professor Bowring refers to the banning by a Moscow court in 2007 of
      books by Said Nursi.  The publication and circulation of these books
      was then made illegal.  Followers of Said Nursi's teachings face
      prosecution in Dagestan.  Dagestan is itself notorious for human
      rights abuses, among the victims of which are Salafi Muslims.  Abuses
      include kidnapping, frequent detentions, destruction of houses, and
      the use of torture.

  13. A Human Rights Watch report on Dagestan from 2015 refers to abduction-
      style detentions affecting the Salafi community.  Detainees may be
      held incommunicado and subjected to torture.  Such treatment is also
      described in a Human Rights Watch report from January 2016.  Professor
      Bowring's report indicates that the situation has not improved.

  14. Both Human Rights Watch and Professor Bowring refer to the unofficial
      "watch list" of Islamic insurgents and those whom the authorities
      suspect are associated with insurgents.  Individuals on the watch list
      have been targeted by the police although they are not the subjects of
      any criminal complaints or investigations.  Professor Bowring states
      that the authorities frequently detain and question those on the watch
      list.  The authorities announced in 2017 that the list was cancelled
      but civil activists insist it still exists.  Professor Bowring refers
      to a news report from July 2017 regarding someone with the appellant's
      name being on the watch list but Professor Bowring had no evidence to
      show this was the appellant.  People can be on the list without their
      knowledge.  Professor Bowring refers to a journalist regarded as a
      Salafi Muslim who was told he was on the list when he was detained but
      had no prior knowledge of this.

  15. The report by Professor Bowring and the country information provide
      ample evidence to show that the appellant's fear is well-founded.
      Were he to return to Dagestan there is a real risk the appellant would
      face detention and torture.  He has a well-founded fear of persecution
      by reason of religion.  His appeal succeeds on protection grounds
      under the Refugee Convention.

Conclusions
  16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  17. The decision is set aside.

  18. The decision is re-made allowing the appeal on protection grounds.



Anonymity
The first-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and I see no reason of substance for
doing so.


Fee Award              (N.B. This is not part of the decision)
No fee has been paid or is payable so no fee award is made.


M E Deans
                                  27th March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


