
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08477/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2019                      |On 20th March 2019                   |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

An order has been made under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellant being identified. Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to a contempt of court.



1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 21 August 2017  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.

Background.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 22 October  1978.   He
    claims that he left Sri Lanka in February 2017 travelling by  plane  to
    an unknown country, then to another another country  before  flying  to
    the UK, arriving on 26 February 2017.  He claimed asylum  on  the  same
    day.  His application was  refused  for  the  reasons  annexed  to  the
    respondent's decision letter of 21 August 2017.

3.    The respondent accepted that the appellant was Sri Lankan but did  not
    accept his claim that  he  had  been  detained  and  ill-treated  as  a
    terrorist suspected of  Tamil  separatism.   It  was  the  respondent's
    finding that the appellant would not be  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities on  return  and  did  not  fall  within  any  of  the  risk
    categories set out in GJ  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 319.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

4.    The appellant's appeal against this decision was  listed  for  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal on 7 June 2018.  At the beginning of the
    hearing his representative applied for the hearing to be  adjourned  so
    that he could obtain further evidence including medical evidence as had
    only recently managed to register  with  a  GP.   The  application  was
    opposed by the respondent [3].

5.    The judge's  reasons  for  refusing  the  application  were  that  the
    appellant had been on notice of the appeal  since  August  2017  and  a
    previous hearing listed for 2 October 2017 had been adjourned  for  the
    same reason, to  obtain  a  medical  report.  The  appellant  had  been
    directed to file any expert evidence 14 days prior to the  hearing  and
    he had, therefore, been on notice two weeks previously that he did  not
    have the required evidence [4].

6.    The judge commented that, as the appellant had had  over  nine  months
    to produce evidence but had not done so, it was more  likely  than  not
    that he would not produce evidence in the future.  She also  said  that
    the more time passed, the more the events which  the  appellant  sought
    rely on were in the past and it was in his best interests that the case
    was heard sooner rather than later [6].

7.    The judge therefore proceeded to hear the appeal.  She  did  not  find
    the appellant to be a credible witness.  She took into account a  short
    medical report from the GP he had registered with who said that in  his
    opinion the appellant was suffering from PTSD and  had  suicidal  ideas
    [14].  She noted the diagnosis of a risk of suicide but commented  that
    the report carried less weight than a report from a  recognised  expert
    in the field and that the GP's diagnosis and opinion was based in  part
    upon the account given to him by the appellant [69].

8.    The judge was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  would  be  of  any
    interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka. She commented  at  [74]  that
    the appellant was legally represented, his evidence  was  very  limited
    and the documentation, to the extent that it could be collected in  the
    UK, was woeful despite the previous hearing being adjourned so that  it
    could be obtained. The appeal was accordingly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal.

9.    In the grounds of appeal, it is argued at  ground  1  that  the  judge
    erred in not granting the application  for  a  further  adjournment  to
    obtain medical evidence.  The appellant had only  recently  managed  to
    register with a GP  and  the  judge  had  failed  to  engage  with  why
    registration had been late and whether it was a fault  attributable  to
    the appellant.  She had failed to consider that the appellant had  been
    on a waiting list and could only register with  the  GP  when  a  space
    became available and that without a GP referral no medical expert could
    be instructed.  According to  the  GPs  letter  of  1  June  2018,  the
    appellant was suffering from PTSD and needed a lot of support,  medical
    treatment and had  a  suicidal  ideation.   In  such  circumstances,  a
    psychiatric report was necessary.

10.   The grounds further argue  that  the  judge  erred  in  placing  undue
    weight on the lack of corroboration  (ground  2);  when  rejecting  the
    appellant's claim the judge failed to consider the plausibility of  the
    claim as a matter separate from the findings on credibility (ground 3);
    failed to give proper weight to the  fact  the  appellant  had  claimed
    asylum immediately on arrival (ground 4), erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant failed to meet the risk categories in GJ (ground  5);  failed
    to consider the risk on return as  an  asylum  seeker  (ground  6)  and
    finally, failed to take proper account of the letter  of  1  June  2018
    from the appellant's GP (ground 7).

11.   Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Grubb)  as
    follows:

         "...

         3. Ground 1 is arguable.  It is arguable, given the acceptance that
         the appellant had only recently been able to register  with  a  GP,
         that it was unfair not to adjourn the hearing in order  to  seek  a
         medical report.  Whilst the absence of  supporting  evidence  would
         not, in itself, be an irrelevance (TK (Burundi)) and  so  ground  2
         standing alone has little  merit,  in  part  the  judge  took  into
         account the absence of evidence which  an  adjournment  would  have
         permitted the appellant the opportunity to obtain.

         4. Grounds 3 and 4 are  not  arguable.   I  would,  however,  grant
         permission on all other grounds."

12.   This appeal was listed before me on 7 February 2019 when Ms  Jegarajah
    asked for  a  short  adjournment  to  obtain  a  medical  report.   She
    explained the difficulties that her instructing solicitors had  had  in
    persuading the appellant to seek medical treatment.  In  the  light  of
    the terms of  the  grant  of  permission  and  the  way  the  appellant
    presented at the hearing, I was by a narrow margin satisfied  that  the
    appellant should have one last opportunity of obtaining  a  psychiatric
    report to see what light, if any, it  might  cast  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

13.   The appellant was seen by Dr Lawrence, a consultant in  General  Adult
    Psychiatry, on 26 February 2019 and his report is dated 5  March  2019.
    Dr Lawrence records symptoms diagnostic of clinical depression  and  of
    PTSD.  He noted that the appellant was showing signs  of  self-neglect,
    his mental state was extremely flat, and his depressive  symptoms  were
    very obvious.  Dealing with the cause of his PTSD, the doctor says that
    he cannot be entirely clear about this.  The appellant was  brought  up
    in a war zone and  such  childhood  experiences  would  certainly  have
    traumatised him.  In addition, the appellant was disturbed as  he  told
    the doctor about the beatings he had received in detention.

14.   It was Dr Lawrence's  view  that  it  was  highly  unlikely  that  the
    appellant was simulating his symptoms as, although it was  possible  to
    pretend to have a particular symptom, it was very difficult to simulate
    a complete syndrome as a syndrome contained a pattern of symptoms which
    all had to match and many of which were not  intuitively  obvious.   He
    went on to consider whether the appellant  was  fit  to  face  a  court
    hearing.  It was his view that he had the capacity to understand  court
    proceedings and to instruct a solicitor and  was  fit  to  face  cross-
    examination but he asked the court to bear in  mind  his  mental  state
    when cross-examined, as this was likely to simply stimulate his trauma,
    and also to take into account that retardation and  numbness  following
    traumatic experiences and depression interfered with cognitive function
    and were associated with slow and hesitant answers and poor memory.

15.   Ms Jegarajah submitted that the  report  was  in  measured  terms  and
    indicated that clearly things were not at all right with the appellant.
     The report, so she argued, indicated that the  appellant  should  have
    been treated as a vulnerable  witness  in  accordance  with  the  Joint
    Presidential  Guidelines.   His  mental  condition  indicated  by   the
    psychiatric report was such that it would be relevant to an  assessment
    of his credibility and to the  way  in  which  his  answers  should  be
    assessed.  She  submitted  that  if  the  appellant  was  found  to  be
    credible, there was sufficient material on which a First-tier  Tribunal
    judge could allow his appeal.

16.   Ms Isherwood submitted that there had been a long delay  in  obtaining
    medical evidence and that the judge had been fully entitled  to  refuse
    the adjournment.

Assessment of the issues.

17.   The primary ground of appeal relied on is ground  1  arguing  that  it
    was unfair for an  adjournment  to  be  refused.   Whilst  I  can  well
    understand why the judge refused the application in the  light  of  the
    fact that there had been a previous adjournment for medical evidence to
    be obtained but to no avail, and no application was  made  for  another
    adjournment until the day  of  the  hearing.  However,  when  assessing
    whether ground 1 is made out, the issue is not whether the judge  acted
    reasonably but the test is one of fairness and whether  there  was  any
    deprivation of the affected  party's  right  to  a  fair  hearing:  see
    Nwaigwe (adjournment;  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  418,  referring  to  SH
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 at [13],  where
    the Court said, "First, when considering whether the immigration  judge
    ought to have granted an adjournment, the test was  not  irrationality.
    The test was not whether his decision was properly open to him  or  was
    Wednesbury unreasonable or  perverse.   The  test  and  sole  test  was
    whether it was unfair".

18.   The psychiatric report now confirms the report  of  the  GP  that  the
    appellant has symptoms of  clinical  depression  and  PTSD.   There  is
    evidence annexed to the medical report at appendix 6 in  a  recent  BMJ
    article dealing with the fact that inconsistencies in history are  very
    common in the survivors of traumatic events and that  this  is  a  fact
    properly to be taken into account when assessing credibility.

19.   I am satisfied that the failure to grant an adjournment  has  in  this
    appellant's particular circumstances  affected  his  right  to  a  fair
    hearing in that the medical evidence now available, foreshadowed in the
    GPs letter, is evidence capable of  affecting  the  assessment  of  the
    credibility of his oral evidence.  I also accept what I have been  told
    about the difficulties his representatives have had in  persuading  him
    to seek medical help.  Taking into account the concerns expressed in AM
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 about  ensuring
    a fair hearing for vulnerable witnesses, in the  light  of  information
    now  available,  I  am  satisfied  that  it  was  prejudicial  to   the
    appellant's case for the application for an adjournment to be  refused.
    Further, I am not satisfied that this is a case which is bound to  fail
    even if the appellant's account is accepted and,  in  this  context,  I
    note that UTJ Grubb granted permission in respect of ground 5 which was
    a challenge to the issue of whether the appellant could meet  the  risk
    categories in GJ.

20.   In summary, I am satisfied that the interests of justice require  this
    decision to be set aside.  Both representatives agreed, and  there  can
    be no issue about this, that the proper course would be for the  appeal
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration by way of
    a full rehearing.

Decision.

21.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full  rehearing
    by a different judge.

22.   In the light of the issues raised in this appeal, I am satisfied  that
    this is a proper case for an order to be made under rule 14(1)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  I  make  an  order
    prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to  lead
    to the appellant being identified.


Signed:     H J E Latter     Dated: 15 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
