
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08013/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th February 2021                         |On 19th March 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     SA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel of Counsel, instructed by Hallmark Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    file contained the documents in paper format.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mensah promulgated on 20 November  2020,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection
    and human rights claim dated 5 August 2019 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  4  October  2018  and
    claimed asylum on the same day, having  left  Iraq  on  21  July  2018,
    travelling via Turkey, Greece and France.  The Appellant's  nationality
    is in dispute, he has claimed both that he is Iranian and  that  he  is
    stateless, but had been born and lived all his life in Iraq.

 4. The Respondent refused the application the  basis  that  the  Appellant
    would be returned to Iraq and would not face any risk on return  there.
    The Respondent accepted that the Appellant  was  Kurdish  but  did  not
    accept his claimed Iranian  nationality,  finding  that  the  Appellant
    either had, or could obtain  status  in  Iraq,  where  his  family  had
    previously been granted refugee status.  The Appellant's claim to be  a
    member of  the  KDPI  was  considered  plausible  and  consistent  with
    background evidence, but the Appellant's credibility had  been  damaged
    by his failure  to  submit  a  letter  from  the  KDPI  confirming  his
    membership, which he stated would be submitted.  There was no  evidence
    of any KDPI activity in the United Kingdom and the Respondent  did  not
    accept that the Appellant had been threatened by the security  services
    in Iraq in 2015.  The Appellant's credibility was damaged by section  8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 by
    virtue of his  travel  through  several  safe  third  countries  before
    claiming asylum in the United Kingdom.  The Respondent  considered  the
    factors in paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules, but these were  not
    in the Appellant's favour.

 5. The Respondent considered that the Appellant would be able to obtain  a
    CSID card in Iraq given that he was in contact with his  family  there.
    In Iraq there would be a sufficiency of protection available to him and
    internal relocation if necessary.  The Appellant  would  not  face  any
    risk of a breach of Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive,  nor
    any breach of his right to respect for private and  family  life  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.   There  were  no
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain on  any
    other basis.

 6. Judge Mensah dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  20
    November 2020 on all grounds.   In  summary,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted the  Appellant's  Kurdish  ethnicity  but  overall  found  the
    Appellant to be a completely unreliable witness and rejected his  claim
    in its entirety.  It was not accepted that the Appellant  was  Iranian,
    nor that he had no documents or status in Iraq and it  was  found  that
    the Appellant could return to the IKR and to  his  family  where  there
    would be no risk to him.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on three grounds as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
    nationality, in  particular  that  it  was  not  in  dispute  that  the
    Appellant was Iranian but only whether he could obtain Iraqi status  or
    nationality and that the First-tier Tribunal did not apply the  correct
    standard of proof in accordance with KK and others (Nationality:  North
    Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT 92 (IAC), as the first-tier Tribunal  could
    not be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the Appellant had
    obtained Iraqi nationality and he could do  so  only  as  a  matter  of
    discretion.  Secondly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take
    evidence into account when assessing his claim, both in relation to the
    Appellant's  attendance  at  the  Iraqi  embassy  and  the  Appellant's
    explanation as to why he had been unable to obtain a  letter  from  the
    KDPI in Paris.  Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal  wrongly  applied
    the country guidance in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG
    [2018] UKUT 00212 which is relevant only to  Iraqi  nationals  and  not
    Iranian refugees, which the Appellant's family were.

 8. At the oral hearing, Ms Patel relied on the written grounds  of  appeal
    and made additional oral submissions.  In relation to the first  ground
    of appeal, it was submitted that the Respondent had accepted  that  the
    Appellant is an Iranian national, which  should  be  reflected  in  the
    record of proceedings and as such, if the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    accept the concession made, it should have been raised at  the  hearing
    and reasons given for departure for it within the findings.   Ms  Patel
    said that the finding that the Appellant is not an Iranian national  is
    material given that it taints the other credibility  findings  made  in
    the decision.  As to the Appellant's status in  Iraq,  the  Appellant's
    evidence was that he had no CSID card and that his family had not  been
    successful in obtaining status in Iraq, although the  family  had  been
    recognised by the UNHCR as refugees, they were IDP's in Iraq.  It is  a
    matter of discretion as to whether the  Appellant  could  obtain  Iraqi
    nationality and it was not guaranteed.

 9. In relation to the second ground of appeal, and  paragraph  49  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision in particular,  Ms  Patel  queried  what
    evidence it was that the Appellant was expected to  have  produced  and
    submitted that there was a  failure  to  take  into  account  that  the
    Appellant had given all the evidence that he could.  The Appellant  had
    given evidence that he had visited the Iraqi embassy,  but  they  could
    offer him no  assistance  when  he  told  them  he  was  Iranian.   The
    Appellant's case before the  First-ticker  Tribunal  was  that  he  had
    Iranian  nationality  on  the  basis  that  his  parents  were  Iranian
    nationals.

10. In paragraphs 45 to 47  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  the
    Appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to  the  letter  about  his   KDPI
    membership is set out, including that the work to provide such  letters
    had moved from Paris to the  IKR  in  2019  and  the  letter  was  sent
    straight  to  the  Appellant's  solicitors.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    however found this explanation to be inconsistent with the Respondent's
    Country Policy Information Note dated January 2019, but gave no reasons
    for preferring this to the Appellant's evidence.

11. The third ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal applied  the
    country guidance in  AAH  inappropriately  as  that  decision  did  not
    concern Iranian refugees, only Iraqi nationals.  It was an error of law
    to extrapolate this guidance to apply to the Appellant and at best  the
    decision included reference to some assistance being available to those
    without a CSID card and that IDPs were given PDS cards for rations.  Ms
    Patel confirmed that the Appellant  had  not  relied  on  any  specific
    evidence in relation to the position for  Iranian  refugees,  nor  what
    documents, if any were required  for  them  to  access  services.   The
    Appellant's own evidence was that he did not require a CSID  to  access
    education or healthcare and he was not  asked  for  any  documents  for
    employment.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Lindsay referred to the decision letter
    and accepted that it did not expressly refer to the Appellant's claimed
    Iranian nationality as a fact which was either accepted or rejected but
    in any event whether or not the Appellant is an Iranian  national,  has
    no material bearing on the issues about whether he would be at risk  on
    return to Iraq and the Respondent has only proposed a return  to  Iraq.
    In any event the Respondent's position is clear in the context  of  the
    decision letter as a whole that the Appellant's claim was not  credible
    and specifically that there was a lack of documentary evidence  of  the
    Appellant's claimed Iranian  nationality.   Mr  Lindsay  accepted  that
    there was an apparent concession at the outset of  the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, but submitted  that  this  was  not  a  formal
    concession that the Appellant's claim was credible  on  any  basis  but
    rather recognition that the Respondent was content for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to proceed on the basis that the  Appellant  was  entitled  to
    Iranian nationality.  Again it was emphasised  that  this  was  in  any
    event not material to the issues to be decided.

13. In relation to the first ground  of  appeal,  was  submitted  that  the
    Appellant was really challenging the conclusion in  paragraph  52  that
    the Appellant is not Iranian and has no lawful  status  in  Iraq.   The
    nationality finding does not of itself undermine  any  of  the  reasons
    given for the adverse credibility findings against the Appellant  which
    were clear, cogent and sustainable.  As to the  Appellant's  status  or
    otherwise in Iraq, the Appellant has relied significantly  on  his  own
    assertions, evidence and credibility rather than by  reference  to  any
    documentary and background evidence.  This claim was in essence that he
    had lived his whole life  in  Iraq  without  a  CSID  and  without  any
    problems accessing services, accommodation or  employment  and  it  was
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to reject that  for
    the detailed reasons given.   It  was  simply  not  believed  that  the
    Appellant did not have a CSID card.   The  evidence  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AAH from Dr Fatah was that a CSID is a crucial document for
    adult life in Iraq.  Whilst it is accepted that there  is  no  specific
    reference in the  country  guidance  case  to  refugees  in  Iraq,  the
    evidence was in relation to adults and not specifically only  to  Iraqi
    nationals.  Considering the evidence in the round, it would be entirely
    speculative for the First-tier Tribunal to have found that the  country
    guidance didn't include the Appellant in relation to the importance  of
    a CSID.

14. In relation to the second ground of appeal, it was submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had carefully considered the evidence  relied  upon
    by the Appellant and had given clear reasons for the  findings  reached
    in paragraphs 46 to 49 of the decision.  It was open to the Tribunal to
    find that in circumstances  where  the  Appellant  had  not  taken  any
    documents to the Iraqi embassy, he had not done all he could, nor  made
    best efforts to obtain their assistance.  In relation to the KDPI,  the
    First-tier Tribunal considered the documents in the round in accordance
    with the principles in a Tanveer Ahmed, there being no  explanation  as
    to the different language that  the  document  was  sent  in,  nor  any
    explanation as  to  how  the  document  was  sent  to  the  Appellant's
    solicitors rather  than  directly  to  the  national  authorities.   Mr
    Lindsay submitted that no reasonable Tribunal could have concluded that
    the KDPI letter was credible in all the circumstances.

15.  In reply, Ms Patel noted that the CPIN relied upon by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, predated the explanation given in a letter from the  KDPI  in
    the IKR that the location of their operations had moved in relation  to
    membership letters, a point not addressed by the First-tier Tribunal.

Findings and reasons

 1. I consider the first and third grounds of appeal together as they raise
    overlapping issues on the facts and findings of the First-tier Tribunal
    as to the Appellant's nationality and/or status in Iran and Iraq.

 2.  The  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  Appellant  had  not
    established to the lower standard  of  proof  that  he  is  an  Iranian
    national  is  wholly  immaterial  to  the  overall  conclusion  on  the
    Appellant's credibility and the outcome  of  his  appeal,  and  in  any
    event, was a finding  which  was  rationally  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to make on the evidence (or lack of evidence) before it.   The
    Respondent proposes to return the Appellant to Iraq, with no suggestion
    of him being returned to Iran and  therefore  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were required to assess only risk on return to Iraq and the Appellant's
    status, if any, there.  The Appellant did not claim to be  at  risk  on
    return to Iraq because of Iranian  nationality  and  to  the  contrary,
    claimed that his family were recognised refugees  in  Iraq,  a  country
    where he was born and had lived his whole life before travelling to the
    United Kingdom.  Whether or not the Appellant is  an  Iranian  national
    therefore has no bearing on whether he would be at risk  on  return  to
    Iraq.  Further, the First-tier Tribunal has given  clear  and  detailed
    reasons for the adverse credibility findings made against the Appellant
    which do not rely in any significant way, if at all, on whether he  had
    established that he was an Iranian national.

 3. The finding was in any event open to the First-tier  Tribunal  even  if
    the Respondent had unequivocally conceded that  the  Appellant  was  an
    Iranian national (which was not accepted in the decision letter).   The
    Appellant's claim before the First-tier Tribunal was said by  Ms  Patel
    to be that he was an Iranian national, however there  was  no  evidence
    supporting  that  claim  and  to  the  contrary,  there  were   written
    statements before the First-tier Tribunal from the  Appellant  that  he
    was not an Iranian national and that he was stateless (with  a  similar
    suggestion that his parents were also stateless in Iraq).  At best, the
    Appellant's own evidence on this point was contradictory.  There was no
    background country evidence on nationality law in Iran (for example  as
    to whether this was  passed  to  children  of  Iranian  nationals  born
    outside of Iran) and no other supporting evidence from the  Appellant's
    family (who he is in contact with) or any other  documentary  evidence.
    On this basis, in the round and in the context  of  the  other  adverse
    credibility findings, it was lawfully and rationally open to the First-
    tier Tribunal to conclude that the Appellant had not  established  that
    he was an Iranian national.

 4. The Appellant's second part of the first ground of  appeal  as  to  the
    standard of proof of whether  he  could  obtain  Iraqi  citizenship  is
    misconceived given that the First-tier Tribunal made  a  clear  finding
    not that he was merely entitled  to  apply  for  Iraqi  nationality  or
    documents  but  that  he  had  lawful  status  in  Iraq  and  was   not
    undocumented there, but had a CSID or other documentation.  That was  a
    finding  entirely  rationally  and  lawfully  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the detailed reasons  given  in  the  decision,  primarily
    relying on the evidence in AAH  in  contrast  to  the  Appellant's  own
    account.

 5. In relation to AAH, the First-tier Tribunal  set  out  the  Appellant's
    evidence as to accessing education, employment and healthcare  in  Iraq
    and his family access to communication in paragraphs 27 to  29  of  the
    decision.  In essence this was that the Appellant was  able  to  access
    all of these things and obtain a food ration card only through  use  of
    his birth certificate and that neither he nor any of his family members
    ever had a CSID card.  The First-tier Tribunal then  set  out  findings
    and extracts of the evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AAH  in
    paragraphs 30 and 31, before concluding that  the  Appellant's  account
    was inconsistent with the background country evidence available.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal acknowledged  that  AAH  was  not  specifically
    concerned with Iranian refugees  in  Iraq,  but  that  it  did  include
    evidence as to the importance of the CSID card to all adults, and  that
    from the CSID card (or information in  the  civil  register)  a  person
    could obtain a Public Distribution System card (a  PDS).   It  was  not
    accepted that an Iranian refugee  in  Iraq  would  be  able  to  access
    services which an undocumented Iraqi would not be able  to  because  of
    the lack of a CSID.  That is an entirely rational and lawful conclusion
    on  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was  wholly
    unexplained how an Iranian refugee would be in a better  position  than
    an undocumented Iraqi or why different rules would apply to them and it
    is inherently implausible that it would.  The Appellant did not  submit
    or rely on any background country  evidence  as  to  the  position  for
    Iranian refugees, nor did he rely on any other evidence to support what
    amounted to no more than an assertion in his evidence that  either  his
    birth certificate alone was  sufficient  or  he  was  not  required  to
    produce any documents at all.

 7. In these circumstances, there was no error of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  a  CSID   or   other
    documentation in Iraq, without which he would not  have  been  able  to
    access education, healthcare, employment, food aid or accommodation and
    without which his family would not have been able to do the  same.   On
    the basis of this finding, confirmed in the conclusion in paragraph  52
    of the decision, it was not necessary for the First-tier Tribunal to go
    further and consider whether the  Appellant  could  apply  for  and  be
    granted Iraqi nationality.

 8. The second ground of appeal is also in two parts as to the  Appellant's
    evidence of his attendance at the Iraqi  embassy  and  about  his  KDPI
    membership.  In relation to the embassy visit, the First-tier  Tribunal
    recorded in paragraph 49 the Appellant's evidence that he attended  the
    Iraqi embassy but took no documents with him to try  to  establish  his
    status in Iraq because he did not have the knowledge.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal found that this damaged his credibility, particularly  as  the
    Appellant  had  sufficient  understanding  to  know  that   documentary
    evidence was needed for his asylum claim.  It  is  not  entirely  clear
    what it is the Appellant says the First-tier  Tribunal  has  failed  to
    consider in relation to his  evidence  on  this  matter  and  the  oral
    submissions simply questioned what  evidence  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    could reasonably expect in  relation  to  this.   However,  the  actual
    conclusion was that the Appellant's  explanation  for  not  taking  any
    documents with him to the Iraqi embassy (and he states he had an  Iraqi
    birth certificate, a ration card and the  UNHCR  letter  and  at  least
    copies of some of these were submitted to the Respondent and  Tribunal)
    was not accepted and that he had not therefore done  all  he  could  to
    obtain assistance from the Embassy.  There is no error of law  in  that
    conclusion, which was reasonably and rationally open to the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the evidence before it.

 9. The second part of the second ground of appeal is that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to take into account the Appellant's explanation as  to
    why he had not been able to obtain a letter from  the  KDPI  in  Paris.
    The Appellant's explanation was set out in part, but not  in  full,  in
    paragraph 46 of the decision, although there is  express  reference  to
    his witness statement such that it is reasonable to conclude  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal did take this into  account  when  considering  the
    documents and the weight to be attached to them.  Similarly,  there  is
    express reference to  the  letters  themselves  from  the  KDPI,  which
    includes  one  containing  an  explanation  that  the  confirmation  of
    membership has moved from the office in Paris to the IKR.

10. The First-tier Tribunal  then  quoted  from  the  Respondent's  Country
    Policy Information  Note  from  January  2019  as  to  verification  of
    membership of the KDPI.  The First-tier Tribunal concluded that  little
    and negative weight was to be attached to the KDPI letters because  (i)
    the Appellant has not filed any evidence to  show  how  his  solicitors
    received the letters, (ii) they were at odds with the country  evidence
    available as they were not sent directly to the Respondent, without any
    explanation, and the documents were in English, not French.

11. The KDPI letters all post-date the publication of the CPIN  by  several
    months, with the explanation of who a response on membership will  come
    from having changed since that date.  This is not expressly  considered
    by the First-tier Tribunal and if accepted, arguably undermines one  of
    the reasons for attaching little weight to the documents that they  are
    not in French - whilst letters coming from Paris would reasonably be in
    French, there is no reason why letters originating from the  IKR  would
    be sent in French.  However, the explanation  does  not  undermine  the
    other two reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal in paragraph  47  of
    the decision, that there was no evidence of how the solicitors received
    the letters and no explanation as to why  the  letters  were  not  sent
    directly to the Respondent.  These matters are not explained at all  by
    the Appellant, his solicitors or the letter from the  KDPI.   In  these
    circumstances,  whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal   appears   to   have
    overlooked the chronology, there remain lawful and rational reasons  as
    to why little weight was given to the documents and weight is primarily
    a  matter  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal   absent   irrationality   or
    perversity, which is not even suggested.

12. In any event, the Appellant has not sought to challenge the  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings that he had not been threatened in Iraq or had  any
    problem with the authorities there; nor that the Appellant's attendance
    at one meeting of the KDPI in the UK would be known to the  authorities
    on return or would place him at risk of any harm whatsoever.   Even  if
    the KDPI letters were given weight to support the Appellant's claim  to
    be a member of the KDPI, this could not, in the context  of  the  other
    findings, have in any event made any material difference to the outcome
    of the appeal as the Appellant was not at  risk  on  return  given  the
    unchallenged findings on this which were not dependent  on  whether  or
    not the Appellant was a member of the KDPI.

13. For these reasons there are no material errors of law in the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision which is confirmed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson                               Date     16th March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

