
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08413/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 September 2017                      |On 06 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N R
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Fitzsimmons of Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                    Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department seeks to appeal  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell  promulgated  on  16
    March 2017 in which he allowed the appeal of NR  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds against a decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  26
    July 2016 to refuse leave to remain.




2.   For the sake of consistency with the proceedings before the  First-tier
    Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to  NR  as  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.


3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He has  been  accorded  the
    date of birth of 1 January 1989 in circumstances where he  claimed  not
    to know his true date of birth.  Whilst I note that there  was  at  one
    point a dispute in  respect  of  his  age  this  was  resolved  in  the
    Appellant's favour by way of findings made  in  an  earlier  appeal  by
    Judge Eban (appeal reference AS/05197/2005).  I also observe  from  the
    papers that the Appellant has  more  recently  indicated  that  he  has
    adopted 12 July as his birthday, that being  the  date  upon  which  he
    underwent a  baptism  as  part  of  the  process  of  a  conversion  to
    Christianity - an event that forms the core basis of the  asylum  claim
    now relied upon.


4.   The Appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom on  13  January
    2005, and is recorded as having  claimed  asylum  on  that  date.   His
    application at that time was based  on  events  that  had  happened  in
    Afghanistan, arising from a business dispute  between  his  father  and
    another, which it was claimed had subsequently led to difficulties  for
    the Appellant.  The Appellant's  initial  application  for  asylum  was
    refused on 17 February 2005 and his appeal was dismissed by Judge  Eban
    in a decision promulgated on 1 June 2005.


5.   Judge Eban, in addition to accepting the Appellant's account as to  his
    age (paragraph 10), also accepted some aspects of his  claimed  history
    in Afghanistan.  It was accepted that there had been a dispute  between
    the Appellant's father and a business  partner,  that  the  Appellant's
    father had been abducted by the erstwhile partner and not  seen  again,
    and that the partner had with the assistance of the Taliban claimed the
    Appellant's father's land (paragraph 12).  However, Judge Eban did  not
    accept other aspects of the Appellant's account,  in  particular  those
    aspects of his account whereby he claimed to have become  a  target  of
    his father's former business partner.  The claimed facts  not  accepted
    were the matters at the core of the Appellant's claim at that time, and
    his appeal was consequently dismissed.


6.   The Appellant made further submissions to the  Respondent  in  December
    2009 which were refused without a right of appeal in  July  2010.   Yet
    further submissions were made in March 2012  and  in  turn  those  were
    refused without a right of appeal in December 2013.  The Appellant then
    made a further submission in respect of asylum by way of an application
    dated 24 November 2015 in which in particular it was raised that he had
    converted to Christianity, the date for such conversion being given  as
    12 July 2015 (the date of his baptism).



7.   The Appellant was interviewed in relation to  this  claim  on  21  July
    2016 and in due course, for reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'
    letter of 26 July 2016,  his  claim  was  rejected.  It  was,  however,
    acknowledged that he had advanced matters constituting  a  fresh  claim
    for asylum and a right of appeal was accorded to  him.   The  Appellant
    appealed to the IAC.


8.   It is to be noted that in the RFRL the Secretary of State  acknowledged
    pursuant to country materials set out within the RFRL and the  case  of
    NM (Christian Converts) Afghanistan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00045,  that  a
    genuine Christian convert would be in danger on return to  Afghanistan.
    However, the Respondent did not accept that the Appellant was indeed  a
    genuine Christian convert.


9.   The  Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mitchell for reasons set out in his Decision.


10.  The Respondent sought to  challenge  the  Decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by  way  of  Grounds  of  Appeal  drafted  in  support  of  an
    application for permission to appeal. The focus  of  the  challenge  is
    essentially twofold: the Judge had failed to consider  the  Appellant's
    evidence in the round, and in particular had  disregarded  the  adverse
    credibility assessment in the earlier appeal; secondly, the  Judge  had
    failed to make an independent assessment in respect of  the  supporting
    witnesses called by the Appellant but had, to quote from paragraph 5 of
    the Grounds, "simply accepted the witnesses' views on the [Appellant's]
    conversion without assessing the adverse points made in the RFRL."


11.  Permission to appeal was purportedly  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes in a decision dated 26 July 2017.


12.  The Appellant has filed  a  Rule  24  response  dated  24  August  2017
    drafted by Ms Fitzsimmons, who appears for him today.  In the  Rule  24
    response a preliminary matter is raised in respect of the timeliness of
    the Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal.


13.   The  Secretary  of  State's  application  for  permission  to   appeal
    acknowledges the Tribunal determination date to be 17 March  2017,  but
    the application for permission is dated 17 July 2017, i.e. four  months
    after the promulgation date. The delay is acknowledged in section B  of
    the application form  (headed  'Time  limit  for  making  a  First-tier
    application  for  permission  to  appeal'),  and  the  drafter  of  the
    application writes this:



    "The SSHD does not currently have information as to why  it  has  taken
    this long for the judgement to be allocated to a  drafter  for  review.
    The SSHD apologises for the out of time application but asks that  time
    is extended on the basis that there is a  very  significant  chance  of
    success and the seriousness of the nature of the grounds of challenge."


14.  In contrast to the appropriate identification of delay in  lodging  the
    application, Judge Parkes  in  granting  permission  to  appeal  simply
    states: "The application is in time and is  admitted."   Plainly,  this
    observation was in error of fact: Ms Isherwood does not  remotely  seek
    to suggest otherwise.


15.  The preliminary issue that is raised before me is to how this  Tribunal
    should now proceed in light of  that  clear  error  of  fact,  and  the
    consequent failure of  Judge  Parkes  to  extend  the  time  limit  for
    appealing.


16.  In the Rule 24 response - relied upon by Ms  Fitzsimmons  and  expanded
    upon in the course of her oral submissions - reference is made to  case
    law.  Ms Isherwood has also provided me with a  case  relevant  to  the
    consideration of 'out-of-time' applications for permission  to  appeal.
    In short, I have  been  provided  with  the  cases  of  AK  and  others
    (Tribunal Appeal - out of time) Bulgaria * [2004] UKIAT 00201,  BO  and
    Others (Extension of time for appealing) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00035 and
    Boktor and Wanis (late application for permission)  Egypt  [2011]  UKUT
    00442 (IAC).


17.  Ms Fitzsimmons essentially argues  that  the  grant  of  permission  of
    Judge Parkes should be considered to be contingent upon the  resolution
    of the issue of timeliness, and the Tribunal today  must  consider  the
    question of extending time. She invites the Tribunal to refuse to grant
    an  extension  of  time  with  particular  reference  to  some  of  the
    guidelines set out in the case of AK.


18.  Ms Isherwood opposes this approach.  She highlights  that  the  current
    Procedure Rules, the regime that governs the Tribunal in respect of the
    grant of permission to appeal presently,  are  those  in  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 (in respect of applications considered, as here by  Judge  Parkes,
    by the First-tier Tribunal) and the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules  2008  (in  respect  of  applications  considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal), and emphasises that this is  a  different  regime  from  the
    Rules that are referred to in the case law.  Her  primary  position  is
    that the Tribunal is in effect bound by the grant  of  permission,  and
    should simply proceed with the appeal and undertake a consideration  of
    the grounds in the usual way.  If the grant  of  permission  is  to  be
    challenged that should be by way of the process of judicial review, but
    otherwise, absent such a challenge, the Tribunal is  now  seized  of  a
    valid appeal against the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


19.  In the alternative, if the Tribunal does have to turn its mind  to  the
    question of timeliness Ms Isherwood identifies that the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal appears to  have  been  posted  to  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officers' Unit in Salford and not the Home Office Presenting
    Officers' Unit at Hatton Cross where the  appeal  was  heard.   She  is
    unable to say in the limited amount of time that she has had to address
    her mind to these matters whether  the  address  given  in  Salford  is
    indeed the Presenting Officers' Unit's address. Beyond this,  she  does
    not have any knowledge of the circumstances in which the Decision  made
    its way to the appropriate Specialist Appeals Team at the  Home  Office
    that deals with applications for permission to appeal: to  this  extent
    she is not really able to offer anything more  by  way  of  explanation
    than the original drafter.  Otherwise Ms Isherwood  essentially  relies
    upon the merits of the grounds as a reason for extending time.


20.  I do not accept that I am bound by the grant of  permission  to  appeal
    if that was plainly made on the basis of an error.  In my judgement  to
    proceed without giving some further consideration to that  error  would
    be for the Tribunal to proceed on an ultra vires basis.  The permission
    to appeal granted by Judge Parkes cannot be said to be a valid grant of
    permission to appeal if he has not turned his mind to the  question  of
    timeousness - and it is clear that he did not.


21.  It seems to me that notwithstanding that there has  been  a  change  in
    the  Procedure  Rules  there  is  nothing   in   those   changes   that
    substantially denies or negates  the  principles  brought  to  play  in
    consideration of exactly these sort of circumstances in earlier  cases.
    In particular, with regard to the head note in the case of  Boktor  the
    following is to be noted:

         "Where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted,
         but in circumstances where the  application  is  out  of  time,  an
         explanation is provided, but that explanation is not considered  by
         the Judge granting permission, in the light of AK (Tribunal  appeal
         - out of time) Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the  clear
         wording of rule 24(4) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Procedure)
         Rules 2005, the grant of permission to appeal is  conditional,  and
         the question of whether there are special circumstances  making  it
         unjust not to extend time has to be considered."


22.  In this context I consider  rule  24  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  which  is  helpfully  set  out  at
    paragraph 8 of the decision  in  Boktor,  is  in  substantial  part  in
    similar terms to rule 33 of the 2014 Procedure  Rules.  Both  prescribe
    the form and manner in which an application for permission to appeal is
    to be made, including identifying the time limit. Rule 24(4)(a) defines
    the power to extend time for a late application "if satisfied by reason
    of special circumstances it  would  be  unjust  not  to  do  so";  rule
    24(4)(b) identifies that if time is not extended the Tribunal "must not
    admit  the  application".  Whilst  there  are  no  directly   analogous
    provisions to 24(4)(a) and (b) in rule 33 of the  2014  Rules,  however
    the power to extend time is governed by  the  general  case  management
    powers set out under rule  4  -  in  particular  rule  4(3)(a)  -  "the
    Tribunal may... extend... the time for  complying  with  any  rule...".
    There  is  no  comparable  test  set  out  by  reference  to   'special
    circumstances', but the powers under rule 4 are to  be  understood  and
    exercised with reference to the 'overriding objective' set out in  rule
    2(1) (see rule 2(3))  - i.e. fairly and justly.   It  seems  to  me  if
    there has not been due compliance with  that  and  the  Judge  granting
    permission to appeal has not identified any errors in that matter  then
    the permission Judge's decision must now similarly be considered to  be
    contingent.


23.  There is a similar, but slightly different Procedure  Rules  regime  in
    place compared with the case law. An  applicant  is  still  obliged  to
    comply with certain formalities, including in respect of a time  limit;
    the Tribunal has power to relax those formalities  and  to  extend  the
    time limit. Whilst there is no express provision comparable  with  rule
    24(4)(b) - "must not  admit"  -  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  power  to
    consider an application for permission to appeal  (under  rule  34)  is
    contingent upon receipt of an application for permission  to  appeal  -
    which of necessity must be taken to mean a valid application - i.e. one
    that complies with the prescribed requirements under  rule  33  or  has
    otherwise been deemed valid because of favourable consideration of  the
    general case management powers to relax the requirements (including the
    requirement in respect of time).


24.  The procedures for the Upper Tribunal considering  an  application  for
    permission to appeal are also similar, but not identical: see  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, in particular rules 21, 5(3)(a),
    and 2. (These Rules wold  have  been  in  force  at  the  time  of  the
    consideration of the appeal in Boktor.)


25.  In the circumstances it seems to  me  that  the  general  principles  -
    absent the specific reference to 'special circumstances' - continue  to
    apply: I can identify nothing in either the fact of the change  of  the
    Rules, or in  the  changed  wording  of  the  Rules,  that  warrants  a
    departure from this approach. Accordingly guidance such as provided  in
    the cases of BO and AK continues to be relevant.   In  particular,  the
    head note of BO helpfully offers the following:

         "If a notice of appeal is given out of  time,  the  first  task  in
         deciding whether to extend time is  to  see  whether  there  is  an
         explanation (or a series of explanations) that cover the delay.  If
         there is, it and all other relevant factors, such as  the  strength
         of the grounds, the consequences of the decision, the length of the
         delay and any relevant conduct by the Respondent are  to  be  taken
         into account..."



26.  I accept Ms Fitzsimmons submission that I must address the question  of
    the timeliness of the Secretary of State's application  for  permission
    to appeal, bearing in mind the guidance indicated above - but with  the
    caveat that I am not applying a  'special  circumstances'  test  but  a
    'fairly and justly' test.


27.  Ms Fitzsimmons places particular reliance upon certain passages in  the
    case of AK and others.  She emphasises paragraphs 25-27, which  are  in
    these terms:

         "25. We entirely reject the Secretary of  State's  submission  that
             one day's lateness is to be regarded as de minimis.  The  time
             limits in appeals of this nature are very  short.   Under  the
             2000 Procedure Rules, the time limit in an  asylum  appeal  is
             ten days  after  the  Adjudicator's  determination.   A  day's
             lateness extends the time by  ten  per  cent.   Ten  per  cent
             cannot be regarded as a minimal amount.


         26.  The  assertion  that  in  AK's  case  the  delay  was  due  to
             'administrative error' adds virtually  nothing  to  the  case.
             Nobody supposed that the delay was deliberate.  On  the  other
             hand, the Secretary of State does not advance any  explanation
             or excuse for the 'error'.


         27.  As [the Home Office Presenting Officer] pointed out, the  fact
             that the Vice President thought that the grounds were arguable
             shows something of their strength, but, as we  have  indicated
             earlier, the strength of grounds cannot by itself be a  reason
             for extending time.  The assertion that there is no  prejudice
             to the Claimant as a result of the delay is simply wrong.   On
             the expiry of the time limit, the Claimant's  position,  as  a
             person  whose  appeal  had  been  allowed,  became  very  much
             stronger.  The Adjudicator's determination could now  only  be
             upset if time  were  extended.   It  clearly  puts  her  at  a
             disadvantage if the time limit is essentially to be ignored."


28.  It seems to me that there  is  considerable  weight  in  the  arguments
    advanced  by  Ms  Fitzsimmons  that  draw  an   analogy   between   the
    circumstances in the instant case and those under consideration in  AK.
    The delay here, on a time limit of fourteen days, was 3.5 months.  That
    is of course a much more  serious  delay  than  that  which  was  being
    considered in AK.


29.  The Secretary of State in the application for permission to appeal  did
    not  in  truth  offer  any  explanation  for  the  delay,  but   simply
    acknowledged that it was unknown why  there  had  been  any  delay  and
    offered an apology.  Ms Isherwood has offered a  potential  explanation
    that the decision may have been misdirected  to  the  wrong  Presenting
    Officers' Unit, but that in itself falls  well  short  of  offering  an
    explanation for the very considerable period of delay  thereafter,  and
    she is  not  otherwise  able  to  offer  any  further  explanation.   I
    acknowledge that Ms Isherwood is  in  some  difficulties  in  gathering
    information in this regard, but it remains the case, it  seems  to  me,
    that essentially no proper explanation has been offered for  the  delay
    notwithstanding the apology offered.


30.  The view of the Upper Tribunal in AK was that the strength  of  grounds
    could not in itself be a reason for extending  time  -  and  ultimately
    that is what Ms Isherwood falls back on, by reference to the favourable
    view on arguability expressed by Judge Parkes. On a strict  application
    of AK, this is not enough. In any event, for my own part - as  will  be
    seen in due course - ultimately I do not  consider  there  to  be  much
    merit in the challenge the Secretary of State has raised.


31.  Accordingly, in all the circumstances I have reached  the  conclusions:
    first, it is indeed for me to consider the  question  of  extension  of
    time; and second, extension of time is not to be granted.   This  means
    that permission to appeal is denied to the Secretary  of  State.   That
    formally brings the appeal to a conclusion.


32.  I mentioned in my consideration of the above issues that I  had  turned
    my mind to the merits of the appeal.  Indeed, before making my decision
    I invited submissions on  the  substance  of  the  challenge  from  the
    parties - and I am grateful for those  submissions  from  each  of  the
    representatives.  However, as I say, it seems to me that ultimately the
    Respondent's appeal lacks substantial merit and were I to  have  formed
    the view that time to appeal should be extended and  proceeded  on  the
    basis of the contingent permission granted by  Judge  Parkes,  I  would
    ultimately have reached the conclusion that the Secretary of State  has
    failed to identify any material error of law such that the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell should be set aside.


33.  In circumstances where  I  have  reached  a  conclusion  which  refuses
    permission to appeal I do not propose to go into very great detail, but
    nonetheless make the following brief observations because they  are  at
    least in part relevant to the issue of 'merits' to which I  had  regard
    when considering the issue of extension of time.


34.   It  seems  to  me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   accurately
    identifies the issues in the appeal at  paragraphs  4  and  12  of  his
    Decision, and indeed at paragraph 4 acknowledges that the only argument
    being put forward by the Secretary of State was whether  the  Appellant
    was a genuine convert, it not being  disputed  that  he  was  attending
    church in view of the number of witnesses who attended the hearing.


35.  The Judge also correctly identified the concession on risk made by  the
    Secretary of State pursuant to the case of NM, (see paragraph 13 of the
    Judge's decision).



36.  The Judge had regard to the Appellant's immigration history and, in  my
    judgment, it cannot be said that he in some way overlooked this in  his
    overall consideration of the  claim,  see  for  example  paragraph  12.
    Whilst it is correct that some aspects of the decision  of  Judge  Eban
    rejected the Appellant's  account,  there  are  other  aspects  of  the
    disputed  account  in  respect  of  which  Judge  Eban  found  in   the
    Appellant's favour.  Judge Eban's  decision  was  not  an  'across  the
    board' conclusion of a lack of  credibility.   It  was  a  nuanced  and
    careful assessment.


37.  The Judge  Mitchell  also  identifies  and  states  the  basis  of  the
    Secretary of State's refusal of the Appellant's case with reference  to
    the RFRL (paragraph 14).


38.  The Judge refers to the Appellant's  oral  testimony  before  him,  and
    observes that the Appellant gave  his  evidence,  whilst  in  a  highly
    emotional manner, nonetheless a straightforward  manner;  although  his
    answers were extremely lengthy  he  did  not  at  any  time  contradict
    himself and his evidence had been consistent throughout (paragraph 11).


39.  The Judge gave also gave consideration to  the  supporting  testimonies
    of the Appellant's witnesses: see paragraphs 15-17.  It was also  noted
    that there were other witnesses in  attendance  that  the  Respondent's
    representative did not  wish  to  hear  from  or  challenge.   The  key
    witnesses for the Appellant were members of his church,  in  particular
    the  Reverend  David  McClure  and  the  Reverend  Thomas  Gillum.   At
    paragraph 15, in setting out the evidence of the Reverend  McClure  the
    Judge observes that his evidence  included  the  observation  that  the
    Appellant "was not "swallowing wholesale" what was being  said  to  him
    but was thinking about it and questioning it".  This  is  illustrative,
    it seems to me, of an element of critical thinking on the part  of  the
    Appellant with regard to his exploration of the  Christian  faith  that
    the Judge so identified.


40.  Reverend Gillum's testimony is stated to have  included  a  description
    of "how he treats with caution any  asylum  seeker  who  wishes  to  be
    baptised  and  uses  the  test  of  'Belonging,  Behaving,  Believing'"
    (paragraph 16).


41.  The Judge observed that  both  these  witnesses  were  "impressive  and
    highly credible", and that they themselves "were clearly satisfied that
    the Appellant  was  a  genuine  convert"  (paragraph  17).   The  Judge
    concluded that he considered this evidence  to  be  "highly  persuasive
    that the Appellant is a  genuine  convert"  (paragraph  17).   On  that
    basis, and on the basis of the totality of the evidence  before  him  -
    "considering all the evidence that has been provided" (paragraph 19)  -
    the Judge expressed his satisfaction that the Appellant was  a  genuine
    convert from Islam to Christianity.  In consequence of  the  concession
    made by the Respondent further to the case of NM, that  was  enough  to
    allow the appeal.


42.  I do not accept for a  moment  that  there  is  any  substance  in  the
    suggestion  that  the  Judge  essentially  uncritically  accepted   the
    evidence of the witnesses.  It seems to me that  the  grounds  in  this
    regard essentially confuse the notion of the independent evaluation and
    consequent acceptance of the evidence with the notion of adopting  that
    evidence uncritically. For the reasons explained in the  Decision,  the
    Judge was entitled to place significant weight - indeed  characterising
    it as highly persuasive - on what was essentially the opinion  evidence
    of the two churchmen as to their views that the Appellant  was  genuine
    in his conversion.


43.  As regards the challenges  to  the  Judge's  failure  to  consider  the
    evidence 'in the round' it is to be acknowledged that  the  Judge  does
    not make any express reference to the adverse credibility  findings  in
    the earlier appeal, albeit, as I  say,  he  clearly  had  in  mind  the
    immigration  history.   It  is  to  be  noted  that   the   Appellant's
    presentation of  his  conversion  to  Christianity  was  essentially  a
    completely new case and accordingly any past untruthfulness  would  not
    inevitably be a determinative, or even necessarily a strong  signifier,
    as to the claimed new fact of his commitment to Christianity.  That was
    primarily to be assessed by the evidence of that conversion - and  that
    is essentially what the Judge did.


44.  Criticism  is  also  made  that  the  Judge  failed  to  have  detailed
    consideration to the individual points and analysis set out in the RFRL
    as to why the Secretary of State  considered  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed to demonstrate a credible knowledge of  Christianity  consistent
    with his professed interest in Christianity.


45.  It seems to me that whilst there may have been gaps in the  Appellant's
    knowledge he could not possibly be described as being ignorant  of  his
    faith: there are passages in the interview, for example at questions 92
    and 95, where he relates certain parables  from  the  Bible.   He  also
    refers to the four Gospels and he also refers to the disciples and  the
    circumstances of Christ's baptism.


46.  The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was to the effect that  the
    Appellant had attended a number of classes at his church.  It cannot be
    said that he was therefore untutored in his new professed  faith.   So,
    it follows that if there were any  gaps  in  his  knowledge  that  must
    either have been a product of gaps in the tutoring, or a product of his
    failure to pick up and retain information from the tutoring.  It  seems
    to me such  gaps  are  therefore  not  in  themselves  a  very  helpful
    indicator of whether he is genuine in his faith.  To  that  extent  the
    Respondent's reasoning in the RFRL is substantially undermined once  it
    is accepted that the Appellant did  indeed  go  through  a  process  of
    preparation for baptism and has been a regular attender at church.


47.  In any event I consider  that  the  Judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
    conclude that the evidence presented in respect of the opinions of  the
    two reverends before him was persuasive evidence as to the  genuineness
    of the Appellant's conversion, and to take that into account along with
    the  Appellant's  own  consistency  of  his  evidence  in  reaching   a
    favourable conclusion on this key point.   The  Judge  only  needed  to
    reach that conclusion on the lower standard applicable in asylum  cases
    but indeed went on to say that he was so persuaded that he  would  have
    been satisfied even to the civil standard of a balance of probabilities
    (paragraph 18).


48.  In all such circumstances, whilst it might  have  been  better  if  the
    Judge had included some closer analysis of the reasoning in the RFRL, I
    am not  persuaded  that  the  Respondent  has  identified  anything  of
    particular merit in the grounds of appeal such  that  the  'timeliness'
    point is to be disregarded; nor if permission to  appeal  were  now  to
    have been granted that would have persuaded me that the decision of the
    Judge should be set aside.


49.  For the reasons indicated  I  refuse  to  extend  time,  and  therefore
    permission to appeal is also refused.


Notice of Decision

50.  The Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal was  made
    out-of-time. I refuse to extend time. Permission to appeal  is  refused
    to the Secretary of State.


51.  The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands: the Appellant's  appeal
    remains allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 27 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

