
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08897/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2018                             |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    [F N]

                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:              Ms A. Benfield of counsel, instructed by
Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:                   Mr. T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who was born on [ ] 1984, is a national of  Uganda.  She
    entered the United Kingdom on 20 September 2010 as a student with leave
    to remain until 31 January 2011. Her leave was subsequently extended in
    the same capacity until 31 January 2012.

2.   On 6 March 2017 the Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that  she
    was at risk of persecution in Uganda as a lesbian. Her application  was
    refused on 1 September 2017 and she appealed against this decision.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Black dismissed her  appeal  in  a  decision,
    promulgated on 25 October 2017. The Appellant appealed  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Macdonald refused her permission to appeal on 5 December
    2017. Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan did grant her permission  to  appeal
    on 22 January 2018 on the basis that it was  arguable  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Black had failed to look at the cumulative effect of the
    evidence before her and that it was arguable that  she  had  not  given
    sufficient reasons to explain why  she  placed  little  weight  on  the
    evidence given by Mr. Ssali.

THE ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Counsel for the Appellant handed up the  Home  Office's  Asylum  Policy
    Instruction on Sexual orientation in  asylum  claims,  which  had  been
    published on 3 August 2016. Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home
    Office Presenting Officer made oral submissions and I have referred  to
    the content of these submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.



ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   In the current case, the documents  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Black were extensive and suggested that, even though the Appellant  did
    not apply for asylum until 6 March 2017,  she  had  started  to  attend
    London Friend in 2013, the Say  It  Out  Loud  Club  in  2015  and  had
    attended Pride events from 2013 to 2017. Her attendance  at  the  Pride
    events and London Friend and the Say It Out Loud Club  and  Pride  were
    also well documented by photographs.

6.   In addition, two other Ugandan women, who are  lesbians  and  who  have
    been granted refugee status here, had provided statements  of  support,
    as a result of knowing her within  the  Lesbian  community  in  London.
    Their statements were accompanied by proof that they had  been  granted
    refugee status. There were also three letters of  support  from  London
    Friend and a witness statement by the Appellant's current partner,  who
    was not able to attend the hearing  due  to  being  in  another  appeal
    hearing concerning her own claim for asylum that same  day  at  another
    first-tier tribunal centre.  Aloysius Ssali from the Say  It  Out  Loud
    Club had also submitted a detailed  witness  statement  and  gave  oral
    evidence on her behalf.  This was  in  the  context  of  the  Appellant
    herself having given very detailed answers in the asylum interview.

7.   The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had given detailed consideration to this evidence  and  that  her
    findings were one which were open to her on the  evidence  before  her.
    In particular, he relied on the long period of delay before she applied
    for asylum.

8.   However, I have reminded myself that the standard of  proof  in  asylum
    cases is a low one and it is my view  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Black failed to apply this requisite low standard of proof but  applied
    a standard which was far higher. For example, it was not sufficient  to
    discount the many photographs relied upon by the  Appellant  by  merely
    stating that the photographs do not without more demonstrate  that  she
    is a lesbian. In addition, she did not form  a  holistic  view  of  the
    totality of the evidence which was substantial.

9.   The Judge's reasons for giving little weight to statements  of  support
    fall within the bounds of  reasonableness  but  all  those  writing  in
    support of an appeal cannot necessarily be expected to attend in  order
    to give oral evidence. However, the reasons  given  for  giving  little
    weight to Mr. SSali's evidence are  not  similarly  sustainable  in  my
    view.

10.  In his witness statement, Aloyisus Sassi gave  a  detailed  account  of
    his own background, as a refugee from Uganda, and as  someone  who  had
    established a Say It Loud Club in London.  In paragraphs 19  to  36  of
    his statement, he also gave very cogent consideration to how he met the
    Appellant and her activities as a lesbian in London

11   I have noted that in paragraph 24 of his statement he stated that  "now
    that [the Appellant] has settled into the community, she has  begun  to
    express an interest in even more socialising with  other  gay  men  and
    women. This is not typical of a person who is merely looking to advance
    their asylum case by meeting with Say  It  Out  Loud  Club  and  London
    Friend". In paragraph 29 of his statement he also explains  how  he  is
    able to distinguish between  those  who  are  genuinely  from  the  gay
    community and those who purport to be  so  for  asylum  purposes.  This
    clearly indicates that he has given detailed thought as to whether  she
    is a lesbian. It is not evidence  which  indicates  that  he  had  been
    "duped" by the  Appellant.  His  description  of  her  being  initially
    conflicted about "coming out" as a lesbian does in  my  view  correlate
    with her delay in claiming asylum as a  lesbian.  As  counsel  for  the
    Appellant submitted there is a significant difference between attending
    Pride events with like-minded friends and giving  intimate  details  of
    past sexual encounters to an immigration officer.

12.   It  is  also  arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Black  gave
    disproportionate weight to the fact that the Appellant had trained as a
    lawyer when considering her delay in claiming asylum and  her  presumed
    knowledge of the asylum determination process.

13.  First-tier Tribunal Black  also  gave  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's partner was not able to attend the hearing but that she did
    not apply for an  adjournment.  In  particular,  she  noted  that  "the
    Appellant would have had the benefit of legal advice from  her  counsel
    but still decided to proceed. She would have known that the evidence of
    [her partner], which is untested,  would  be  given  little  evidential
    weight as a result". However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Black  did  not
    have knowledge of the precise advice given to the Appellant,  which  is
    the subject of legal privilege, and counsel may have been in possession
    of other information which indicated that an adjournment may harm,  not
    assist, her client's case.  It was not for the Judge  to  speculate  on
    the legal advice which may have been given.

14.  Counsel also relied on  a  ground,  which  was  not  contained  in  the
    grounds of appeal, and which was  that  the  Respondent  was  under  an
    obligation to put relevant  policies  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and had failed to do so. As a general proposition of law, this is
    correct but I do not need to consider granting permission to amend  the
    grounds, as for  the  reasons  given  above,  I  find  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A. M. Black did err in law in her decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge A. M. Black, for a de novo hearing.


Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 13 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
