
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08000/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 9th February 2018                  |On 28 February 2018                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                 JAMAL AHMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq who was born  on  18th  July  1998.
    He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  respondent's
    decision set out in a letter dated 3rd August 2017, to refuse to  grant
    him asylum.  The appellant asserts that his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would cause it to be in breach of  its  obligations  under  the
    Refugee Convention and, or in the alternative, would be unlawful  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being incompatible  with  the
    appellant's rights under the European Convention for the Protection  of
    Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

2.   The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge C  Mather
    in Manchester on 18th September 2015.  Having heard the appellant  give
    oral evidence, the judge found the  appellant  not  to  be  a  credible
    witness.  She found  that  he  gave  conflicting  evidence  as  to  the
    circumstances in which he sustained an injury  to  his  elbow  and  the
    judge  believed  that  were  he  to  be   telling   the   truth,   such
    inconsistencies  would  not  occur.   She  did  not  believe  that  the
    appellant's injuries impaired his functionality,  noting  that  he  was
    able to work on his own in Iraq  and  was  able  to  undergo  a  twelve
    months' journey from Iraq to the United Kingdom.  The appellant claimed
    that he was working in Iraq, only being given food and shelter and  was
    forced  to  work,  being  passed  around  from  employer  to  employer.
    However, the judge noted that  according  to  the  appellant's  medical
    records, he smoked between 45 and 50 self-rolled cigarettes a  day  and
    had done so since the age of 13.  The implication  being  that  he  was
    being paid, because he had enough money to spend on tobacco.   She  did
    not believe that this was compatible with the picture of abuse that  he
    was seeking to portray.

3.   The appellant claimed that he had walked  to  Turkey  with  many  other
    people accompanied, by an agent and that took four weeks.  She did  not
    believe it to be credible that the agent did not  require  any  payment
    from the appellant, because he knew of the  appellant's  circumstances.
    Neither did she accept that the appellant would have been given food by
    this agent or by fellow travellers for four weeks.

4.   Similarly, she did not believe it to be  credible  that  the  appellant
    had encountered a Syrian family in a refugee camp and  that  they  paid
    for his food and for his journey from Turkey, a  journey  lasting  some
    twelve  months,  requiring   different   methods   of   transport   and
    accommodation.  She also repeated  her  reference  to  the  appellant's
    medical records showing that he smokes between 45 and 50 cigarettes per
    day.

5.   The appellant claimed that he did not know he was coming to the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge did not believe that to be credible either.  He was
    fingerprinted both in Germany and in France.

6.   The judge noted and applied AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
    00544 (IAC).  She accepted that it would be reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to obtain a passport or laissez passer by the  Iraqi  Embassy
    in London, which would enable him to re-enter the  country.   She  said
    that he had failed to demonstrate that he could not obtain a CIS within
    a reasonable timeframe, following his return to Iraq.  This would,  she
    noted, enable him to access social and financial  assistance  from  the
    authorities and also to gain employment.  She noted that there  was  no
    Article 15(c) risk to an ordinary civilian in the  IKR.   She  did  not
    believe the appellant was persecuted in Iraq or that he would face  any
    future risk of persecution on his return.

7.   She found that he had not discharged the burden on him to show that  he
    had a well-founded fear of persecution for a reason recognised  by  the
    Geneva Convention or that he would face a real risk of serious harm  by
    reference to paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.  On the basis  of
    the facts established there was no reason to believe  that  his  return
    would result in treatment in breach of Article 2 or 3 of the  ECHR  and
    she dismissed the appeal.

8.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain  granted  permission  to  appeal,
    believing it to be arguable  that  the  judge  had  given  insufficient
    consideration to the appellant's ability to obtain a CSID.   She  noted
    that the judge said that the appellant failed to  demonstrate  that  he
    could not obtain one within a reasonable timeframe but gives no  reason
    why he would be able to obtain one.

9.   The appellant attended before me in person.  I made sure  that  he  and
    the interpreter both understood each other.  The appellant confirmed to
    me that he had contacted the Red Cross to ask them  to  assist  him  in
    finding his brother and also his mother but, so far he  had  not  heard
    anything.  I explained  that  I  was  going  to  ask  the  Home  Office
    representative some questions and that I would ask that the interpreter
    did not embark on a translation of the questions and  answers  while  I
    was speaking to the Presenting Officer, because I wished to  make  sure
    that the appellant understood exactly what was going on.   I  explained
    that I would tell him afterwards what had transpired.

10.  The Presenting Officer told me that the judge had made several  adverse
    credibility findings in respect of the  appellant,  so  that  when  the
    appellant claimed he had lost contact with his brother, and claimed  at
    one stage that he was an orphan and at  another  that  his  mother  was
    alive, it was open to the judge not  to  believe  the  appellant.   The
    judge was entitled, therefore, to  find  that  the  appellant  had  not
    proved that there was no-one available in Iraq who could assist him  in
    obtaining a CSID.  In any event, the Home Office would not  remove  the
    appellant until they had obtained a  travel  document  from  the  Iraqi
    authorities.  Once a travel document had been  obtained  the  appellant
    could apply for and obtain financial assistance if he chose to ask  for
    it and be given an assisted return to Iraq,  which  would  provide  him
    with some funds on his return to Erbil in order that he could obtain  a
    CSID and then look for employment.

11.  I took the time to explain the Home Office position  to  the  appellant
    at some length.  The appellant told me that he understood. I  explained
    to him that in the event that the Home Office were unable to  obtain  a
    travel document from the Iraqi authorities, he  would  not  be  removed
    from  the  United  Kingdom.   Mr  Bates  explained  that  provided  the
    appellant co-operated in attempts to obtain a travel  document,  if  it
    proved  impossible  to  obtain  a  travel  document  from   the   Iraqi
    authorities in London, then there would come a time when the  appellant
    may well be granted some form of leave, but in the meantime it would be
    necessary for  the  appellant  to  rely  on  Social  Services.   Having
    explained this to the appellant, he told me that  he  had  some  papers
    which he wanted me to look at.  He explained that he had  been  to  the
    Iraqi Embassy who had refused to offer him with a travel document.  The
    documents he handed to me were documents from the Red Cross relating to
    his request for them to assist him with  tracing  his  mother  and  his
    brother, a translation of an Arabic document referred  to  as  being  a
    Unified Card - Smart Card and a statement from the appellant.

12.  I had the papers copied for the Home Office Presenting  Officer.   They
    included a statement prepared on the appellant's behalf.  The statement
    was written in English and indicated  that  it  had  been  dictated  to
    support his case  at  the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    statement is as follows:-

         "1.  I stated previously that I had never seen my mother, my father
             died when I was young and I was told about his death,  I  lost
             my younger brother when a family came to the cemetery where we
             were staying and they took him  and  I  have  never  seen  him
             since.  I have an aunt and her husband but they kicked me  out
             when I was young and as a result  of  their  action  I  became
             homeless and people started using me  and  get  not  paid  for
             works which I did.


         2.   I have approached British Red Cross in Manchester and they are
             trying to locate my mother (if  she  is  still  alive)  or  my
             younger brother.


         3.   Visiting the Iraqi Consulate on 31/01/2018 Wednesday:  I  have
             visited the Iraqi Consulate and  sought  their  assistance  in
             getting any Iraqi identity documents issued  but  despite  the
             fact that  I  was  interviewed  by  them  extensively  but  it
             appeared that they cannot find any records of me like page and
             reference numbers.  I have asked them to give me a  letter  to
             the Home Office but they declined and instead gave me  a  copy
             of some new instructions received from  the  Iraqi  Government
             stating that  CSID  and  nationality  certificates  should  be
             renewed and get replaced by the Smart Card - Unified Card  and
             then the individual  will  be  able  to  apply  for  an  Iraqi
             passport.  So I am in difficult situation because I never  had
             any Iraqi identity cards or nationality certificates let alone
             get them replaced.


         4.   I believe even if the Home Office able to issue laissez passer
             to me to deport me back to Baghdad Airport, I will be stuck in
             transit towards Erbil or Sulaimany Airport because with no IDs
             the KRG will not allow me to gain entry to IKR.


         5.   Thus, with no CSID or nationality certificate I would  not  be
             able to gain entry and even if I do I  will  not  be  able  to
             secure  employment,  housing  and  food   support   from   the
             government or  receive  medical  assistance.   As  it  was  my
             situation in the past before leaving Erbil.


         6.   I did state previously in my documents that I have  approached
             the authorities in Erbil before leaving Iraq and  despite  the
             fact they did not help me I was detained and left in limbo".


13.  The appellant told me he had nothing further to say.  I told  him  that
    I would reserve my decision and that it would be sent to him shortly.

14.  AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ
    944 explains that the CSID is an essential document for life  in  Iraq.
    It is for  practical  purposes  necessary  for  those  without  private
    resources to access food and basic services and is not a document  that
    can be automatically acquired after return to Iraq.   Annex  C  of  the
    judgment says this:-

         "9.  Regardless of  the  feasibility  of  P's  return  it  will  be
             necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
             obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A CSID  is
             generally required in order for an Iraqi to  access  financial
             assistance  from  the  authorities;   employment;   education;
             housing; and medical treatment.   If  P  shows  there  are  no
             family or other members likely to be able to provide means  of
             support, P is in  general  likely  to  face  a  real  risk  of
             destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by  the  time  any
             funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her agents to
             assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely
             that P will still have no CSID.


         10.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
             as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil
             Status Affairs Office for P's home governorate, using an Iraqi
             passport (whether current or expired), if P  has  one.   If  P
             does not have such a passport, P's ability to  obtain  a  CSID
             may depend on whether P knows the page and  volume  number  of
             the book holding P's information (and  that  of  P's  family).
             P's ability to persuade the authorities that P is  the  person
             named on the relevant page is likely to depend  on  whether  P
             has family members or other individuals who  are  prepared  to
             vouch for P.


         11.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
             if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's
             governorate because it is  in  an  area  where  Article  15(c)
             serious harm is occurring.   As  a  result  of  the  violence,
             alternative CSA Offices for Mosul, Anbar and  Saluhaddin  have
             been established in Baghdad and  in  Kerbala.   This  evidence
             does not demonstrate that the 'Central Archive' which  existed
             in Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to  those  in
             need of them.  There is, however, a National Status  Court  in
             Baghdad, to which P could  apply  for  formal  recognition  of
             identity.  The precise operation of this  court  is,  however,
             unclear".


15.  The appellant was not found to be a credible witness by the  judge  who
    heard and saw him give evidence.   She  has  given  clear  and  logical
    reasons for her findings.  In particular, she did not believe  anything
    the appellant had said about his journey to  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    claimed to be destitute in Iraq and yet was transported by an agent  to
    Turkey  for  nothing  because  the  agent  knew  of   the   appellant's
    circumstances and was also fed  by  the  agent  on  his  journey.   The
    appellant was also taken in by a Syrian family who,  according  to  the
    appellant, paid for his journey to the United Kingdom via  Germany  and
    France.  Given the judge's findings, I believe that she was entitled to
    find that the appellant had failed to demonstrate  that  he  could  not
    obtain a CSID within a reasonable timeframe  following  his  return  to
    Iraq.  Based on her findings, the appellant must have  paid  the  agent
    who took him out of Iraq and into Turkey and must  have  paid  for  his
    transportation to Europe.  The appellant chose not to  tell  the  truth
    when giving evidence to the judge.

16.  Similarly, the judge was entitled to find  that  he  had  not  suffered
    harm or ill treatment in the past such as to engage either the  Refugee
    Convention or the EHCR and that there was no real risk of him suffering
    such harm or ill treatment in the future in Iraq.

17.  I have concluded that  in  making  her  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mather has not made a material error of  law  and  I  uphold  her
    decision.

Summary.

    The appellant's appeal on asylum grounds is dismissed. The  appellant's
    appeal  on  humanitarian  protection   grounds   is   dismissed.    The
    appellant's human rights appeal is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley           Date 27 February 2018








TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals have been dismissed and there is no question of payment  of  any
fees.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley           Date 27 February 2018


