
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08228/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 February 2019              |On 13 February 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                  FIRAT [S]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel
      (instructed by Montague Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted by  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Grimes on 21 December 2018 against the determination
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana who had dismissed the appeal  of
         the Appellant against the refusal of his  international  protection
         claim.  The decision and reasons was promulgated  on  24  September
         2018.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Turkey, born on 5 November  1994,
         and of Kurdish ethnicity.  Neither his  nationality  nor  ethnicity
         were expressly challenged by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department. The Appellant claimed that he was  at  risk  on  return
         from the government as a suspected PKK supporter.  After  reviewing
         the evidence, Judge Chana found that the Appellant was not credible
         and that his claim was fabricated.  By way of alternative analysis,
         even had she accepted his claim, the judge found that  (as  he  had
         declared himself) he had never been charged with being a PKK member
         and was not at risk as a failed asylum seeker.

    3.      Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  in  the  Upper   Tribunal
         notwithstanding refusal below because it  was  considered  arguable
         that the judge had failed to consider all of the evidence which the
         Appellant had produced, and had not reached clear findings of fact.
          If so, it might then be arguable that  the  judge  had  failed  to
         consider the risk factors identified in IK (Returnees -  records  -
         IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKAIT 00312.

    4.     Notice under rule 24 had been served by the Respondent, opposing
         the onwards appeal.

    Submissions

    5.     Ms  Panagiotopoulou  for  the  Appellant  relied  on  the  Upper
         Tribunal grounds of onwards appeal and the Upper Tribunal grant  of
         permission to appeal.  In summary, counsel mounted an extensive and
         detailed  assault  on  the   First-tier   Tribunal   determination,
         contending that the judge had failed to engage with  some  the  key
         evidence which the Appellant had presented, much of which  demanded
         proper attention, such as the situation of the Appellant's  father.
         It was accepted in the reasons for refusal letter that HDP  members
         could face arrest for suspected involvement with the PKK.   It  was
         unclear  what  the  judge  had  accepted.   The  judge's  views  of
         inconsistency were too selective and the credibility findings  were
         inadequate.  The judge had misunderstood  the  distance  which  the
         Appellant had moved to enter hiding  with  his  aunt.    The  whole
         determination was problematic. The decision and reasons was  unsafe
         and should be set aside  and  the  appeal  reheard  before  another
         judge.

    6.     Ms Isherwood for the Respondent submitted that none of Counsel's
         submissions had any real  substance.   The  judge  had  placed  the
         appeal into the correct  context  of  current  country  conditions,
         which were not in serious dispute.  The  determination  had  to  be
         read as a whole.  The judge had examined the evidence in depth  and
         had reached sustainable findings,  providing  substantial  reasons.
         The Appellant had had the opportunity to produce documents and  the
         judge had explained what she made of them, applying Tanveer Ahmed *
         [2002] UKAIT 439 principles.  The  Appellant  had  been  found  not
         credible  for  sufficient  reasons.   There  had   also   been   an
         alternative  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  story   and   its
         consequences.   There was no material error of  law.   The  onwards
         appeal should be dismissed.

    7.      Ms  Panagiotopoulou  in  reply  reiterated   her   submissions,
         emphasising that  the  IK  risk  factors  had  been  insufficiently
         considered and that the documents produced had not been taken  into
         account.

    No material error of law finding

    8.     The tribunal reserved its  decision,  which  now  follows.   The
         tribunal accepts the submissions of Ms Isherwood  and  must  reject
         those valiantly made by  Ms  Panagiotopoulou.   In  the  tribunal's
         view, the errors asserted to exist in the decision and reasons  are
         illusory.  The grant of permission to appeal  was  a  liberal  one,
         because essentially the dispute is over findings of fact with which
         the Appellant disagrees.

    9.     The determination was carefully prepared by a  very  experienced
         judge who stated specifically that all of  the  evidence  had  been
         considered: see, e.g., [3], [26] and  [34]  of  the  determination.
         That was no mere formula.  Judges of the  First-tier  Tribunal  are
         repeatedly  counselled  by  the  higher  courts   to   keep   their
         determination within reasonable bounds, which  recommendation  this
         judge applied.  The determination must be read as  whole,  starting
         with the setting of the scene, the Appellant's  admissions  in  his
         evidence such as that he had never been charged with  being  a  PKK
         supporter, had never collected money for the PKK and did  not  know
         where the PKK equipment was: see [17ff] of the determination.

    10.    There was no requirement for the judge to  embark  on  a  minute
         discussion of each and every point  which  the  Appellant  had  put
         forward.  The judge focussed  on  the  central  elements  which  if
         reasonably likely to be true were capable of causing real risk  and
         explained why those claims were implausible, for example, that  the
         Appellant would be recruited as  a  spy  by  the  authorities,  yet
         having been so recruited was never pursued afterwards: see [38]  of
         the  determination.   That  is  an   unimpeachable   finding   with
         substantial and sound reasons given.  It  was  submitted  that  the
         judge erred when finding that the Appellant had not been pursued to
         his aunt's "nearby" home but of course Turkey is large country  and
         the aunt's province was relatively near.   Of  equal  if  not  more
         importance was the obvious fact that she was a relative with  links
         which could have been followed up in a state with emergency powers.
          This was not a situation of  the  Appellant  disappearing  into  a
         labyrinthine and populous metropolis such as  Istanbul  where  some
         measure of police  discretion  might  be  applicable.    Again  the
         judge's conclusion is logical and unimpeachable.

    11.    The judge considered the position  of  the  Appellant's  father,
         which plainly involved examination of  the  documents  put  forward
         relating to him.  The judge's statement that the Appellant's father
         remained in his village (by  implication,  largely  continuing  his
         usual life there) despite being accused  of  helping  the  PKK  was
         accurate, as was the finding that the Appellant's evidence on  that
         point was inconsistent and by again implication, exaggerated.

    12.    Perhaps even more importantly, on a fair and full reading of the
         determination, it is clear that the judge  was  constantly  testing
         her primary conclusions, giving anxious scrutiny  to  the  evidence
         and considering the alternatives: this can be seen in particular at
         [41], [43], [45] and [48] of the  determination,  where  the  judge
         finds that, even if the Appellant had been detained, which she  did
         not accept, he was released without charge, which was indicative of
         the interest of the authorities who had  the  opportunity  to  make
         checks on the Appellant, such as the connection with his father  or
         other close relatives.  That assessment of the real risk  was  open
         to the judge.  It is particularly significant given current country
         conditions, where the Turkish authorities  are  accused  of  acting
         very heavy handedly, making it less probable that persons perceived
         to be of continuing interest would be leniently treated.

    13.    It was submitted that the Appellant (and his advisors) would  be
         unable to know from the  determination  why  his  appeal  had  been
         dismissed, but the tribunal considers that the judge gave clear and
         strong reasons why she considered that the claims  put  forward  by
         the Appellant were not credible.  These  included  the  Appellant's
         humanitarian assistance through Red Crescent (rather  than  express
         partisan PKK support) which the authorities would distinguish,  the
         improbability of the authorities' requesting the Appellant  to  act
         as a spy,  the  substantial  length  of  time  that  the  Appellant
         remained in Turkey undetected and unharmed after claiming  that  he
         believed he was in danger from the  authorities  and  his  lack  of
         knowledge of HDP despite his claimed support for  HDP.   The  judge
         also  drew  attention  to  inconsistencies   in   the   Appellant's
         testimony.

    14.    The judge had demonstrably examined the whole  of  the  evidence
         with anxious scrutiny, in the current context of country conditions
         in Turkey.  The judge's assessment of risk on return,  applying  IK
         on the basis of her credibility findings, was open to her.  In  the
         tribunal's view, the submissions advanced on the Appellant's behalf
         amount to no  more  than  disagreement  with  the  judge's  adverse
         findings of fact, all  of  which  were  available  to  her  on  the
         evidence  presented,  which  evidence  was   plainly   sufficiently
         considered and the consequent findings  adequately  reasoned.   The
         tribunal finds that there was no  material  error  of  law  in  the
         decision challenged.

    DECISION

    The appeal is dismissed

    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.




    Signed                             Dated 7 February 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
