





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/08559/2016
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House             |                  Decision and Reasons   |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 16 October 2017               |                  On: 30 October 2017    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                                     M R
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, counsel (instructed by Taj Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
   2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 23 January 1981. He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
      refusing his asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights claims.

   3. In granting permission to appeal on  8  August  2017,  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Finch stated that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence
      "holistically" giving each part of  the  evidence  appropriate  weight
      before reaching a  final  decision  on  the  appellant's  credibility.
      Moreover, the Judge also failed to take  into  account  the  objective
      evidence  about  the  authorities  in  Bangladesh,  fabricating  cases
      against political opponents. It also  appeared  from  his  substantive
      asylum interview that he had been able to  give  detailed  information
      about the BNP.

Error of law hearing

   4. Ms Iqbal, who did not represent the appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, adopted her skeleton argument.

   5. She submitted that the Judge's approach at [20] of  the  determination
      'contravened' the  guidance  given  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JT
      (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 878.  The Judge found that the  appellant's
      delay in claiming asylum is damaging to his credibility. This did  not
      mean that he must disbelieve him "but I must  have  and  do  view  his
      account through the prism of his damaged credibility." That  paragraph
      occurred at the outset of his findings and conclusion.

   6. The Judge had noted that the appellant was a qualified lawyer. He came
      to the UK in fear of his life in October 2010, intending at  the  same
      time to study at post graduate level. He claimed  not  to  have  known
      anything about asylum in the UK. He learned of asylum in mid-2015  and
      only applied for asylum in December 2015.

   7. Ms Iqbal submitted that this approach was wrong as the Judge failed to
      conduct a global assessment of his credibility. He had already reached
      a conclusion about part of the appellant's  account  which  he  stated
      would impact on the entire claim.

   8. Ms Iqbal further submitted that the  Judge's  approach  regarding  the
      appellant's BNP membership was also flawed. At [37]  he  rejected  the
      documentary evidence confirming the appellant's role in the BNP  party
      in Bangladesh as  he  concluded  that  this  evidence  was  undermined
      "....by references to the existence of false  criminal  cases  against
      the appellant because I have rejected the reliability and  credibility
      of that part of the appellant's claim." He was unable  to  place  much
      weight on the letter of the BNP [39].

   9. The Judge did not however give individual  consideration  to  separate
      pieces of evidence  as  noted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch  when
      granting  permission.  Accordingly,  the  Judge  also  assessed   this
      particular  issue  in  a  vacuum  without  considering  the  potential
      corroborative evidence. The Judge "put the cart before the horses".

  10. Ms Iqbal submitted that the  Judge  further  erred  in  assessing  the
      evidence concerning the appellant's  membership  of  the  BNP  and  in
      particular in the UK. He accepted at [41] that documents  provided  by
      the BNP supported the appellant's claim to be involved in the  BNP  in
      the UK and that the appellant is a visible member of BNP in the  UK  -
      [46].

  11. On the basis of these findings he found that the appellant was  a  low
      level supporter or member of the  BNP  in  Bangladesh,  albeit  not  a
      prominent one or leader of any grouping in the BNP and  did  not  have
      any particular profile in the  BNP.  He  may  have  been  involved  in
      political activities in Bangladesh commensurate  with  his  low  level
      support, which may have brought him into conflict with other low level
      supporters of the opposition. This did not result in his  establishing
      a particular profile "or  of  leading  to  the  authorities  having  a
      specific interest in him" [43].

  12. She submitted that the Judge has adopted an inconsistent  approach  in
      accepting the BNP-UK evidence but rejecting  BNP-Bangladesh  evidence.
      The documentary evidence was provided by the same organisation, albeit
      in two different countries. There were not adequate reasons explaining
      the differing findings.

  13. The Judge accepted that the appellant was a visible member of the  BNP
      in the UK - [46]  but  it  remained  unclear  despite  the  background
      evidence relied on, why the Judge concluded that the  appellant  would
      not be at risk on return.

  14. She also submitted that the Judge  failed  properly  to  consider  the
      appellant's asylum interview where he gave detailed evidence about the
      BNP party contrary to the contentions in the reasons for  refusal  and
      the Judge's findings at [42] of the determination.

  15. The Judge's finding that he had surprisingly poor knowledge of the BNP
      and politics in  Bangladesh  as  demonstrated  throughout  his  asylum
      interview is not borne out.

  16. She submitted that the appellant answered all the  relevant  questions
      in the interview. She referred to his answers give to questions 11-19.
      There he set out some of the history. He also set out in  some  detail
      his current position in the BNP in Bangladesh. He also set out in some
      detail the history of the  BNP  including  when  it  was  founded.  He
      identified matters such as the emblem or logo of the party, the colour
      of the star and what it signifies. This,  she  submitted,  showed  his
      knowledge about the BNP and his own involvement with  the  party  over
      the years.

  17. It is also evident that he was not in the right state of mind when  he
      was interviewed and he  informed  the  interviewing  officer  of  that
      during the course of his interview. He stated at  one  stage  that  he
      would like a break as he is struggling to sit down and would  like  to
      stand for a  while.  That  was  because  of  lack  of  sleep.  He  was
      struggling to recall things. The interviewing officer stated  that  if
      he is unable to continue  the  interview  he  would  need  to  provide
      medical evidence from a doctor that he is  unable  to  be  interviewed
      "today" - Q 21. The  appellant  stated  that  if  he  could  have  the
      opportunity it would be good, "I could go to and  request  that."  The
      interviewing officer then said that the problem is that if  he  has  a
      young baby it could be months and months of not having a good  night's
      sleep and the interview  needs  to  be  conducted.  The  officer  then
      consulted a senior colleague, noting  that  he  appreciated  that  the
      appellant had had some sleepless nights but as the interview needs  to
      be completed, "we will continue, the rest of  the  interview  will  be
      over an hour left and we have already been through 30 minutes."

  18. She submitted that the Judge also failed  to  assess  the  appellant's
      account of leaving the country on his own passport  having  regard  to
      the background evidence. His evidence referred to at [23-29] and  [32]
      included the assertion that the appellant was able  to  leave  without
      any difficulty due to the use of someone  with  influence,  which  was
      despite the fact that FIRs had been  issued  against  him.  The  Judge
      appeared to find the appellant's account incredible, failing to  place
      this in the context of the background evidence  about  corruption  and
      bribery.

  19. Further,  the  Judge  appeared  to  ignore  the  appellant's  evidence
      corroborated by background evidence in relation to false,  politically
      motivated cases used against political opponents when necessary.

  20. Mr Clarke relied on the Rule 24 response. He submitted that there have
      been no material errors. He referred to the grounds of appeal  and  to
      the asylum interview at Q30 where the appellant stated that in 2008 he
      "thought to save myself I would  leave  the  country."  This  was  not
      correct as the evidence was not such that he should leave the  country
      at that time. It was what his parents told him in 2014.

  21. With regard to the Judge's assessment of the delay, the Judge did  not
      restrict himself simply to the delay in claiming asylum but had regard
      to the appellant's chronology of events  and  his  recent  claim.  The
      analysis of the whole delay permeates the appellant's claim.

  22. The Judge's assessment began at [15]. The appellant  claimed  to  have
      feared for his life and  it  was  not  credible  that  he  would  have
      embarked on a relatively lengthy process of  applying  for  a  student
      visa. His conduct introduced delay and uncertainty.  Even  though  his
      first application was refused he remained to await the  outcome  of  a
      fresh application for a student visa.

  23. Mr Clarke also referred to paragraphs 17-20 which  were  in  the  same
      vein. At [19] the Judge stated that he was not satisfied  that  it  is
      credible that he would not have realised the need  to  seek  asylum  a
      long time before December 2015 as he was aware that  his  presence  in
      the UK was time  limited  and  he  would  be  expected  to  return  to
      Bangladesh. Accordingly, this is the context in which  paragraph  [20]
      must be considered.

  24. Mr Clarke very properly accepted that the Judge did say that he had to
      accordingly view the appellant's account "through the  prism"  of  his
      damaged credibility. Although under s.8 of the 2004 Act the Judge  was
      obliged to take into account the delay, Mr Clarke very fairly accepted
      that there had been "a poor choice of words".

  25. Mr Clarke submitted that the  Judge  had  considered  the  appellant's
      appeal "holistically". It is evident that he considered the FIRs which
      accused the appellant and 14 others of terrorism. The  appellant  told
      the Tribunal that he was not aware of these cases until  he  spoke  to
      his parents about returning to Bangladesh,  in  2014.  He  claimed  in
      interviews that the dates alleged are when he was actually in the  UK.
      The Judge found that to be untrue. The dates of the FIR and the arrest
      warrants were before the appellant left Bangladesh. That was  damaging
      to his credibility [31].

  26.  Further,  the  Judge  had  regard  to  the  appellant's  claim  about
      anticipating  difficulties  at  the  airport  and   his   pre-arranged
      assistance from a friend who was a senior officer [32].  The documents
      were only produced at the asylum interview, some five years later. Why
      did he not claim asylum at an earlier stage? Mr Clarke submitted  that
      this is not a "pure section 8 point." The very  nature  of  his  claim
      does not stack up against his own evidence.

  27. The Judge moreover looked at the  further  issues,  expressly  stating
      that at  [20].  He  also  found  the  appellant's  evidence  generally
      unsatisfactory [22]. It was vague and evasive.  Accordingly, the Judge
      did not simply reject his claim on the basis of a late prosecution  of
      his asylum claim.

  28. As  to  the  submissions  relating  to  the  documentary  evidence  at
      paragraph 14 of the grounds, he  submitted  that  this  amounts  to  a
      disagreement only. The Judge has given cogent reasons on the issue  of
      risk.

  29. With regard to the documentary evidence provided by the BNP, the Judge
      noted at [37] that the evidence is undermined  by  references  to  the
      existence of false criminal cases against the appellant because he has
      rejected the reliability and credibility of that part of his case.

  30. The Judge did however "reassess" his approach to that evidence in  the
      light of the BNP letter, referring to it, because he must carry out  a
      holistic assessment. However, the apparent corroboration  provided  by
      the BNP letter amounted to corroboration of a fabrication.

  31. Mr Clarke submitted that the Judge had to start somewhere. Accordingly
      it is necessary to read paragraph [38] in the  light  of  the  earlier
      findings, and in particular those at [36].

  32. Finally, he submitted that the  Judge's  findings  at  [42]  that  the
      appellant had surprisingly poor knowledge of the BNP and  politics  in
      Bangladesh was not material to the overall  findings.  The  Judge  was
      clear that he had a low profile consistent with being a member of  the
      BNP. He also had regard to the appellant's vague and evasive evidence.

  33. In reply Ms Iqbal submitted that the issues considered by the Judge in
      respect of delay related wholly to s.8. She submitted  that  the  2004
      Act stated a deciding authority shall take into  account  as  damaging
      the appellant's credibility, of any behaviour  to  which  the  section
      applies. The Judge did more than merely take into account as  damaging
      his credibility, behaviour to which the section applied. That  finding
      was by no means in a vacuum. It infected the whole approach  to  other
      evidence and issues including the FIRs.

  34. Moreover, the Judge made no finding in respect of  the  documents  and
      their reliability. There had been a number of  requests  made  by  the
      appellant's solicitors for any verification reports  relied  on.  None
      however was made available.

      Assessment

  35. I have had regard to Mr Clarke's overarching submission, namely,  that
      the Judge in fact  considered  the  evidence  of  procrastination  and
      delay, in its entirety, including the history of the delay in  leaving
      Bangladesh at a much earlier stage despite the  appellant's  claim  of
      existing difficulties.

  36. At the outset of his findings and assessment  however  the  Judge  had
      regard to the appellant's delay in claiming  asylum  as  damaging  his
      credibility. There is an apparent reference to s.8 of  the  2004  Act.
      Although the Judge  noted  that  this  does  not  mean  that  he  must
      disbelieve the appellant,  he  nevertheless  "must  and  do  view  his
      account through the prism of his damaged credibility." The  fact  that
      this factor was considered at  the  outset  would  not  ordinarily  be
      problematic.  As Mr Clarke observed the Judge had to start somewhere.

  37. It appears however that the Judge did not simply consider this to be a
      factor which had to be taken  into  account  in  the  context  of  the
      evidence as a whole. The remainder of the evidence  was  going  to  be
      considered through that prism of delay.

  38. As noted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch, he did not have proper  regard
      to the approach in Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] EWCA Civ  11,  where  the
      Court of Appeal found that it was necessary to  consider  all  of  the
      evidence holistically, giving each part of  the  evidence  appropriate
      weight  before  reaching  a  final  decision  about   an   appellant's
      credibility.

  39. Notwithstanding Mr Clarke's very astute submissions however, I  cannot
      safely find that the Judge did in fact consider the  delay  in  making
      the claim to be one of the factors to  be  taken  into  account  after
      considering the evidence as a whole.

  40. At  paragraph  [37]  the  Judge  also  rejected  the  reliability  and
      credibility of the appellant's role in the party in  Bangladesh  which
      had however been confirmed in the documentary evidence provided by the
      BNP. He stated that the evidence was undermined by references  to  the
      existence of false criminal cases against the appellant because he has
      rejected the  reliability of that part of his case. However, as  noted
      by Judge Finch, he did not give individual consideration  to  separate
      pieces of evidence.

  41.  Nor  did  the  Judge  take  into  account  the  'objective'  evidence
      concerning the authorities in  Bangladesh  fabricating  cases  against
      political opponents.

  42. Finally, as already noted, the appellant  was  in  fact  able  at  the
      substantive asylum interview to give detailed  information  about  the
      BNP.

  43. I find that there have  been  material  errors  in  the  determination
      rendering it unsafe. I set it aside. In the circumstances the  parties
      were agreed that if I reached  that  conclusion  the  case  should  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in Newport for a fresh decision to
      be made.

  44. I am satisfied that the extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary in order for the decision to be re-made, is extensive.  This
      will be a complete re-hearing with no findings preserved. I have  also
      had regard to the overriding objective and conclude that it  would  be
      just and fair to remit the case.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Newport,  for  a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction made


      Signed                             Date 24 October 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer





