
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08744/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th March 2018                            |On 28th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     IK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, of Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant has appealed against a decision of Judge O'Malley of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 12th October 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a male  citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  in  1990.   He
    arrived in the UK on 7th December 2015 and made  an  asylum  and  human
    rights claim.  His  asylum  claim  was  based  upon  imputed  political
    opinion.  He feared the Taliban as they had killed  his  two  brothers.
    He feared that if returned to Afghanistan he would also be killed.

 3. In brief the Appellant's claim is that he lived in the  Asmar  district
    of Kunar province, Afghanistan.  His eldest brother HJ was president of
    the AH  Foundation,  a  construction  company  that  had  work  in  the
    provinces of Kunar and Nooristan.  The company  worked  in  partnership
    with the Provincial Rehabilitation Teams (PRTs) of the foreign  forces,
    working on infrastructure projects.  The Taliban were opposed to  those
    projects, and opposed to individuals  working  with  the  American  and
    foreign forces.

 4. HJ was shot and killed by the Taliban  in  Pakistan  on  15th  February
    2016.

 5. The running of the business was then taken  over  by  the  next  eldest
    brother, HI, and from 2007 the Appellant was involved in  the  security
    side of the business.  In 2008 HI founded and became president  of  his
    own company, the RCC.

 6. In 2010 the Appellant's role in RCC increased and between 2010 and 2013
    he  supervised  and  monitored  security   guards.    RCC   worked   on
    construction projects,  and  provided  security  for  American  convoys
    travelling through their areas.

 7. Threats were made against RCC after an incident  involving  work  being
    done on the Asmar to Ghaziabad road. The Taliban carried out attacks on
    the road, and the American forces retaliated by  carrying  out  bombing
    raids which killed some of  the  Taliban,  including  a  local  leader.
    Construction of the road could not be completed because of the attacks.



 8. After the death of the Taliban leader HI was pursued by the Taliban and
    threatened.  He went into hiding in a house  in  Asadabad  but  on  7th
    October 2013 he was discovered by the Taliban and  shot  dead  together
    with his cousin and a bodyguard.

 9. After the death of HI, the Appellant took on the role of  president  of
    the RCC unofficially.  Letters from the local Taliban were sent to  his
    family home describing  his  deceased  brothers  as  non-believers  and
    threatening the Appellant.  He fled the area.  The Taliban visited  the
    family home and questioned his father.  The Appellant moved from  place
    to place returning secretly to see  his  parents  every  two  or  three
    months.

10. When in Asadabad the Appellant  received  a  telephone  call  from  his
    father to say a  further  letter  dated  15th  October  2015  had  been
    received, accusing him of spying, and blaming him for the death of  the
    Taliban leader.  The letter  required  him  to  present  himself  to  a
    Taliban court.

11. The Appellant asked his MP for help, but was told that the MP could not
    provide protection  against  the  Taliban.   The  Appellant  then  fled
    Afghanistan with the assistance of an agent, the cost of  travel  being
    funded by the Appellant's father.  The  Appellant's  surviving  brother
    MI, also left Afghanistan and is currently in Greece.

12. The Appellant arrived in the UK illegally  on  7th  December  2015  and
    subsequently made an asylum claim.

13. The asylum and human rights claim was refused by the Respondent on  4th
    August 2016, and the subsequent appeal was heard by  the  FtT  on  22nd
    September 2017.  The FtT heard evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  two
    witnesses.

14. The FtT dismissed the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds.  The  FtT
    accepted that the companies referred to by the Appellant, AHF  and  RCC
    existed, and that his  two  brothers  had  held  senior  roles  in  the
    businesses.  It was also accepted that the brothers  had  been  killed.
    It was not accepted that the Appellant was involved in security in  AHF
    or RCC as claimed, and it was not accepted that the brothers  had  been
    specifically targeted by the Taliban before they were killed.  The  FtT
    found that their deaths were deliberate and at paragraph 70 found  that
    they "may be Taliban fatalities".  At paragraph 82 the FtT  found  that
    the Appellant had not been targeted by the Taliban, and that  he  would
    not be sought out on his return for any involvement in AHF or RCC,  and
    found there was no specific interest in him.

15. However the FtT allowed the appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds
    with  specific  reference  to  Article  15(c)  of   the   Qualification
    Directive.  The FtT took  into  account  the  country  guidance  in  AK
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC),  and  also  took  into  account
    evidence submitted by the Appellant, which postdated  AK,  including  a
    report from Dr Giustozzi which indicated an increased risk since AK was
    published.  The FtT concluded that the Appellant would not be  at  risk
    as a result of any specific targeting by the Taliban, but  taking  into
    account the evidence submitted by the  Appellant,  which  indicated  an
    increase in widespread attacks affecting civilians across the  country,
    found that there was no part of Afghanistan which would be sufficiently
    free from indiscriminate violence, and  therefore  concluded  that  the
    Appellant  qualified  for  protection  under  Article  15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive.

16. The FtT also considered Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights, and in particular paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The FtT found
    that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    reintegration into Afghanistan, and allowed the appeal  with  reference
    to Article 8.

17. The FtT decision caused both parties to apply for permission to appeal.
     The Appellant applied for permission to appeal against the decision to
    refuse his appeal on asylum grounds.  In summary it was contended  that
    the FtT erred by failing to make findings on  material  facts  such  as
    whether the Appellant's  brothers  were  targeted  and  killed  by  the
    Taliban.  Also there was  a  failure  to  take  into  account  material
    evidence, that being  documentary  evidence  submitted  to  prove  past
    persecution, attempts to secure protection, and risk on return, and  no
    findings were made on that evidence.  It was also  contended  that  the
    FtT had failed to give reasons when describing the Appellant's evidence
    as being  vague  and  inconsistent,  and  conclusions  without  reasons
    prevented the Appellant from knowing exactly why his claim failed.

18. The Respondent also applied for permission to appeal.   The  Respondent
    did not challenge the FtT findings  in  relation  to  Article  8.   The
    Respondent  challenged  the  finding  in   relation   to   humanitarian
    protection, contending that the FtT had made a material misdirection of
    law  by  failing  to  correctly  interpret  AK.   The  Respondent  also
    contended that the FtT had erred by  failing  to  resolve  conflict  in
    relation to credibility.  The FtT had identified inconsistencies in the
    Appellant's account at paragraphs 73 and 76-78  but  had  not  resolved
    those  inconsistencies  with  the  wider  finding  that  the  Appellant
    requires humanitarian protection.

19. Both the Appellant and Respondent were granted permission to appeal  by
    Judge Brunnen.

Error of Law

20. On 18th January 2018 I heard submissions from both parties in  relation
    to error of law.  The Appellant  was  represented  by  Ms  Loughran  of
    Counsel and the Respondent by Mr Walker a Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer.Ms Loughran advised that   following  a  consultation  with  Mr
    Walker, it was agreed that the FtT had not erred in law  in  concluding
    that the Appellant was entitled to  humanitarian  protection.   It  was
    also agreed that the FtT had erred in  law  in  dismissing  the  asylum
    aspect of the appeal, for the reasons  given  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal.

21. Mr Walker confirmed  that  the  Respondent  no  longer  challenged  the
    conclusion by the FtT that the Appellant was entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection.  It was accepted that the Respondent had not challenged the
    decision by the FtT to allow the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.   Mr
    Walker confirmed that it was conceded that the FtT had erred in law  in
    relation to dismissal of the asylum aspect of the appeal, as  explained
    by Ms Loughran.

22. In view of the concession made on behalf of the  Respondent,  that  the
    FtT did not err in law in concluding that the Appellant was entitled to
    humanitarian protection because there existed an Article 15(c) risk  in
    Afghanistan, I made a formal finding that the FtT had not erred in  law
    on that point.

23. As it was also conceded by the Respondent that the FtT had erred in law
    in dismissing the asylum appeal for the reasons given  in  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal, I found that
    the FtT had materially erred in law on that point,  and  therefore  the
    decision must be set aside and remade.

24. The FtT conclusion that the Appellant was entitled to  succeed  in  his
    appeal by reliance upon Article 8 had  not  been  challenged  and  that
    finding was therefore preserved.

25. With reference to the asylum aspect of the appeal, I  found  that  some
    findings had  not  been  challenged  and  could  be  preserved.   Those
    findings are that the Appellant had two brothers,  and  those  brothers
    had senior roles in the business, that was known as AHF and then  known
    as RCC.  The business is in existence.  These findings were made by the
    FtT at paragraph 66.  Also preserved is the FtT finding at paragraph 70
    that both the Appellant's brothers were killed, and their  deaths  were
    deliberate.

26. The hearing was adjourned for further evidence to be given, so that the
    asylum claim could be considered again.

Re-Making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

27. At the commencement of the hearing I ascertained that the Tribunal  had
    received all documentation upon which the parties intended to rely, and
    that each party had served the other with any documentation upon  which
    reliance was to be placed.  The Tribunal had received the  Respondent's
    bundle with Annexes A-W, that had been before the  FtT.   The  Tribunal
    also had the Appellant's consolidated bundle that had been  before  the
    FtT, with tabs A-E, and the Appellant's skeleton  argument  dated  30th
    March 2017.

28. Mr Kotas handed in an extract of the SIGAR (Special  Inspector  General
    for  Afghanistan  Reconstruction)  report  dated  30th  July  2014  and
    indicated that he would be referring specifically to page 58.   As  the
    FtT  findings  that  the  Appellant  was   entitled   to   humanitarian
    protection, and his appeal also succeeded in relation to Article 8 were
    preserved, it was agreed  that  the  only  issue  before  the  Tribunal
    related to asylum.  Mr Sellwood confirmed that as only  asylum  was  in
    issue, it was the first 21 paragraphs of his  skeleton  argument  which
    were relevant.

The Oral Evidence

29. The Appellant and both witnesses gave evidence with the  assistance  of
    an  interpreter  in  Pushtu  and  there   were   no   difficulties   in
    communication.

30. The Appellant adopted as his evidence his witness statements dated 16th
    June 2016 and 24th August 2017.

31. Oral evidence was then given by SK who adopted his  witness  statements
    dated 23rd July 2015 and 29th March 2017.  SK  confirmed  that  he  had
    grown up with the Appellant in Afghanistan.   He  left  Afghanistan  in
    late 2008.  Both he and the Appellant believed that they were  paternal
    cousins but DNA evidence, to their shock, has confirmed  that  this  is
    not the case.  SK has been granted refugee status.

32. Oral evidence was then given by HS who is a cousin  of  the  Appellant.
    He has also been granted refugee status in the UK.  He adopted  as  his
    evidence his witness statements dated 23rd July 2015 and 22nd September
    2017.

33. The Appellant and witnesses were questioned by the representatives.   I
    have recorded all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings and
    it is not necessary to reiterate them here.  If relevant I  will  refer
    to the oral evidence when I set out my conclusions and reasons.

The Oral Submissions

34. I heard oral submissions from the representatives which are set out  in
    full in my Record of Proceedings and briefly summarised below.

35. On behalf of the Respondent reliance was placed upon  the  reasons  for
    refusal decision dated 4th August 2016.  Mr Kotas  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal had to decide three issues.  Firstly has the Appellant  proved
    that he worked as head of security for RCC.  Secondly was he threatened
    by the Taliban.  Thirdly would he be at risk on return.

36. It was submitted that it was inherently unlikely that the Appellant was
    head of security at RCC.  He claimed to have taken on that role  at  17
    years of age while still at school.  He had  no  formal  qualifications
    and no experience.  It was submitted that he had embellished his  role.



37. I was asked to find that he had not been threatened by the Taliban  and
    had not received threatening letters.  The expert report at B77/78  did
    not address whether the letter was genuine and Mr Kotas described  that
    report as containing multiple hearsay.  I was asked  to  attach  little
    weight.  I was asked to note page 58 of the SIGAR report which referred
    to AHF, RCC, and the Appellant's elder brother as being debarred by the
    American army because of bribery and corruption.  This had occurred  on
    5th June 2014, and it meant that RCC would not be awarded contracts  by
    PRT for a period of five years ending on 29th September 2018.

38. I was asked to note that the Appellant had remained in Afghanistan  for
    just over two years following the death of his brother in October  2013
    without coming to harm.

39. Even if the Appellant's  case  was  taken  at  its  highest,  Mr  Kotas
    submitted that there was an internal relocation option to Kabul.

40. Mr Sellwood  in  making  oral  submissions  placed  reliance  upon  his
    skeleton argument.  I was asked to  consider  whether  the  Appellant's
    account is coherent, whether there is any corroborating  evidence,  and
    whether the evidence fits with background evidence.  All  these  points
    needed to be considered together.

41. It was submitted that RCC is a family business and there was  a  degree
    of nepotism giving the Appellant a position within the company.  It  is
    clear and accepted that the company exists.

42. I was asked to accept the Appellant had given a coherent, plausible and
    credible account and that  there  is  voluminous  evidence  by  way  of
    corroboration contained within the Appellant's  bundle.   Documentation
    had been received from Afghanistan, and the original envelopes provided
    as proof of the origin of postage.  I was asked to  place  weight  upon
    the expert reports prepared by Dr Giustozzi.

43. In addition I was asked to note and accept the evidence  given  by  the
    witnesses, who Mr Sellwood described as  witnesses  of  truth,  on  the
    basis that both had been granted refugee status in the UK.

44. I was asked to place weight  upon  Dr  Giustozzi's  opinion,  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk on return as he had worked for a company who
    worked with the Americans and foreign forces.  That would  put  him  at
    risk from the Taliban.  His brothers had been killed because  of  their
    involvement, through the business, with the  Americans  in  particular.
    Dr Giustozzi confirmed that the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  if  he
    returned to his home area where the Taliban have  a  very  considerable
    presence,  there  would  be  no  sufficiency  of  protection,  and   no
    reasonable internal relocation option to Kabul.  I was asked  to  place
    weight upon the expert reports, and  to  allow  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.  Mr Sellwood acknowledged that if the appeal  was  allowed  on
    asylum  grounds,  the  Appellant  was  not  entitled  to   humanitarian
    protection.

45. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

46. I have taken into account all the oral and documentary evidence  placed
    before me, together with the submissions made by both  representatives.
    I take into account the lower standard of proof that applies, which can
    be described as a reasonable degree of likelihood.  The  burden  is  on
    the Appellant.   I  accept  that  it  is  important  that  I  view  the
    Appellant's account in the context of conditions in Afghanistan.

47. I have considered the evidence in the round, and considered this appeal
    in the light of the provisions of paragraph  339L  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  With reference to documentary evidence,  I  have  followed  the
    guidance in Tanveer Ahmed Pakistan [2002] UKIAT 00439, in  that  it  is
    for the individual producing a document to show that it can  be  relied
    upon, and the decision maker should consider whether a document is  one
    on which reliance should properly be placed after looking  at  all  the
    evidence in the round.

48.  There  are  preserved  findings  from  the  FtT.   These  include  the
    conclusion that the Appellant is entitled  to  humanitarian  protection
    because of the risk of indiscriminate violence, paragraphs 94-95 of the
    FtT decision setting out that conclusion.  In addition the  Appellant's
    appeal is allowed with reference to Article 8 on the basis of paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi), paragraph 99  of  the  FtT  decision  setting  out  that
    conclusion.

49. There are also preserved findings in relation to the asylum  aspect  of
    the appeal.  These are that the businesses known as AHF and RCC were in
    existence, and RCC is still in existence.  The  Appellant's  two  elder
    brothers held senior roles in those businesses.   The  Appellant's  two
    elder brothers were killed and their deaths were deliberate.

50. There is an abundance of documentary evidence to prove  the  activities
    of RCC.  It is a company involved in construction, and it  worked  with
    the American and foreign forces.  This is confirmed  not  only  by  the
    documentary evidence, but by the Appellant and both witnesses who  gave
    evidence at the Tribunal hearing.  In relation to  those  witnesses,  I
    accept that both have been  granted  refugee  status,  HS  was  granted
    refugee status by the Respondent, and SK  was  granted  refugee  status
    after a successful appeal.  I  accept  that  both  witnesses  knew  the
    Appellant and his family well before the witnesses left Afghanistan  in
    2008.

51. I accept the Appellant's  evidence  that  his  nephew  AK  is  now  the
    president of RCC.  The Appellant remains in contact with him, and  last
    spoke to him by telephone when AK was  in  Dubai.   AK  is  waiting  to
    receive a visa to entitle him to travel to the United States.

52. The existence of RCC as a company undertaking  reconstruction  projects
    is confirmed in the SIGAR report which makes specific reference to  the
    company, and the Appellant's brother who was killed in 2013.  I  accept
    the Appellant's evidence that he was unaware that the company had  been
    disbarred from being awarded contracts by the Kunar PRT in  June  2014.
    The Appellant stated in paragraph 33 of  his  witness  statement  dated
    16th June 2016, that after the death of his brother in October 2013 and
    following the serious threats from the Taliban, the operations  of  RCC
    started to be conducted from Kabul only, and the company stopped taking
    on any new  contracts  after  the  death  of  the  Appellant's  brother
    although there was still income coming in from existing projects.

53. I find that the Appellant did work for RCC.  I do not find that he  was
    head of security at 17 years of age. I accept that RCC  was  formed  in
    2008.  In his initial witness statement at paragraph 18  the  Appellant
    explained that in 2007 his family had not started  their  own  company,
    because they were working under the name of the AH Foundation which was
    an NGO.  His role at that time was  to  oversee  the  guards  who  were
    guarding the construction site, and he was monitoring whether they were
    doing their jobs properly.  In my view that is an accurate  summary  of
    his activities.

54. Both witnesses who gave evidence at the  hearing  confirmed  that  they
    were aware of the Appellant  having  a  security  role  prior  to  them
    leaving Afghanistan.  This in my view corroborates what  the  Appellant
    has stated, and I do regard the witnesses as credible.

55. There is at A62 of the Appellant's bundle a list of  key  personnel  in
    RCC as at 2011.  The Appellant is named as a security  officer,  having
    one year experience.  It is his case that his role changed in 2010  and
    he became more involved, and I find that this document  can  be  relied
    upon, and supports that account.

56. I am therefore  satisfied,  for  the  reasons  given  above,  that  the
    Appellant worked for RCC, and as described by the witnesses, it was his
    family business, and that he had a role monitoring the security guards.
     This was before the death of his brother in October 2013.

57. I am satisfied that the company undertook work with the  Americans  and
    foreign forces, and the background evidence and Dr  Giustozzi's  expert
    report, confirms that individuals working for such companies, would  be
    regarded by the Taliban as collaborators.  This I find would  put  them
    at risk.

58. The Appellant's elder brothers were both shot.   It  is  accepted  that
    both had senior roles with a company which would  be  regarded  by  the
    Taliban as collaborating with the foreign forces.  I find, to the lower
    standard of proof, that the Appellant's brothers  were  killed  by  the
    Taliban.

59. I accept that the Appellant received threats from the Taliban following
    the death of his brother in October 2013.  I do place  weight  upon  Dr
    Giustozzi's reports, and note at B78 of  the  Appellant's  bundle,  the
    report dated 13th  March  2017,  which  confirms  that  Dr  Giustozzi's
    colleague spoke with the Taliban's intelligence head for Kunar province
    and  it  was  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  is  on   the   Taliban's
    "blacklist".  This is because he was said to be working with  NATO  and
    foreign forces.  His two brothers were described  as  working  for  the
    American PRT, and were referred to  as  having  been  abducted  by  the
    Taliban which is incorrect, as neither  were  abducted  but  both  were
    killed.  Notwithstanding this error, I find that reliance can be placed
    upon the report.   The  letter  from  the  Taliban  that  prompted  the
    Appellant to leave Afghanistan  is  dated  15th  October  2015  and  is
    contained at D31-D32 of the Appellant's bundle.  I find that weight can
    be attached to this.  This is a letter that has been considered in  the
    round.  The background evidence, including Dr Giustozzi's expert report
    confirms that the Taliban do send letters of this nature to individuals
    regarded as collaborators.  The Taliban would regard the Appellant as a
    collaborator because of the activities carried out by RCC.  I therefore
    conclude that following the death of the Appellant's brother in October
    2013, the Appellant did  receive  threats  from  the  Taliban,  and  in
    particular received a letter dated 15th October 2015  ordering  him  to
    attend a Taliban court.

60. Having found that the Appellant worked for RCC, and did receive Taliban
    threats, I now must consider whether he would be at risk on return.   I
    have placed considerable weight upon Dr Giustozzi's report  dated  14th
    March 2017.  Dr Giustozzi is a recognised expert in  this  field.   His
    report is comprehensive.  I set out below paragraph  46  which  is  the
    final paragraph of the report, in which  Dr  Giustozzi  summarises  his
    conclusions;

         "46. In summary, the account provided by Mr K is plausible.   Mr  K
             would be at risk from the Taliban having been warned  by  them
             and having not heeded to their  warnings.   The  Taliban  have
             confirmed that Mr  K  is  on  their  blacklist  (see  separate
             verification report).  The risk would be greatest  in  Mr  K's
             home province of Kunar, where Taliban presence  is  pervasive,
             except in areas occupied by the Islamic  State.   The  Taliban
             have more limited capabilities in Kabul, but Mr K will also be
             at risk there, particularly if he had to settle in one of  the
             neighbourhoods populated by eastern Pashtuns like himself."

61. I also note  the  Respondent's  country  information  and  guidance  on
    Afghanistan in relation to persons supporting or perceived  to  support
    the government and/or international forces published in February  2015.
    At paragraph 1.3.12 it is confirmed that those at  risk  would  not  be
    able to seek effective protection in  areas  controlled  by  the  anti-
    government elements (AGE).

62. At paragraph 1.3.13 it is stated that in Kabul  and  other  cities  and
    towns controlled by the government, in general the authorities  may  be
    willing to offer protection but they are unlikely to be able  to  offer
    effective protection given the structural weaknesses  in  the  security
    forces, including a lack of resources, training and adequate equipment,
    poor vetting of recruits, weak command and control structures  together
    with corruption and official impunity for serious abuses.

63. The above information is similar in content to the views  expressed  by
    Dr Giustozzi.

64. My conclusion is that the Appellant has proved to a  reasonable  degree
    of likelihood, that he would be at risk if  he  returned  to  his  home
    province of Kunar, and that there  does  not  exist  in  Afghanistan  a
    sufficiency of protection, or a reasonable internal relocation  option.
    He has therefore proved that he has a well-founded fear of  persecution
    from the Taliban.  On that basis he is entitled to a grant of asylum.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

As  the  Appellant  is  a  refugee  he  is  not  entitled  to   humanitarian
protection.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds in relation to  Article  8  of
the 1950 Convention.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the Appellant has made a claim  for  international
protection.


Signed                              Date 20th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid or is payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
