
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08502/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 April 2019                               |On 25 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     sm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:For the Appellant:   Ms L Smyth, instructed by Gillen and Co
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Mathews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity Direction


I make an order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure of any  matter  or  material
that might lead members of the public to identify the appellant.  A  failure
to comply with the terms of this order may result in contempt proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a minor born in 2006, and a national of Somalia.   She
    has been granted  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fox who dismissed her appeal on protection grounds  (the
    Refugee Convention and humanitarian protection) and  under  Articles  2
    and 3 of the Human Rights Convention for reasons given in his  decision
    dated 30 October 2018.


 2. The basis of the appellant's claim to protection  is  that  she  cannot
    return to Somalia because of her  membership  of  a  particular  social
    group and fears  that  she  would  be  forced  to  undertake  FGM.   In
    addition, it is contended on behalf of the appellant that she would  be
    at risk because she is light-skinned.


 3. The appellant's parents (and  her  brother)  are  also  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   She arrived on 21 August 2014 with her mother  and  brother.
    Her  father  arrived  on  11  September  2014.   Her   parents   sought
    recognition  as  refugees  with  the  appellant  and  her  brother   as
    dependants.  Their  claims  were  refused  on  6  February  2015.   The
    appellant's parents appealed unsuccessfully against  that  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal which was heard by Judge Gillespie.  They  were
    similarly unsuccessful in their applications for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal and by January 2016, there was no further  avenue
    of appeal available to them.  The appellant made  her  application  for
    asylum on 14 February 2017.


 4. In dismissing the appeal, Judge Fox made  extensive  reference  to  the
    decision of Judge Gillespie who had made adverse  credibility  findings
    regarding the appellant's parents.  Judge  Fox  came  to  a  number  of
    factual conclusions which are best captured by the following paragraphs
    from his decision:


         "33. On the evidence before me today I am also satisfied  that  the
             Appellant's   individual    circumstances    and    background
             information have shown to me that it would not be unreasonable
             to expect her to return to Somalia and live  in  the  city  of
             Mogadishu, with her family, to include both her parents.   She
             has family in Mogadishu.  I am  satisfied  that  it  has  been
             demonstrated that  FGM  is  legal  in  Somalian  constitution.
             Steps have been taken by the authorities  to  have  this  band
             [banned] in the country.  Her family are set against  FGM  and
             would provide further protection and support coupled with  the
             authorities disposition in regard to stamping out such a  vile
             practice.

         34.  Regard to any possibility that the  Appellant  may  be  forced
             into an early marriage again, I cannot accept this.

         35.  The Appellant is fully and formally supported by  her  parents
             in regard to these issues.  They  have  clearly  stated  their
             preference not to allow this  to  happen  to  their  daughter.
             Their support compounded by  the  availability  of  government
             agencies to provide additional support, as  confirmed  by  the
             background evidence, confirms that the family's wishes can  be
             adhered to and that she would not be forcibly married  off  at
             an age that was considered to be too young.

         36.  The Appellant's witnesses are not good witnesses  as  to  fact
             and truth.  Their  evidence  may  not  be  relied  upon.   The
             Appellant may be safely returned to her home country,  Somalia
             without fear of misfortune, adverse attention or otherwise.

         37.  On the evidence before  me  today  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant has not provided any credible basis for  challenging
             the assertions, analyses and conclusions in  the  Respondent's
             refusal letter.   On  the  evidence  before  me  today,  I  am
             satisfied those assertions, analyses and conclusions are valid
             and tenable and I reach similar conclusions myself [for]  like
             reasons.  I find that the Appellant's failure to claim  asylum
             on the basis of a fear of FGM and forced early  marriage  when
             she could have first claimed with her parents' claim without a
             satisfactory explanation, undermines the  credibility  of  the
             Appellant's claim to have come to the United Kingdom to escape
             persecution.  That credibility is further  undermined  by  the
             inconsistencies and implausibilities in the story, examples of
             which I have referred to above.  I  find  therefore  that  the
             core  of  the  Appellant's  account   of   persecution   lacks
             credibility and is a fabrication designed to  gain  access  to
             the United Kingdom.

         38.  On the evidence before me today  [I]  am  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant is an indirect economic migrant brought  to  the  UK
             [by her] parents without either knowledge or  consent  on  her
             part,  and  has  not  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  seek
             international protection."

 5. The grounds of challenge  on  which  permission  was  granted  were  in
    summary as follows:


   i) The judge erred by failing to apply the guidance  in  AMM  and  Others
      (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT
      00445 (IAC).

  ii)  The  judge  failed  to  consider  material  objective  evidence  thus
      rendering his decision irrational.  This is with specific reference to
      some 23 reports and authorities provided with a  16-page  schedule  of
      essential paragraphs including UK Home  Office  Country  Guidance  and
      Policy.  None of that was referred to in the decision.

 iii) The judge had erred by making adverse credibility  findings  based  on
      the appellant having failed to make an asylum claim  at  the  earliest
      occasion without good reason.  It is contended this was irrational.

  iv) The judge had placed excessive weight on  previous  findings  made  in
      relation to the appellant's parents' cases where the issue of FGM  had
      not been litigated.  It is also contended this was irrational.

 6. At the outset of the hearing Mr Matthews explained  that  it  had  been
    agreed with Ms Symth that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law
    based on the grounds of challenge.  Both also agreed  that  there  were
    substantial findings that needed to be made in  the  re-making  of  the
    decision for which  the  appropriate  forum  would  be  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In addition to her  agreement  on  these  matters  Ms  Smyth
    clarified that the appellant's father had not been interviewed  by  the
    Secretary of State in respect of the appellant's claim  but  had  given
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.


 7. In my judgment the parties were correct in taking this approach.  It is
    evident from my reading  of  the  judge's  decision  that  although  he
    referred to AMM & Others, he did  not  have  regard  to  that  case  as
    guidance in relation to the risk of FGM and  failed  to  undertake  the
    risk  assessment  that  was  required.   That  guidance  needs  to   be
    considered  in  the  context  of  the  appellant's  father's   evidence
    regarding the force of the custom of this practice.  Accordingly, I  do
    not consider that any of the findings by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox
    (as opposed to those by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie)  can  be
    preserved.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox is  therefore
    set aside and the case  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing de novo before a differently constituted tribunal.



Signed
                                                 Date 18 April 2019
UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

