
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08882/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                              |On 29 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sellwood, instructed by Duncan Lewis &Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant, as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1980 and is a citizen  of  Trinidad
    and Tobago. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State dated 11 August 2016  to  refuses  protection
    and human rights claims following a decision to deport him. The  First-
    tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 17  October  2018,  allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR). The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The challenge to the Tribunal's decision  is  on  a  relatively  narrow
    ground.  Having  rejected  the  other  grounds  of  appeal,  the  judge
    concluded that there was a  real  risk  that  the  appellant  would  be
    exposed to conditions in prison in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  which  would
    breach Article 3 ECHR.

 3. Mr Tan, who appeared for the Secretary of  State,  submitted  that  the
    judge's analysis was inconsistent in that the judge had  believed  part
    of the account of the appellant but  rejected  other  aspects  of  that
    account as incredible. He accepted, however, as the grounds make  clear
    [3], that the Secretary  of  State  did  not  dispute  that  there  are
    outstanding charges against the appellant in Trinidad  and  Tobago  and
    that the appellant had previously been convicted  of  receiving  stolen
    goods in that country and sentenced to 36 months' hard labour.  Mr  Tan
    did not press the argument advanced in the grounds at [3] that  it  was
    uncertain that the outstanding charges against the appellant  would  be
    serious enough to warrant his detention upon  return.  He  acknowledged
    that the charges are serious. I find that he was right  to  do  so  and
    that it was clearly open to the judge to conclude  that  the  appellant
    would be arrested upon return.

 4. The grounds challenge the judge's reliance upon the expert report of Dr
    Wardle. Mr Tan submitted that the expert, an anthropologist,  does  not
    have the qualifications to comment authoritatively on prison conditions
    in Trinidad and Tobago. However, I agree with Mr Sellwood, who appeared
    for the appellant, and who submitted that  the  expert  has  based  his
    opinion upon properly-cited sources including the US  State  Department
    report of 2015. As the judge noted [77], Dr Wardle was careful  not  to
    'measure the evidence against any legal test' but  only  to  offer  his
    opinion that there was sufficient evidence available in  the  publicly-
    available material to support the proposition that prison and detention
    facilities would breach Article 3 ECHR. I find that the judge was well-
    aware of the limited nature of the opinion offered by  the  expert  and
    that determining whether the prison conditions breached Article 3  ECHR
    was a matter for the Tribunal, not the expert. I note that the expert's
    assertion that around 30% of the prison population is comprised of pre-
    trial detainees and prisoners on remand  and  that  there  were  severe
    delays waiting for trial dates was not  challenged  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.

 5. The grounds [4] highlight the expert's statement  that  'some'  of  the
    prisons  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  suffer  from  severe  overcrowding,
    infestation, violence, poor  nourishment  and  a  lack  of  ability  to
    communicate with the outside world. It  is  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to determine whether conditions  in  all  prisons  would  breach
    Article 3 ECHR and why it was likely  that  the  appellant  would  find
    himself necessarily in  one  of  the  prisons  with  particularly  poor
    conditions. This ground has no merit.  The  judge  was  concerned  with
    determining the  extent  of  risk  by  reference  to  the  standard  of
    reasonable likelihood. The appellant had  been  in  one  of  the  'bad'
    prisons previously and a substantial proportion  of  the  prisons  have
    been shown by the background material to contain conditions which would
    cross the Article 3 ECHR threshold. The judge has carried  out  careful
    and detailed analysis and it was plainly open to him to  conclude  that
    it was reasonably likely that the appellant would not only be  detained
    upon his return but that he would find himself in a  prison  where  his
    rights under Article  3  ECHR  would  be  infringed.  In  essence,  the
    Secretary of State's challenge is nothing more than a disagreement with
    that finding. As to the authority that overcrowding in prison  can  per
    se breach Article 3 ECHR, see Mursic v Croatia 7334/13 GC.

 6. In the circumstances, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 23 APRIL 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


