
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08138/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Pursuant to rule 34 of the                   |                              |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules    |                              |
|2008                                         |On 20 August 2020             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                GRANVILLE [M]
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     written submissions provided by Ms A Fijiwala, Home
                    Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    written submissions provided by Mr M D Templeton of
                    Quinn Martin & Langan Solicitors


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

      1. This is an 'error of law' decision  determined  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, paragraph 4 of  the  Practice  Direction  made  by  the
         Senior  President   of   Tribunals:   Pilot   Practice   Direction:
         Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper
         Tribunal  on  19  March  2020,  and  paragraphs  4  -  17  of   the
         Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020: Arrangements During the Covid-
         19 Pandemic, 23 March 2020.

      2. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Doyle (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on 1
         November 2019, allowed the  respondent's  appeal  (on  humanitarian
         protection  grounds  and  protection  based  human  rights  grounds
         [Articles 2 and 3 ECHR]) against the appellant's decision  dated  9
         August 2019 to refuse his asylum and human  rights  claim  and  his
         claim for humanitarian protection.

      3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Sheridan on 7  January  2020.  The  'error  of  law'
         hearing was listed for 2 April 2020 but  was  vacated  due  to  the
         Covid-19 panedmic.  On  11  May  2020  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions to the parties expressing its provisional view that,  in
         light  of  the  pandemic,  it  was  appropriate  to  determine  the
         questions (i) whether the judge's decision involved the  making  of
         an error of law and, if so, (ii) whether the decision should be set
         aside, without a hearing.

      4. The appellant should have served her further submissions in respect
         of the two questions  by  25  May  2020.  These  were  not  however
         received by the Upper Tribunal until  10pm  on  1  June  2020.  The
         appellant requested an extension of time  citing  the  difficulties
         caused by limited resources due to  the  pandemic.  The  respondent
         provided his response to the further submissions on 8 June 2020.  A
         brief reply from the appellant was sent on the same day.

      5. Although there was a breach of the time  limits  by  the  appellant
         (and, as a consequence, by the respondent), both parties  have  now
         provided their written submissions. The delay  has  not  prejudiced
         either party or the general administration of  justice.  Given  the
         difficulties posed by  the  pandemic,  and  having  regard  to  the
         overriding principle in rule 2 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the  principles  set  out  in  SSHD  v  SS
         (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Hysaj [2014] EWCA Civ 1633, I
         consider it appropriate to extend time  to  both  parties  for  the
         filing of written submissions.

      6.  Following  the  provision  of  their  submissions  in  respect  of
         questions (i) and (ii), neither party made any further  submissions
         in respect of the Upper Tribunal's provision  view  that  questions
         (i) and (ii) could be appropriately and fairly determined without a
         hearing.

      7. Having regard to the overriding interest in rule 2 of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with cases justly and
         fairly,  and  having  considered  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
         challenge to the judge's decision (which does not involve the  need
         for further evidence to be considered), and having  regard  to  the
         narrow focus  of  the  legal  challenge  and  the  concise  written
         submissions from both parties, and  having  satisfied  myself  that
         both parties have been given a fair opportunity  to  fully  advance
         their cases, I consider it appropriate, in light  of  the  Covid-19
         pandemic, to determine questions (i) and  (ii)  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008.

Background

      8. The respondent is a national of Trinidad  and  Tobago.  He  was  47
         years old at the date of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.  He
         entered the UK on  21  December  2004  having  been  granted  entry
         clearance as the spouse  of  a  British  citizen.  He  was  granted
         Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) on 20 December 2006. On 9 February
         2017 the respondent was convicted of affray and received a 13-month
         custodial sentence. An appeal against a refusal of a  human  rights
         claim was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro  on
         29 September 2017 and the respondent became appeal rights exhausted
         on 16 October 2017. Further representations were eventually treated
         as a fresh claim following judicial  review  proceedings,  but  the
         respondent's protection claim was refused on 9 August 2019.

      9. I briefly summarise  the  respondent's  protection  claim.  In  his
         capacity as a soldier providing support to a  police  operation  he
         shot and wounded the leader of the 'Young and Restless gang' during
         a gunfight in Trinidad and Tobago in  2001.  The  gang  leader  was
         arrested and imprisoned. The gang leader  threatened  to  kill  the
         respondent as he held the respondent responsible for his arrest and
         incarceration and had recognised the respondent as someone who  had
         been involved with  the  national  football  team.  The  respondent
         remained in the military until 2003. He believes  the  gang  leader
         was released from  prison  in  2003.  In  the  respondent's  asylum
         interview (question 32) he claimed that his cousin was kidnapped by
         the gang  some  time  in  November  2004.  The  gang  informed  the
         respondent that he had to exchange  himself  for  his  cousin.  The
         respondent had married a British citizen  in  early  2004  and  was
         issued with a spousal entry clearance  on  19  December  2004.  The
         respondent entered and remained in the UK pursuant  to  this  entry
         clearance. He claimed in his asylum interview that his  cousin  was
         killed in early 2005 (question 31). A death certificate provided by
         the respondent indicated however that his cousin died  on  1  March
         2008. The respondent was informed by his sister that the gang  were
         offering a reward for anyone who could provide information  on  his
         whereabouts. The respondent did not make a protection  claim  until
         after he lost his ILR in  2017  and  after  his  first  appeal  was
         dismissed.

     10. The appellant was not satisfied  the  respondent  gave  a  credible
         account of events  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  In  particular,  the
         appellant  considered  that  the  inconsistency  relating  to   the
         cousin's date  of  death  "severely  undermined"  the  respondent's
         credibility.  Nor  was  the  appellant  satisfied  that  there  was
         adequate evidence that the person named in  the  death  certificate
         was the respondent's cousin, or that the gang leader would know the
         respondent  shot  him  in  the  back.  The  appellant  additionally
         considered that the respondent's failure to raise his asylum  claim
         fears during his appeal before Judge O'Garro "severely damaged" his
         credibility.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     11. In summarising the respondent's claim the judge  stated  (at  7(b))
         that the respondent's  cousin  was  murdered  the  week  before  he
         travelled to the UK. The  judge  also  summarised  the  appellant's
         position, but neglected to mention the inconsistency in respect  of
         the death of the respondent's cousin.

     12. Having indicated that the respondent was not pursuing his appeal on
         Article 8 grounds, and having found that the respondent was  not  a
         member of a particular social group so as to trigger the  operation
         of  the  Refugee  Convention,  the  judge  considered  whether  the
         respondent was nevertheless entitled to  a  grant  of  humanitarian
         protection and whether his deportation would breach Articles 2  and
         3 ECHR.

     13. At [27] the judge noted the respondent's  claim,  mentioned  in  is
         screening interview, that his life was under threat in Trinidad and
         Tobago because of his military service, and that in his substantive
         asylum interview he went  into  detail  about  his  involvement  in
         supporting the police during the gang gun battle. The judge stated,

             "What  the  [respondent]  says  in  his  asylum  interview  is
             consistent with his written submission when he claimed asylum,
             and is consistent with his detailed witness statement, and  is
             consistent with his oral evidence."

     14. At [28] the judge summarised the respondent's  evidence  in  cross-
         examination in  respect  of  his  delay  in  claiming  asylum.  The
         respondent's 1st appeal proceeded on Article 8 grounds only because
         he had been granted ILR on Article 8 grounds and because he  had  3
         British citizen children. It was only when arrangements  were  made
         for his removal that it finally dawned on the  respondent  that  he
         could claim asylum. At [29] the judge stated,

             "The delay  in  the  [respondent's]  claim  for  asylum  2017,
             because, until that point, he had indefinite leave  to  remain
             in the UK."

     15. The judge then considered an expert country report dated 12  August
         2018 prepared by Prof Shirley Anne Tate. The  judge  said  this  at
         [31].

             "Dr Tate's conclusion is that, despite the  passage  of  time,
             the [respondent] could still be at risk  from  the  Young  and
             Restless gang and their affiliates. Dr Tate finds  that  gangs
             have  pervasively  infiltrated  organs  of  state  and   state
             protection against gang violence is ineffective. Dr Tate  also
             finds that the [respondent] could not qualify for the  witness
             protection  programme,  and  internal  relocation  would   not
             guarantee the [respondent's] safety because gang networks  are
             widespread  and  the  [respondent]  was  a  renowned  football
             player."

     16. At [32] the judge stated,

             "There is reliable documentary evidence that the  [respondent]
             played football for  his  national  team.  There  is  reliable
             evidence that the [respondent] was a member  of  the  Army  of
             Trinidad and Tobago. When I consider each strand of evidence I
             find that the [respondent] gives  a  consistent  and  detailed
             account of being involved in action against two  warring  drug
             gangs, and a consistent and detailed account of  shooting  and
             wounding a gang leader."

     17. Then at [36] the judge stated,

             "Placing reliance  on  Dr  Tate's  opinion,  and  the  country
             guidance caselaw, I find that  the  Young  and  Restless  gang
             merged with other gangs and are  now  under  the  umbrella  of
             Jamaat al Muslimeen (JAM). Both  Dr  Tate's  opinion  and  the
             country guidance caselaw tell me that the passage of time does
             not remove the threat, and that there is not a sufficiency  of
             protection available for the [respondent], so that there is no
             viable alternative of internal relocation."

     18.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  respondent   was   entitled   to
         humanitarian protection  and  that  his  deportation  would  breach
         Articles 2 and 3 ECHR. The appeal was dismissed on  asylum  grounds
         but allowed on humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and  3  human
         rights grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     19. The 1st ground takes issue with the judge's reliance on the  expert
         report. At 4.2 of her report the expert stated,  "Bearing  in  mind
         the makeup of gangs in Trinidad and Tobago  this  gang  could  well
         still exist and also have links with 'Rasta  City'  and  Jamaat  al
         Muslimeen  which  both  have  an  African  Trinidadian  base."  The
         appellant  contends  that  the   report   contained   very   little
         information on the Young and Restless gang and that the expert only
         speculates about potential  links  with  other  gangs  without  any
         objective information in support. The judge accepted  the  expert's
         findings uncritically without providing any proper  explanation  to
         support why this conclusion had been  reached.  This  was  relevant
         given that neither the respondent nor his family members  had  been
         harmed or threatened since 2004. The  judge  failed  to  reach  his
         findings "with the necessary realism and attention  to  fact"  when
         finding that the respondent would be at risk on return despite  the
         absence of evidence that the gang still operated after 15 years.

     20. The 2nd ground contends that the judge failed to resolve a conflict
         of fact in respect of a material matter. In her Reasons for Refusal
         Letter the  appellant  took  specific  issue  with  the  evidential
         inconsistency relating to the death of the person described as  the
         respondent's cousin. The judge however failed to make any  findings
         in relation to this issue and failed to resolve the  inconsistency.
         This inconsistency went to the core the respondent's claim and  the
         judge's  failure  to  deal  with  it  materially   undermined   the
         sustainability of his ultimate conclusion.

     21. The 3rd ground  contends  that  the  judge  acted  perversely  when
         approaching the issue of the respondent's delay in claiming  asylum
         on the basis that the delay only stemmed from  2017  and  not  from
         when the respondent 1st arrived in the UK. The judge  was  required
         to consider the respondent's delay under section 8  of  the  Asylum
         and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 but  failed
         to consider that the relevant considerations applied to the  moment
         that the respondent was in fear of returning to his  home  country.
         The judge failed to adequately consider the respondent's failure to
         raise his  protection  concerns  during  the  appeal  before  judge
         O'Garro and failed to attach relevant weight to this failure, which
         affected the respondent's credibility.

     22. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan explained,

             "At para. 7(b) the judge stated that the [respondent's]  claim
             was that his cousin was murdered a week before he travelled to
             the UK in December 2004. At para. 27 the judge stated that the
             [respondent's] asylum interview, witness  statement  and  oral
             evidence was consistent. It is arguable that the judge  failed
             to  address  the  [appellants]  claim  that  the  evidence  in
             relation to the death of the  [respondent's]  cousin  was  not
             consistent given that the death certificate  showed  the  date
             2008, the [respondent's] claim at the  hearing  was  that  the
             death was in 2004 (a week before he travelled to the  UK)  and
             in the asylum interview and witness statement it is said  that
             the death was in 2005."

     23. Although Judge Sheridan did not refer to the 1st and  3rd  grounds,
         he did not expressly restrict the scope of the appeal.

     24. In his submissions the respondent contends that permission was only
         granted in respect of the 2nd ground and not in respect of the  1st
         and 3rd ground. This was  because  the  permission  Judge  made  no
         reference to either ground 1 or ground 3. The respondent  requested
         the Upper Tribunal to  consider  the  scope  of  the  appeal  as  a
         preliminary issue.

     25. The respondent contends  that  1st  ground  was  "not  a  stateable
         ground."  The  judge  had  accepted  the  respondent's  account,  a
         position previously taken by the appellant herself  in  an  earlier
         refusal decision. The judge did not  accept  the  expert's  opinion
         uncritically and without consideration of  all  the  evidence.  The
         judge detailed the experience and expertise of the expert  and  had
         considered the relevant country guidance (MB (Inability to  Provide
         Protection - JAM) Trinidad & Tobago CG [2010] UKUT 448).  No  issue
         was previously raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter  with  this
         element of the expert's report.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  his
         opinion for the reasons given.

     26. The respondent characterises the 2nd ground as a  requirement  that
         the judge exhaustively  set  out  every  challenge  raised  by  the
         appellant. There  is  however  no  such  requirement.  The  judge's
         positive credibility findings were based not only on the consistent
         elements of the respondent's account set out in paragraphs  32,  33
         and 34 of the decision,  but  on  a  consideration  of  the  expert
         report, the Country Guidance decision, "and all other evidence." If
         however a material error did  arise,  it  was  submitted  that  the
         remittal should be to the same judge to provide a specific  finding
         in respect of the inconsistency.

     27. In respect of the 3rd ground,  the  respondent  contends  that  the
         judge correctly identified the delay as stemming from 2017 when the
         respondent's ILR was revoked. The delay was not significant and had
         been clearly considered by the  judge,  who  had  a  wide  area  of
         discretion in respect of the weight to attach  to  any  delay.  The
         judge's conclusion was not unreasonable.

Discussion

     28. I can deal  briefly  with  the  preliminary  issue  raised  by  the
         respondent. As pointed out by the  appellant  in  her  email  reply
         dated 8 June 2020, the failure to specifically refer to  grounds  1
         and 3 do not mean that permission was refused in respect  of  those
         grounds. This is abundantly clear from Safi and Others  (permission
         to appeal decisions)  [2018]  UKUT  388.  In  the  section  of  the
         standard form document  containing  his  decision,  Judge  Sheridan
         stated, "Application for permission is granted." He did  not  grant
         permission  on  limited  grounds  and  there  are  no   exceptional
         circumstances that could persuade me that he intended to limit  the
         grounds.

     29. I shall consider the 2nd ground of appeal first.  The  Reasons  for
         Refusal Letter clearly raised, as a central credibility issue,  the
         inconsistency between the approximate date given by the  respondent
         in his asylum interview for the death of his cousin and the date of
         death contained in the death certificate. In his statement dated 17
         October 2019  the  respondent  acknowledged  the  inconsistency  in
         respect of the  murder  of  his  cousin  stating  that  his  sister
         confirmed the murder occurred in January 2005. It  is  additionally
         apparent from the judge's notes of the  hearing  that  this  was  a
         point specifically raised in cross-examination.

     30. At 7(b) the  judge  stated,  "In  December  2004  the  [respondent]
         travelled to the UK. The week  before  travelled  to  the  UK,  his
         cousin was murdered." I  have  considered  the  judge's  manuscript
         notes of the hearing. To the extent that they are  legible,  I  can
         find no reference to the respondent claiming that  his  cousin  was
         killed in 2004. This suggests that the judge erroneously stated  in
         his decision that the respondent's cousin was killed in  2004.  The
         grounds however focus on the wholesale  failure  by  the  judge  to
         engage with the inconsistency raised in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
         Letter and during  cross-examination,  that  is,  the  respondent's
         claim that his cousin was  killed  in  early  2005  and  the  death
         certificate which identified the date of death as 1 March  2008.  I
         find considerable merit in this ground.

     31. At no stage in his decision does the judge refer to or engage  with
         this inconsistency. This inconsistency was material when  assessing
         whether the appellant gave a credible  account  of  the  events  he
         claimed caused him to fear for his safety in Trinidad  and  Tobago.
         The inconsistency was both apparent from the face of the papers and
         was specifically raised in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  and
         during  cross-examination.  The  judge's  assertion  at  [27]   and
         (although to a lesser extent) at [32] that the  respondent  gave  a
         consistent account  of  events  that  gave  rise  of  his  fear  of
         returning to Trinidad and Tobago, and the inference  drawn  by  the
         judge that, as a result of other consistencies in the  respondent's
         evidence, the respondent's account was truthful (a finding made  at
         [34]),  failed  to  take  into  account  or  resolve  the   central
         inconsistency relating to the death of his cousin. Whilst  a  judge
         is not obliged  to  deal  with  every  nuance  of  an  individual's
         account, it is incumbent on him or her to resolve central issues in
         dispute. The judge failed  to  do  so  in  this  appeal.  Whilst  I
         appreciate that  the  judge  additionally  found  the  respondent's
         account to be consistent with the country expert report,  I  cannot
         say that, but for the  failure  to  engage  with  and  resolve  the
         inconsistency, the judge would inevitably  have  reached  the  same
         conclusion. The error of law is therefore material.

     32. My assessment of ground 2 is enough to require the judge's decision
         to be set aside. I am however independently satisfied that the  3rd
         ground is made out. Regardless of whether s.8  of  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc)  Act  2004  required  the
         judge to consider the delay in claiming asylum from  2004  or  from
         the point in July 2017 when his ILR ceased,  the  judge  failed  to
         consider, when assessing the respondent's credibility, his  failure
         to raise his protection concerns during his previous appeal  before
         Judge O'Garro. Whilst the judge recites the reasons advanced by the
         respondent for his delay at [28],  the  judge  fails  to  make  any
         finding in respect of the delay. The judge has  failed  to  make  a
         relevant finding or to take into account a  relevant  consideration
         when assessing how the respondent's credibility is affected by  his
         failure to raise his protection concerns at any  stage  during  the
         previous  appeal.   I   find   this   materially   undermines   the
         sustainability of the judge's credibility findings.

     33. I am additionally, and independently, satisfied that the judge  has
         erred in law in his approach to the expert report, as  outlined  in
         the 1st ground. Whilst the judge was entitled to treat  Prof.  Tate
         as a country expert, this did not oblige him to accept all  aspects
         of her report. Prof. Tate gave no explanation as to why the  makeup
         of gangs in Trinidad and Tobago supported her observation that  the
         Young and Restless gang "could well still exist." Her  opinion,  at
         page 12, that the Young and Restless gang had "merged or  at  least
         cooperate" with the Rasta City gang because this 'also has  leaders
         in Maloney' is entirely speculative. Her opinion, as an expert,  is
         entitled to have weight attached to it, but there is no  indication
         that this particular  aspect  of  the  expert's  opinion  has  been
         critically considered by the judge given the dearth of  information
         relating to the Young and Restless gang and in the absence  of  any
         further threats to the respondent or his family members since 2004.

     34. Given that there are at least two  material  legal  errors  in  the
         judge's approach to the issue of credibility it is, in my judgment,
         necessary for the decision to be remade de novo in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal by a judge other than Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Doyle.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors  on  points  of  law
requiring it to be set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Doyle.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum

Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  Date: 17 August 2020
