
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08813/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2020                  |On 23 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     JT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J  Collins,  Counsel  instructed  by  Mayfair  Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I make this
order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker.


2. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
dismissing the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
State refusing him international protection and other relief.


3. The reason for giving permission and the thrust of the grounds is that
the adverse findings of the First-tier Tribunal were fundamentally unfair
because they relied to a considerable extent on matters that had not been
challenged by the Secretary of State and/or had not been not put to the
witness.  This is not to say that every point has to be put or that every
challenge has to be outlined but it is always dangerous not to put and
outline and when it is not done on a large scale the risk of unfairness
becomes very real indeed.


4. I have been considerably assisted here by a very realistic Rule 24
notice from Mr Kotas, basically bowing to the inevitable and accepting the
decision was unsatisfactory for the reasons I have outlined, and suggesting
that the remedy is for a complete rehearing, all issues open before the
First-tier Tribunal.


5. Mr Collins agrees and so do I.


6. All judges in the Upper Tribunal must think before we send work back to
the First-tier Tribunal but the essential point here is that there has been
no proper determination of the appeal because the reasons given are wrong
for the reasons I have outlined here. The Appellant is not entitled to a
decision that keeps open all of his appeal rights but that is consideration
and is a strong one when the existing decision is fundamentally flawed.


7. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I set aside its decision and I
direct that the case be heard in the First-tier Tribunal.


8. It is apparent from looking at the papers that there has been an
unfortunate history here of delay and confusion, in part because of the
Appellant's apparent ill health. I have no intention of ordering the First-
tier Tribunal about how it goes about its affairs but I draw this to its
attention and respectfully suggest it might be appropriate for a CMR
hearing before the case is finally listed.  Mr Collins made this
suggestion.  With respect, I think it is sensible.


9. Notice of Decision


The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its decision and direct
that the case is heard again in the First-tier Tribunal before a different
judge.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 November 2020               |




