
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08809/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 MAY 2019                        |On 15 MAY 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  NAJAT [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 13 March 2019, I rejected  the  submission
    made on behalf of the appellant at the first resumed hearing  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision to deport the appellant was unlawful.  My
    reasons for so finding, together with my earlier  decision  identifying
    an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision, were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant was born on  2  February  1985  and  is  a  male
         citizen of Iraq. By a decision promulgated on 2 October 2018, Upper
         Tribunal Judge Rintoul set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and directed a resumed hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal.  A
         transfer order was made on 1 November  2018  and  I  conducted  the
         resumed hearing at Bradford on  28  January  2019.  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Rintoul's reasons for finding an error of law was follows:

             "1.   The  appellant  appeals  with  permission  against   the
             decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes promulgated on  6
             February 2018.

             2.   The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd from near Kirkuk who  left
             Iraq in 2002 at the age of 17 arriving in the  United  Kingdom
             shortly thereafter, and  claimed  asylum.   He  was  initially
             granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  but   was   granted
             indefinite leave to remain on 4 February 2008.  The  appellant
             has on twelve separate occasions been convicted of a total  of
             nineteen offences. Most  recently  he  was  convicted  on  the
             involvement of the production of cannabis and also  perverting
             the course of justice  at  Sheffield  Crown  Court.   On  that
             occasion he was sentenced to nine months  in  respect  of  the
             production of cannabis and three months in  respect  of  doing
             acts intended to pervert the course of justice.  The sentences
             were imposed consecutively.

             3.   The appellant's case is that he is at risk of  return  to
             Iraq on the basis that his father was opposed to the regime of
             Saddam Hussein and was killed by supporters of  an  opposition
             group; and, that he would be at risk from the same people.  He
             also feared that he would be at risk on account of the general
             situation in Iraq and that he could not live  safely  anywhere
             there.  He also states he does not speak Arabic, that  he  has
             no relatives with whom he is in  contact  with  in  Iraq,  has
             never held a CSID card and would be unable  to  return  as  he
             would not be able to obtain a CSID.

             4.   The Secretary of State's case as set out in  the  refusal
             letter is that he was not at risk has not made out noting that
             the basis of his claim as now put that his father  had  worked
             for a group opposed to Saddam  Hussein's  regime  yet  in  his
             initial protection claim and so that his father was affiliated
             to the Ba'ath Party.  The Secretary of  State  concluded  also
             that the part of "Iraqi Kurdistan" where he lives,  the  Erbil
             Directorate in which Kirkuk is located, the  degree  of  armed
             conflict  does  not  give  rise  to  indiscriminate   violence
             engaging Article 15(c).  The Secretary of State concluded also
             it would not be a breach of either the Refugee  Convention  or
             Articles 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Convention to  return  the
             Appellant to Iraq  concluding  that  the  seriousness  of  his
             offence was  such  that  he  was  excluded  from  humanitarian
             protection and that his deportation would not be in breach  of
             Article 8  given  that  he  did  not  fulfil  the  grounds  of
             paragraphs A398 to 399D of the 2002 Act.

             5.   On appeal the judge found that:-

                  (i)  the claim the appellant was  at  risk  owing  to  the
                  connection with his father  was  without  substance  there
                  being no evidence to show that the group who targeted  his
                  father is still in existence or how it would identify  him
                  [25];

                  (ii) it was unlikely that the appellant  would  co-operate
                  with  efforts  to  remove  him  [27]  to  [29];  that  the
                  appellant could not rely on his own  unreasonable  refusal
                  to co-operate in circumstances to show that he  could  not
                  be returned in line with AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944;

                  (iii)    the appellant  was  not  a  foreign  criminal  as
                  defined given that he had not been sentenced to  a  single
                  term of twelve months; and, that despite the  respondent's
                  submissions, not pre-figured in the refusal  letter  [32],
                  he was not satisfied that the appellant was  a  persistent
                  offender as defined and thus was not caught either by  the
                  automatic deportation provisions  nor  was  he  a  foreign
                  criminal as defined in Section 117D of the 2002 Act;

                  (iv) the appellant could not meet the terms  of  paragraph
                  276ADE [36] nor did he meet the grounds of Appendix FM  in
                  respect to his relationship with his partner [37] and that
                  it had not been  shown  that  family  life  could  not  be
                  pursued in Iraq by the appellant and his partner  although
                  both being unwilling to do so [40].

             6.   The appellant sought permission to appeal on the  grounds
             that the judge had erred:-

                  (i)  in failing properly  to  apply  the  guidance  in  AA
                  (Iraq) [2017] in that,  having  apparently  accepted  that
                  relocation  to  Baghdad  was  not  an  option,  he  failed
                  properly to  consider  the  practicality  of  travel  from
                  Baghdad to the IKR;

                  (ii)  in  irrationally  concluding  that  the  appellant's
                  family would be able to assist him in  obtaining  a  CSID;
                  having lost contact with his sisters he had  no  remaining
                  relatives in Iraq the family in any event being unable  to
                  return to the Kirkuk Civil Status Office as the region was
                  one of conflict such that Article 15(c) would be engaged;

                  (iii)    in failing properly  to  take  an  assessment  of
                  proportionality with regard to  the  factors  set  out  in
                  Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

             7.   On 5 March 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pedro  granted
             permission.

             8.   In his Rule 24 response the Secretary  of  State  submits
             that the judge erred

                  (i)  in the assessment of whether or not the appellant was
                  a persistent offender, wrongly  taking  into  account  the
                  fact that the grant of indefinite leave to remain in  2008
                  showed the  offences  were  not  serious  this  not  being
                  relevant to the question of the persistence of  offending,
                  the judge failing to look holistically at the totality  of
                  the  offending  in  light  of  Chege  ("is  a   persistent
                  offender") Kenya [2016] UKUT 187;

                  (ii) in concluding that in any event the  appellant  would
                  not be at risk of destitution without a CSID if he had  no
                  family to turn to for support which was not  the  case  as
                  found by the judge.

             9.   Both parties accepted that the judge  had  erred  in  not
             noting that the  appellant's  ILR  had  not  been  revoked  by
             operation of Section 5 of the 1971 Act as, for the duration of
             the appeal, it is preserved by operation of Section 34 of  the
             UK Borders Act 2007. On that basis, the findings with  respect
             to article 8 were flawed given  that  they  proceeded  wrongly
             from the assumption that the appellant did not currently  have
             leave.

             10.  Mr Greer has submitted that the simple finding  that  the
             appellant was not credible was not sufficient as  findings  of
             fact still needed to be made with regards to those  with  whom
             the appellant was in contact and it  would  not  be  right  to
             impute things onto him in the absence of  credibility.   There
             were no proper findings as  to  whether  the  appellant  could
             obtain a CSID and it therefore followed that the findings with
             respect to internal relocation were misplaced.

             11.  Mr Greer submitted also that  the  judge  had  erred  as,
             having found that the appellant was  not  a  foreign  criminal
             there was no proper consideration of the  underlying  legality
             of the decision which was relevant to proportionality as was a
             proper analysis of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

             12.  Mr Greer had submitted also that the submission that  the
             appellant was a  persistent  offender  was  to  overstate  the
             nature of his offending given that most of them related  to  a
             failure to attend court, to answer to bail or to a failure  to
             comply with a curfew.

             13.  Mr Mills submitted that the judge had not  addressed  the
             submission from the Secretary  of  State  that  Kirkuk  is  no
             longer a contested  area  and  that  the  case  was  that  the
             appellant could return to Kirkuk to get help, albeit  that  he
             had left Iraq at the age of 17 in 2002.  It had been  open  to
             the judge to find that the appellant was not telling the truth
             when he said he could not get a CSID and the  judge  had  also
             erred in concluding that the appellant was  not  a  persistent
             offender as the judge should not have discounted the  offences
             which occurred prior to the grant of indefinite leave.  It was
             noted also that the judge had said that it would  be  arguable
             that the appellant is a persistent offender if they  had  been
             taken into account see decision at paragraph 34.

             14.  I am satisfied that the judge's analysis of Article 8  is
             flawed given that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  still  had
             indefinite  leave  to  remain  was  not  properly  taken  into
             account.  Further, having concluded that the appellant was not
             a  foreign  national  offender,  and  was  not  a   persistent
             criminal, then the entire basis of the decision to deport  the
             appellant fell away; this is not a case where there had been a
             separate revocation of indefinite leave  to  remain  on  other
             grounds.  A failure to take this  into  account  is  a  matter
             which infects significantly the Article 8 analysis and on that
             basis the decision involved the making of an error of law.

             15.  Was this error material?  I consider that it  was.  There
             is significant merit in the respondent's submission as set out
             in the rule 24 letter that the judge  wrongly  concluded  that
             the appellant was not a persistent offender.   The  judge  did
             not appear to have directed himself in line with Chege and  it
             was wrong to discount the offences committed prior to 2008  in
             assessing whether offending was persistent.  The issue of  the
             seriousness of the offences was not strictly relevant and they
             should not have been ruled out of consideration.  There was  a
             clear thread in the offending in that the appellant appears at
             many different occasions to have ignored and  disregarded  the
             law in failing to attend court, failing to  comply  with  bail
             and failing to comply with curfews. That attitude of disregard
             for the law is also shown in the most recent convictions.

             16.  Accordingly, I consider that the  judge's  decision  that
             the appellant was a persistent offender is flawed  and  cannot
             be sustained.  That does not, however, mean that any  decision
             will  inevitably  be  that  the  appellant  is  a   persistent
             offender.  That would require a further fact-finding  exercise
             but the errors are material and the decision must be set aside
             on that basis also.

             17.  With regard to the findings about the  CSID  and  whether
             the appellant could obtain one, as well as the difficulties of
             relocating  to  Kirkuk,  I  remind  myself  that  this  is   a
             protection case and the decision has now been  set  aside.   I
             consider that given that there  has  been  a  further  country
             guidance case and the situation in Iraq has  changed  to  some
             degree since the last  decision,  that  it  would  be  in  the
             interests of justice to set aside the protection part  of  the
             claim as it will  be  necessary  to  undertake  further  fact-
             finding.

             18.   I  consider  that  the  findings  with  respect  to  the
             availability and assistance for  the  appellant  in  Iraq  are
             unsustainable.  Whilst I accept that it was open to the  judge
             to find that the appellant was not  credible,  the  issues  of
             relocation are, for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds,
             unsustainable and it is not  clear  how  the  appellant  could
             relocate from Baghdad to the Kurdish region.   Further,  there
             appears to be some degree of confusion about the  location  of
             Kirkuk which is not in the IKR.  This appears  to  arise  from
             the refusal letter, and a proper analysis must be made.

             19.  Accordingly, for  these  reasons,  I  consider  that  the
             decision must be set aside in its entirety  and  remade.   The
             issue that remains is to whether this should be remade in  the
             Upper Tribunal and I am satisfied that in the circumstances of
             this case that it would be appropriate to do so therefore I do
             not order this to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

             Notice of Decision

             (1)  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
                  making of an error of law and I set it aside.

             (2)  As agreed between the parties, the appeal will be  remade
                  in the Upper Tribunal at Bradford on a day to be fixed."

         2.   At the  resumed  hearing,  Mr  Greer,  who  appeared  for  the
         appellant, raised a matter which he submitted is fundamental to the
         Tribunal's jurisdiction to remake the decision. Both parties accept
         that the decision to deport  the  appellant  sought  to  rely  upon
         section 32(5) of the United Kingdom Borders Act 2007. Further, they
         accept the index offence (the production of cannabis)  led  to  the
         appellant  receiving  sentence  of  9   months   imprisonment   for
         production and 3 months for acts intended to pervert the course  of
         justice. The sentences were imposed consecutively. Section  38  (1)
         (b) of the 2007 Act provides:

             "In section 32(2) the reference to a person who  is  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months-

             (a)  ...

             (b)  does not include a reference to a person who is sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12  months  only  by
             virtue of being sentenced to consecutive  sentences  amounting
             in aggregate to more than 12 months,"

         3.   Mr Greer submitted that the decision to deport  the  appellant
         under the provisions  of  the  2007  Act  was  not  lawful  as  the
         appellant did not fall within  the  provisions  of  section  32(2).
         After some discussion, I told  the  representatives  that  I  would
         consider  the  submission  and  I  adjourned  the  resumed  hearing
         accordingly.

         4.   Mr Greer sought to rely upon  Charles  (human  rights  appeal:
         scope) [2018] UKUT 00089 (IAC) in support of his argument. At  [45-
         49], the Upper Tribunal held;

             "45. We find  we  must  take  issue  with  the  last  part  of
             paragraph 23 of Greenwood (No. 2).  The former ability of  the
             Tribunal to conclude that a decision of the Secretary of State
             was unlawful, with the result that a lawful decision  remained
             to be made by her, depended  upon  the  fact  that  under  the
             version of section 86 of the 2002 Act as it was, prior to  its
             amendment by the 2014 Act, the Tribunal was required to  allow
             an appeal insofar as it thought that a decision against  which
             the appeal was brought or was treated as being brought was not
             in accordance with the law (including immigration rules). That
             requirement has been removed from the  legislation.   In  this
             regard, therefore, Parliament has most definitely  "taken  the
             opportunity to interfere".

             46.  The correct approach to adopt in a  human  rights  appeal
             under section 82(1)(b) is as follows.  As section 84(2)  makes
             clear, and as is reflected in the present notice of  decision,
             served  in   compliance   with   the   Immigration   (Notices)
             Regulations 2003, the decision being appealed is the  decision
             to refuse the claimant's human rights  claim.   Section  84(2)
             provides that the only ground upon which that decision can  be
             challenged is that "the decision is unlawful under  section  6
             of the Human Rights Act 1998".  Section 6(1) of the  1998  Act
             provides that it "is unlawful for a public authority to act in
             a way which is incompatible with the Convention rights".

             47.  The definition of "human rights claim" in section  113(1)
             of the 2002 Act involves the making of a  claim  by  a  person
             that to remove him or her from or to require  him  or  her  to
             leave the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6.

             48.  The task, therefore, for the Tribunal, in a human  rights
             appeal is to decide whether such removal or requirement  would
             violate any of the provisions  of  the  ECHR.   In  many  such
             cases,  including  the  present,  the  issue  is  whether  the
             hypothetical removal or requirement to leave would be contrary
             to Article 8 (private and family life).

             49.  In such a paradigm human rights appeal, therefore, we  do
             not consider that paragraph 21 of the decision in Greenwood No
             2, including its sub-paragraphs (a) and (b), has any purchase.
              If the decision  to  refuse  the  human  rights  claim  would
             violate section 6 of the 1998 Act, the Tribunal must so  find.
             In such a paradigm case, we see no  purpose  in  the  Tribunal
             making any statement to the effect  that  "a  lawful  decision
             remains to be made by  the  Secretary  of  State".   It  would
             certainly be  wrong  to  conclude  that,  having  allowed  the
             appeal,   the   appellant's   human   rights   claim   remains
             outstanding, in the sense that the  Secretary  of  State  must
             make a fresh decision on that claim.  The actual position will
             be that the Secretary of State, faced with the allowing of the
             appeal by the Tribunal, will decide whether and, if  so,  what
             leave to enter or remain she should  give  to  the  appellant.
             Any deportation decision or decision under section 10  of  the
             1999 Act that the Secretary of State may have made in  respect
             of the appellant will fall away.  Again, we see  no  need  for
             the Tribunal to make any express statement to that effect."

         5.   I do not find  that  Charles  offers  Mr  Greer  any  support.
         Whether or not the decision of the Secretary of State to deport the
         appellant has been made under the correct statutory provision,  the
         appellant has made protection and human rights application  to  the
         Secretary of State, an application which  the  decision  letter  23
         August 2017 clearly indicates was refused. There was  no  right  of
         appeal against the making of the deportation order but only against
         the Secretary of State's asylum/human rights decision.  The  First-
         tier  Tribunal  (and  now  the  Upper  Tribunal)  was  required  to
         determine the appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  only
         because the only decision of the Secretary of State with  which  it
         was concerned was the refusal  and  not  the  decision  to  make  a
         deportation  order.  Neither  Tribunal  has  any  jurisdiction   to
         conclude that the deportation decision was not in  accordance  with
         the law.

         6.   Accordingly, I direct that the resumed hearing  be  listed  in
         Bradford on the first available date before me. Judge Rintoul  [17-
         19] do not preserve any of the findings of fact of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. Matters such as the risk to the appellant  of  return  to
         his home area of Iraq, any risk he may face upon forced  return  to
         Baghdad and whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to
         relocate within Iraq, in particular to the IKR, may  be  raised  at
         the resumed hearing. The legality of the deportation decision  will
         not, for the reasons given above, be revisited.

         Notice of Decision

         7.   The First-tier Tribunal decision has already been  set  aside.
         The Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lane)  will  remake  the
         decision at or following a resumed hearing which shall be fixed  on
         the first available date  at  Bradford  (2  hours:  Kurdish  Sorani
         interpreter).

 2. The appellant attended the adjourned resumed hearing  and  adopted  his
    witness statement as  his  evidence  in  chief.  There  was  no  cross-
    examination.

 3. Mr Greer submitted that, as long ago as 2009, the  Secretary  of  State
    had accepted that the appellant had no identity documents (including  a
    CSID) and could not obtain such documents; accordingly,  the  Secretary
    of State had issued the appellant with an emergency travel document. He
    queried why now, some 10 years later, the Secretary of  State  believes
    that the appellant would be able to obtain the necessary documents.  He
    submitted that the appellant had given  consistent  evidence  regarding
    the complete absence of family members who would be able to assist  him
    in Iraq (his parents are dead and he has not had any contact  with  his
    sister many years).

 4. I have considered all the evidence very  carefully.  I  agree  with  Mr
    Greer that the prospects  of  the  appellant  obtaining  the  necessary
    identity documents now certainly  no  better  and  possibly  even  more
    remote than they were  in  2009.  I  accept  what  the  appellant  says
    regarding an absence of friends or family members who would be able  to
    assist him in obtaining replacement documents.  Applying  the  existing
    country guidance (AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944) I  am  satisfied  that
    the appellant would be exposed to a real risk of destitution should  he
    return undocumented to Baghdad. Consequently, I  allow  his  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds. Whether the Secretary of  State  seeks
    to revoke his indefinite leave to remain and to  substitute  a  shorter
    period of the humanitarian protection leave is a matter  for  him.  The
    appellant  should  remain  aware  of  the  fact  that,  should  country
    conditions alter in Iraq, then he may in  the  future  be  expected  to
    return to his country of nationality.

Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    to refuse his claim for international protection following  a  decision
    to deport him to Iraq is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.


Signed   Date 1 MAY 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

