
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08097/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2018                             |On 6 November 2018            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    A E H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Fenney of NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco who  was  born  on  21  September
    1992.  He left Morocco on 12 January 2016 and travelled to Amsterdam in
    the  Netherlands.   There,  he  claimed  asylum  on  16  January  2017.
    However, as the appellant continued to have a visa valid for entry into
    the United Kingdom, he was sent to the UK where he claimed asylum on  9
    May 2017.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is gay and a member of  a
    particular social group in  Morocco  and  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution,  including  prosecution,  as  a  result  of   his   sexual
    orientation.

 4. On 10 August 2017, the Secretary  of  State  rejected  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  A number of matters
    were accepted before Judge Clemes who heard the appellant's appeal.  It
    was accepted that the appellant is Moroccan.  His  immigration  history
    was accepted as was his sexual orientation and  that  homosexuality  is
    illegal in Morocco.  It was also accepted that he  had  worked  for  an
    organisation known as "ALCS" in Morocco.   That  organisation  provides
    advice and help to individuals in same-sex relationships, in particular
    in relation to AIDS.

 6. Judge Clemes found, having examined the background evidence, that there
    was not a real risk of the appellant being prosecuted  because  of  his
    sexual orientation.  Judge Clemes accepted that  the  appellant  had  a
    boyfriend in Morocco who  remained  unharmed.   He  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been subject to a "low level  [of]  harassment"  by,  for
    example, neighbours.  He did  not  accept,  however,  that  either  the
    appellant or his boyfriend had  been  subjected  to  any  serious  ill-
    treatment or persecution including,  in  the  case  of  the  appellant,
    whilst at work or because  of  his  involvement  with  ALCS.    In  the
    result, Judge Clemes dismissed the appellant's appeal on the basis that
    he had failed to establish a real risk of persecution or  serious  ill-
    treatment as a result of his sexual orientation.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on,
    essentially, two grounds.  First, the judge failed properly to consider
    the background  evidence  and  the  risk  to  the  appellant  of  being
    prosecuted because of his  sexual  orientation.   Secondly,  the  judge
    failed to consider all aspects  of  the  appellant's  claimed  risk  on
    return, in particular arising out of his employment.

 8. Initially, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) refused the appellant
    permission to appeal but, on 12 February 2018, the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ
    Finch) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 9. In granting permission, UTJ Finch  identified  the  following  arguable
    errors of law:

         "When considering the substantial amount of evidence relied upon by
         the Appellant about discrimination and persecution faced by gay men
         in Morocco men the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  give  any
         weight to material  from  sources  such  as  Buzz-Feed  or  Erasing
         76Crimes.  He asserts the sources were not  reliable  but  did  not
         provide any reasons for such a finding.

         It may be that  greater  weight  should  be  given  to  reports  by
         established international human rights organisations but this  does
         not mean that no weight should be given to other sources.

         He also did not stress the issue of  whether  in  a  country  where
         homosexuality was illegal the appellant could rely on a sufficiency
         of protection from third party actors."

The Judge's Decision

10. In his determination, Judge Clemes set out the  appellant's  claim  (at
    para 2) and the respondent's reasons,  in  summary,  for  refusing  his
    asylum claim (para 3).  Then at paras 4-10 of  his  determination,  the
    judge set out the  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  given  at  the
    hearing.  At para 11,  the  judge  set  out  the  Presenting  Officer's
    submissions.  At para 12, he set out the submissions of the appellant's
    (then) Counsel as to why the appeal should be  allowed.   Then,  having
    set out the relevant  law  at  paras  13-16,  the  judge  analysed  the
    evidence and made his findings at paras 17-22 of his determination.

11. At para 17, the judge set out what was accepted and what was  an  issue
    in the appeal as follows:

         "I find that the following  facts  are  agreed  and  made  out  the
         nationality and age of the appellant; his immigration history;  the
         appellant's sexuality; homosexuality is  illegal  in  Morocco;  his
         employment history in Morocco.  The threats made by  his  neighbour
         and  the  various  accounts  of  encounters  with  the  Police  are
         contentious.  The issue - according to the  Skeleton  Argument  for
         the appellant - is whether there is a risk on return.  Mr Dieu  set
         out - helpfully - the points from the background evidence which  he
         said pointed to prosecution of homosexual men in Morocco so much so
         that it amounts to persecution."

12. Then at paras 18-19, the  judge  dealt  with  the  background  evidence
    contained in the appellant's bundle of 114 pages.  The judge said this:

         "18. There is  a  volume  of  background  evidence  filed  for  the
             appellant, much of which is quite  old.   Some  of  it  is  of
             dubious relevance - for example the article on "Sex Tourism in
             Morocco".  The appellant's bundle contains examples  of  cases
             where homosexual men have been prosecuted and these are listed
             in the Skeleton  Argument  at  paragraph  2(c)  onwards.   The
             appellant had also shown some knowledge  of  the  law  against
             homosexuality in practice: being  sexually  active  seemed  to
             attract adverse attention (the report at page 32 of the bundle
             is an example of public sexual activity).  Many of the reports
             deal with defendants who  are  not  only  charged  with  being
             engaged in homosexual activity but also with aggravating other
             offences for example, inciting younger men to become  involved
             in homosexual activity or  drinking  alcohol  (see  page  40).
             Some of the sources are not well-known and lack any reputation
             for independence and integrity an example is the blog at pages
             42-43 which draws  on  some  authoritative  sources  but  also
             relies on others, such as Buzz-Feed.   The  Skeleton  Argument
             claims that this source talks of eight men being arrested  and
             jailed (in Morocco) whereas in  fact  it  relates  to  two  in
             Morocco and six in Egypt.  Some of it recycles the information
             from the article at page 38 (the men sentenced in  May  2013).
             Yet it is presented as an accumulating total - but it  is  not
             as simple as that, I am satisfied.  It is right to  note  that
             at page 45 appears more evidence of the jailing of 3 more  men
             but gain this was an  arrest  and  conviction  of  men  caught
             committing  sexual  acts  in  public.   There   are   frequent
             references to "unreported" prosecutions but I am not satisfied
             that I can place any weight on such information:  the  sources
             are not made out or shown to be in any  way  authoritative  or
             reliable.

         19.  A Human Rights Watch report (a reliable source) of  July  2015
             presents a more mixed picture with references to a mob  attack
             on a suspected homosexual man but also arrests of the  alleged
             perpetrators.   It  also  goes  on  to  call   for   the   de-
             criminalisation of the law.  Another report at page 52 relates
             other prosecutions but - in common with the  earlier  article,
             there is the recycling of older cases.   Again,  the  Skeleton
             Argument does not make  this  clear.   This  feature  is  also
             evident on pages 54 and 55 (the same case is presented as  two
             discrete ones).  The website "76crimes" sets out that there is
             an average of  86  prosecutions  per  year  under  this  anti-
             homosexuality law but - other than the Associated Press -  its
             sources are less than impeccable and (in my judgment) possibly
             unreliable.  Of more reliability is the report of  the  Danish
             Immigration Service at page 66 which sets out how LGBT  groups
             can be exposed to violence.  Against that,  there  is  a  more
             optimistic part of the report  which  describes  the  ways  in
             which the LGBT community does manage to function and meet  up.
             The same report goes on to detail that the Moroccan state does
             sometimes intervene to protect homosexual men and  women  from
             attacks from members of the public (page 68  of  the  bundle).
             The report sets out that this is a  mixed  picture:  in  other
             cases, there is little protection for an LGBT  person  who  is
             the victim of a crime.  The Danish Immigration report might be
             the best source for a clearer picture of how many prosecutions
             there actually are under the law:  pages  68  onwards  examine
             different sources and give some examples.  The  report  itself
             has to grapple with the way in which information is  presented
             to it: in paragraph 25 it has to report  to  setting  out  the
             different claims made (e.g. 4-5 cases  at  first  instance  in
             2015-16).  It lists some examples - these  themselves  include
             some of the ones from earlier  reports  in  the  bundle.   The
             report also alludes to "trumped up"  charges,  i.e.  based  on
             false confessions or fabricated accounts.  Despite this, in my
             judgement, the numbers of cases are a great deal smaller  than
             the Skeleton Argument  represents  at  first  reading.   I  am
             certain that there has been no attempt to mislead the Tribunal
             but there has not been the expected level  of  examination  of
             the figures to prevent the same case  of  "prosecution"  being
             duplicated and presented as a new one.   I  am  not  satisfied
             that the background  evidence  does  support  the  claim  that
             prosecutions are so numerous  that  they  become  persecution.
             Many of the cases are of men  being  caught  in  committing  a
             sexual act as opposed  to  merely  being  homosexual  and  not
             hiding the fact.  Committing sexual acts in public (as some of
             the examples entail) is  often  a  criminal  offence  even  in
             "Western"   society.    Other   prosecutions   involve   other
             aggravating offences - for example promoting  prostitution  or
             the corrupting of younger people or the possession of alcohol.
              I - further - am not satisfied that the provenance of much of
             the information is wholly  objective  and  therefore  attracts
             less credibility and have approached it with some caution."

13. At para 20, the judge dealt with the appellant's  evidence  and,  in  a
    number of respects, did not accept his account:

         "There is the appellant's  own  evidence.   He  could  have  sought
         evidence in support for it - most obviously from his boyfriend  who
         remains in Morocco and is unharmed it seems.  I remind myself  that
         the appellant says that his boyfriend was far more "open" about his
         sexuality than the appellant had been and yet  he  (the  boyfriend)
         has not suffered  any  ill-treatment  which  could  be  classed  as
         persecution.  I broadly accept the appellant's factual account - it
         fits  with  the  descriptions  of  harassment  of  the   homosexual
         community which are contained in much of the  background  evidence.
         I am not satisfied that the account of a  female  neighbour  making
         threats against him is made out and certainly  not  satisfied  that
         any such behaviour could amount to any form of behaviour for  which
         he would need to seek the protection of the authorities.  If  there
         were such  threats,  then  in  any  event  they  are  a  low  level
         harassment by a non-state agent.  I consider that the appellant has
         embellished the seriousness of this account to include the  "maker"
         of them rounding up local youths against him.  He - as I say  above
         - had an easy source of possible support his  boyfriend  who  could
         have sent in a statement (Morocco is not a closed state which would
         inhibit the sending of such evidence).  Despite the picture that he
         now presents of a pattern of persecution against him, he  chose  to
         leave the UK and go back to Morocco in December 2106.  This - I  am
         satisfied - damages the credibility of his account:  why  would  he
         return to the place where he was being persecuted when he had  been
         able to stay in the UK and make an asylum claim?  There is evidence
         on his visa application that he had also travelled abroad on  other
         occasions to places where he might have been expected  to  make  an
         asylum claim if his version of persecution carried any credibility.
          He says now that he wanted to see if his boyfriend was  alright  -
         but I am satisfied that  this  is  not  a  true  account.   Nothing
         happened in that short time to materially alter the overall picture
         of their life together in Morocco."

14. At paras 21-22, the judge set out  his  conclusions  that  led  him  to
    dismiss the appeal as follows:

         "21. When the totality of the  appellant's  account  is  considered
             these salient facts emerge he has not (certain latterly)  made
             an attempt to hide his sexuality in  Morocco;  he  has  openly
             lived with a male who is also homosexual and was not afraid to
             show off that  fact;  he  worked  for  an  organisation  which
             supported gay men quite publicly  without  -  I  find  on  the
             evidence - suffering the adverse  attention  of  the  Moroccan
             authorities.   I  did  not  find  the  dichotomy  between  the
             Ministries of the Interior and Health credible as suggested by
             the appellant; there is little to support it.  I am  satisfied
             that the appellant has probably been harassed at quite  a  low
             level by the authorities but that he has never  been  arrested
             or detained for any criminal process to be pursued.  I do  not
             accept the claim that he faced discrimination at work (a  type
             of whispering campaign)  -  he  was  working  for  a  tolerant
             organisation in terms of people's  sexuality  and  I  find  it
             unlikely that such an organisation  would  put  up  with  such
             behaviour from its workforce.

         22.  In my judgment, the  appellant's  own  evidence  supports  the
             overall thrust of the background evidence:  that  prosecutions
             of gay men are sporadic at their worst - and in my judgment  -
             show a pattern of court  cases  where  there  are  aggravating
             features.  The appellant has not been subjected  to  any  such
             process.  I am not  satisfied  that  there  is  a  pattern  of
             prosecutions that - taken as a broad overview - can amount  to
             persecution.  At best the appellant might suffer the same sort
             of harassment that he has probably already had to put up with.
              That falls short of persecution, in my judgment.   I  am  not
             satisfied that the appellant is someone who, owing to a  well-
             founded fear of persecution for reasons  of  membership  of  a
             particular social group or political  opinion,  is  unable  or
             unwilling to avail himself of the protection of his country of
             origin Morocco."

The Submissions

15. Ms Fenney, who represented the appellant submitted that the  judge  had
    failed properly to consider the background  evidence.   In  particular,
    she submitted that he had "cherry-picked" from the  Danish  Immigration
    Service Report: "Morocco: situation of LGBT persons, 21/03/2017"  which
    is at pages 62-86 of the appellant's bundle.  She  submitted  that  the
    judge had been wrong to say that the  background  evidence  established
    that only those with 'aggravating factors' were at risk of prosecution.
     That was not so.  She relied on para 2.2 ("exposure to violence by sub-
    groups of LGBT persons"), para 2.3 ("LGBT communities and  safe  spaces
    in Moroccan society"), para 2.4 ("state protection available") and para
    2.5 ("examples of trials involving homosexuality").  She submitted that
    this painted the position in Morocco in much more of a  negative  light
    than the judge recognised in para 19 of his  determination.   She  also
    submitted that the judge had failed to take into  account  whether  the
    appellant's work in an AIDS advice organisation would be a "aggravating
    factor".  She submitted that the evidence of harassment, if it went  on
    long enough, would amount to persecution and in addition she  submitted
    that the appellant had avoided prosecution by bribing  police  officers
    in order to be arrested and had been subject to humiliation in order to
    avoid arrest and prosecution.  Ms Fenney submitted that the  judge  had
    failed properly to assess  the  future  risk  of  the  appellant  being
    attacked.

16. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the
    judge  had  properly  considered  the  background  evidence.   He  had,
    correctly, noted in para 18 that much of the evidence  was  quite  old.
    The judge had been entitled to give  less  weight  to  sources  on  the
    internet such as blogs and Buzz-Feed.  He was entitled, in para 19,  to
    give greater weight to the Human Rights Watch  Report  and  the  Danish
    Report.  In para 19, Mr Howells  submitted  that  the  judge  had  been
    entitled to find that  the  scale  of  prosecutions  presented  by  the
    appellant's (then) Counsel in para 2 of his skeleton argument  was  not
    as great as claimed.  Mr Howells relied upon the Home  Office,  Country
    Policy and Information Note, "Morocco: Sexual  Orientation  and  Gender
    Identity" (July 2017) at pages 87-114 of the appellant's  bundle  where
    at para 3.1.2 and section 6 ("Law in practice") that "in practice"  the
    law is "rarely used".  Mr Howells submitted that it was  wrong  to  say
    that the  judge  had  found  in  paras  19  and  20  that  arrests  and
    prosecutions only occurred where there were "aggravating factors".

17. Further, Mr Howells submitted that the judge's rejection of some of the
    appellant's evidence at para  20  was  not  challenged;  including  his
    finding  that  the  appellant  was  only  subject  to  a  low-level  of
    harassment by non-state actors.  Mr Howells submitted  that  the  judge
    was entitled to find at para 21, that level of harassment did not reach
    that required to establish persecution.

18. Finally,  as  regards  the  appellant's  work  with  ALCS,  Mr  Howells
    acknowledged that the judge accepted his work at paras 3 and 17 of  his
    determination but had noted that he had not been  arrested  because  of
    that.  Mr Howells submitted that the judge was entitled  to  find  that
    the appellant's work would not in itself, or as an aggravating  factor,
    create a real risk of persecution on return to Morocco.

Discussion

19. I have set out  the  judge's  reasoning  and  the  respective  parties'
    submissions at  some  length.   In  substance,  I  accept  Mr  Howells'
    submissions.  The judge  did  not  fall  into  error  in  reaching  his
    findings and in dismissing the appeal.

20. First, I do not accept that the judge failed properly to  consider  the
    background evidence.  He was entitled, at para 18, to give less  weight
    to internet sources such as blogs including Buzz-Feed.  The  judge  was
    entitled to give significant weight to  both  the  Human  Rights  Watch
    report and the Danish Immigration Service report.

21. I am not persuaded that the judge  misrepresented  the  weight  of  the
    evidence in the  background  material.   Ms  Fenney  did  not  seek  to
    "unpick" Judge Clemes' reasoning in paras 18 and 19 that  the  skeleton
    argument relied on  before  him  failed  to  identify  that  there  was
    duplication and overlap between the claimed numbers of  prosecution  of
    individuals due to their sexual orientation.   In  my  judgment,  Judge
    Clemes' reasoning at paras 18 and 19 is properly  sustainable  in  that
    regard.

22. Secondly, the judge did not conclude that the background evidence  only
    showed  prosecution  of  gay  men  where  there  was  in  addition   an
    "aggravating factor".  He merely said, at para 19, that "many"  of  the
    cases involve men who were "committing a  sexual  act"  and  not  being
    prosecuted simply because  they  were  gay;  and  "other"  prosecutions
    involved "other aggravating offences", such as possession  of  alcohol,
    corrupting younger people and  promoting  prostitution.   Judge  Clemes
    accepted that there were instances of gay men being  prosecuted,  in  a
    variety  of  circumstances,  under  the  Moroccan  law.   However,  the
    evidence before him was that these prosecutions were not  numerous  and
    the CPIN Report identified, on the basis of evidence, that  prosecution
    was "rare".  Judge Clemes had to decide whether there was a "real risk"
    of persecution based upon prosecution which was "more  than  fanciful".
    In my judgment, having properly considered the background evidence,  it
    was not irrational for Judge Clemes to conclude that a "real  risk"  of
    prosecution (amounting to,  as  he  put  it,  "persecution")  had  been
    established.  In reaching that conclusion, I am wholly unpersuaded that
    he failed properly to consider the background material before him.

23. Thirdly, the judge made clear (and now unchallenged) findings that  the
    appellant had been subject to a low level of  harassment  by  non-state
    actors.  Judge Clemes rejected the appellant's  claim  (again  not  now
    challenged) that he had faced discrimination at work, given that he was
    working for a "tolerant organisation in terms of  people's  sexuality".
    Those unchallenged  findings  were,  in  my  judgment,  findings  which
    entitled Judge  Clemes  to  find  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    establish a real risk of persecution by non-state actors.  The issue of
    "sufficiency of protection" from the state did not "therefore" arise.

24. Fourthly, the fact that the appellant worked for an  organisation  such
    as ALCS was clearly well in the mind of the judge.  He dealt  with  the
    appellant's evidence in that regard at some length at  para  6.   There
    was nothing in the evidence, before Judge Clemes, to suggest  that  the
    appellant had previously been at an enhanced risk of interest  or  ill-
    treatment by the authorities because of his job.   He  had  never  been
    arrested on  that  basis.   In  addition,  Judge  Clemes  set  out  the
    appellant's evidence that he had avoided trouble  with  the  police  by
    paying bribes when threatened with arrest (see para 7).   At  para  22,
    Judge Clemes noted that: "the appellant might suffer the same  sort  of
    harassment  that  he  has  probably  already  had  to  put  up   with",
    nevertheless he concluded that that fell "short of persecution"  for  a
    Convention reason.  Ms Fenney submitted that the judge  had  failed  to
    consider all aspects of the appellant's claim to be harassed, not  only
    by non-state actors but also by the  police.   As  is  clear  from  the
    citations I have given, Judge Clemes did consider all  aspects  of  the
    appellant's claim to be harassed.  I am unpersuaded that, on the  basis
    of his factual findings, the  judge  was  not  rationally  entitled  to
    conclude that that harassment did not reach the level of  "persecution"
    both in its nature and intensity so as to engage the protection of  the
    Refugee Convention.

25. Fifthly, I am in no doubt that Judge Clemes  did  consider  the  future
    risk to the appellant, albeit in the  context  of  what  the  appellant
    claimed (and the judge accepted) had  happened  to  him  previously  in
    Morocco.  That included the fact that the  appellant  had  returned  to
    Morocco, having first come to the UK in 2016  and  that  there  was  no
    evidence  from  his  boyfriend  in  Morocco  either  to   support   the
    appellant's claim or which provided any evidence that  the  appellant's
    boyfriend faced any problems in Morocco despite being, as the judge put
    it, "far more 'open' about his sexuality than the appellant"  (at  para
    20).

26. Consequently, I am satisfied that the  judge's  factual  findings  were
    properly based upon the background evidence and that in dismissing  the
    appeal the judge did not err in law.  For  the  reasons  he  gave,  the
    judge rationally concluded that the appellant had failed  to  establish
    that on return to Morocco there was  a  real  risk  that  he  would  be
    persecuted because of his sexual orientation.

Decision

27. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law.  The decision stands.

28. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             26 October 2018
