
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08177/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th April 2019                       |On 30th April 2019                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     TMA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Uddin, instructed by Paragon Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in this  determination  identified  as  TMA.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. For the  reasons  given  in  his  decision,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         O'Connor found that the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred in  law
         in dismissing the appeal on Article 8  human  rights  grounds,  and
         that the primary findings of fact were retained. A  transfer  order
         was made and hence the resumed appeal hearing came before me.

      2.  The  appellant's  solicitors,  very   helpfully,   filed   a   new
         comprehensive bundle with all  the  relevant  documentary  evidence
         relied upon. I heard no oral evidence,  the  primary  facts  having
         already  been   determined.   I   heard   submissions   from   both
         representatives.

      3. The primary facts are as follows:

           . TMA claimed to have entered the UK on 7th October  2002,  aged
             19, and applied for asylum 2 days later. His asylum claim  was
             refused but he was granted exceptional leave to  remain  until
             4th December 2006. Having made an application  for  indefinite
             leave to remain but  before  a  decision  was  taken  on  that
             application he was, on 8th February 2008, convicted of  theft,
             breaching a previous suspended sentence  and  sentenced  to  5
             months imprisonment.

           . A deportation order was signed on 5th June 2009  following  an
             unsuccessful appeal against a decision to make  a  deportation
             order;

           . Between 9 December 2003 and 29 January 2015 TMA was  convicted
             of a total of 46 offences;

           . TMA has a current partner (JS) with whom he has a genuine  and
             subsisting relationship which amounts to family life  although
             they have not lived together since February  2016.  They  have
             known each other for 9 years (8 at the time of the  First-tier
             Tribunal decision). JS is a  British  Citizen,  not  of  Iraqi
             origin, she has never been to Iraq; she could visit him in the
             IKR. JA has adult children who themselves have children;

           . TMA has two British Citizen children, born  October  2004  and
             August 2007, with  two  different  (British  Citizen)  mothers
             (neither of whom is JS);

           . TMA has a parental relationship with each child and has family
             life with them, by way of physical contact  for  a  few  hours
             every  3  to  4  weeks;  regular  telephone  contact  in   the
             intervening periods of time;

           . It is in the best interests of the children to  remain  living
             with their respective mothers and realistically it would never
             be the case the children would go to Iraq /IKR with him;

           . Although physical contact with the children would cease on his
             removal to Iraq, they are used to not living with him and  not
             having him around;

           . There was no evidence to suggest TMA's absence would have  any
             adverse effect on the children's health or development;

           . He and the children  could  maintain  contact  through  modern
             means of communication, and it would be open to  the  children
             to visit him in Iraq.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal judge also made findings that there was  no
         evidence to suggest that TMA was not  familiar  with  the  customs,
         culture and language of Iraq, and no evidence he could not overcome
         any obstacles to his return to Iraq. The  first  is  a  generalised
         finding which does not seem to have been based on  evidence  -  the
         appellant is a Kurd from Kirkuk. The First-tier Tribunal judge does
         not appear to have considered those matters, but in a country  that
         has been ravaged by war for a number of decades and where there are
         numerous internal conflicts continuing it is difficult  to  justify
         such a generalised statement. In so far as obstacles to return  are
         concerned, the appellant does not have  a  CSID.  Country  Guidance
         case law makes clear the difficulties likely to be faced by someone
         without a CSID.  That finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         cannot be relied upon.

      5. The appellant is from Kirkuk which, according  to  current  Country
         Guidance is an area where there is a real risk of an Article  15(c)
         breach. He cannot return to Kirkuk. Country Guidance indicates that
         if he can get to the IKR, he would be able to stay there;  although
         conditions there would not be easy and could be described  as  very
         difficult, there is no risk of an Article 3  or  8  breach  of  his
         rights when there. The respondent returns individuals  to  Baghdad,
         not to the IKR; in any event the appellant is not from the IKR  and
         would not be returnable there direct. It is not possible to get  to
         the IKR without real risk of serious harm, unless flying internally
         to the IKR from Baghdad. Current Country Guidance confirms that  it
         is not possible to undertake a flight without a CSID.

      6. The appellant does not have a CSID or any other form  of  identity.
         He has no living relatives in Iraq, Kirkuk or the IKR or in the  UK
         who would be able to assist him in obtaining ID documents;  he  has
         been away from Kirkuk  for  some  17  years.  The  current  Country
         Guidance is that he would not be able to leave the airport  without
         real risk  of  serious  harm.  He  would  not  be  able  to  access
         employment, find accommodation or be able to travel to the IKR.

      7. I am satisfied that returning  to  Baghdad  without  any  ID  would
         result in him having no access to telephone, internet  etc  because
         he would have no access to employment or other financial support. I
         am satisfied that he would not be able to communicate using 'modern
         means of communication', with  either  JS  or  either  of  the  two
         children. He would, therefore, disappear totally from their lives.

      8. In considering the factual matrix and the potential breach  of  the
         right  to  respect  for  private  and  family  life,  although  the
         appellant was not subject to 'automatic  deportation',  he  is  the
         subject of a deportation order made in 2009  having  commenced  his
         offending very soon after his arrival in the UK. The considerations
         to be taken into account in the assessment of the potential  breach
         of Article 8 on deportation following the refusal by the respondent
         to revoke the deportation order,  includes  the  considerations  in
         s117C Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  which  are
         reflected in the Immigration Rules.

      9. The appellant has not been lawfully resident in the UK for most  of
         his life. Because of the lack  of  a  CSID,  there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles to his integration  into  Iraq  and  although
         (for the reasons  in  the  next  paragraph)  it  is  reasonable  to
         conclude that he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK he
         does not meet the criteria in s117C(4) of the NIAA 2002.

     10. The appellant speaks fluent English. He has been in the UK for some
         17years and has worked consistently when not  in  prison.  Although
         little documentary evidence  was  put  to  me  on  his  social  and
         cultural integration, he has established relationships with British
         Citizens and had British citizen children with whom  he  retains  a
         parental relationship and  whom  he  sees  regularly;  despite  his
         criminal offending he is clearly socially and culturally integrated
         in the UK.   His relationship with JS commenced when he was subject
         to a deportation order. Little  weight  can  be  placed  upon  this
         relationship, even though it is genuine and subsisting. They do not
         live together,  and  I  accept  that  it  would  be  upsetting  and
         difficult for them not to see each other. Although  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge found that JS could visit the appellant in  Iraq,  I
         reject that finding: the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  advise
         against all travel to significant provinces of Iraq including  part
         of Erbil in the IKR; they advise against all but  essential  travel
         to the remainder of Iraq.  Without a CSID, the appellant  would  be
         destitute in Baghdad; she would have to visit him there, where  the
         FCO do not permit official visitors to stay in hotels.  Hotels  and
         guest houses where foreign nationals stay  are,  according  to  the
         FCO, subject to regular threats. To state that she could visit  him
         in Iraq is unrealistic and would place her in danger. I  find  that
         his removal from the UK pursuant to  the  deportation  order  would
         result in the termination of their relationship. But the nature  of
         their relationship is not such that such a conclusion can result in
         a finding that it would be unduly harsh for either of them to be so
         separated. he does not meet the criteria in s117C(4)  of  the  NIAA
         2002.

     11. Realistically, pragmatically and for safety reasons, for  the  same
         reasons as I have set out in paragraph 10, neither child  (with  or
         without their respective mothers)  could  visit  the  appellant  in
         Iraq. Although the appellant only sees them every 3-4 weeks, he has
         a relationship with them which is consistent and continues  through
         telephone contact. Such contact is important for the  children  and
         will continue to be so both because  of  their  dual  heritage  and
         because he has been a significant part of their  lives  throughout.
         It is plain that it is not reasonable for the children to travel to
         Iraq: they  do  not  live  with  the  appellant  and  there  is  no
         expectation, realistic or otherwise, that they would do  so  if  he
         continued to live in the  UK.  Were  it  not  for  the  appellant's
         criminality, I would find that he met the criteria in s117B(vi)  of
         the 2002 Act.

     12.  But  the  appellant  has  criminal  convictions  and  there  is  a
         deportation order. Although, as I have said  above,  s117C  is  not
         directly applicable, the principles that lie behind the statute and
         the  Rules  reflect  an  analysis  of  the   impact   of   personal
         circumstances upon whether there would be a breach  of  Article  8.
         This is  not  simply  whether  there  would  be  a  breach  of  the
         appellant's Article 8 rights but also  those  of  the  two  British
         citizen children.

     13. The fundamental question is, therefore, whether the  separation  of
         the appellant from these children would be unduly harsh. The nature
         and extent of his criminality is not relevant save  to  the  extent
         that the criminality has, in effect, brought him within s117C. This
         requires  consideration  whether  the  total   breakdown   in   any
         communication between the appellant  and  the  children  is  unduly
         harsh. The  evidence  before  me,  which  I  accept,  is  that  the
         appellant is particularly  supportive  of  the  oldest  child  with
         regard to his GCSEs. The regular telephone calls are valued by  the
         child at this stressful time of his school career and I accept that
         the loss of that support would have a  significant  impact  on  the
         child in terms of his performance. The younger child  has  recently
         changed schools and the  evidence,  which  I  accept  is  that  the
         appellant has proved supportive for  this  change  in  the  child's
         life. This support is provided through the frequent telephone calls
         the appellant has with the children

     14. If the telephone/facetime/Skype contact could  continue  and  there
         was the possibility of occasional visits to Iraq or a  neighbouring
         country, I would have no hesitation in finding  that  although  the
         children would lose the current  relatively  frequent  face-to-face
         contact they have with their father, the fact that  they  would  be
         able to maintain a means of  communication  which  they  had  grown
         accustomed to would be such that the appellant's departure from the
         UK would not be unduly  harsh  upon  the  children.  In  this  case
         however there will be the  total  termination  of  contact  between
         father and child. With no means of securing identity documents  the
         appellant would be in Baghdad with no possibility of leaving either
         elsewhere in Iraq or out of the country. These  children  have  had
         their father in their lives their whole life;  the  separation  has
         been managed in their best interests  given  the  parents  are  not
         together. Current Country Guidance case law  means  that  continued
         communication and occasional contact would not be merely  difficult
         but impossible. This cannot be other than unduly  harsh  for  these
         children.

     15. If this were an appeal following the making of a deportation  order
         I would find that Exception 2 applies. As  a  human  rights  appeal
         that follows the making  of  a  decision  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
         deportation order, I am satisfied that because Exception 2 applies,
         it would be a breach of Article 8 to remove the appellant.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law, the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside to be remade.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 25th April 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
