

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08563/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 18 October 2017                            |On 02 November 2017          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     A N
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr A. Chakmakjian, Counsel instructed by
Fadiga & Co.
For the respondent:          Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grice ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 31 March 2017. The appellant appeals  against
    the First-tier Tribunal decision on the following grounds:

       i) The credibility findings were flawed because the judge:


          a) failed to consider the circumstances of the screening interview
             adequately;


          b) failed to take into account the appellant's explanation  and/or
             placed undue weight on an alleged discrepancy in  his  evidence
             relating to problems arising from a "clergyman"/"Imam";

          c) failed to give adequate  reasons  for  placing  weight  on  the
             appellant's failure to mention the arrest of his  secretary  in
             interview. He mentioned the incident in the SEF statement,  but
             was not asked about it in interview;

          d) failed to give adequate weight to  documents  relating  to  the
             appellant's business, which were supportive of his account.


      ii) The judge made several negative credibility findings in  relation
          to matters that were not raised by the respondent without  giving
          the appellant a fair opportunity to respond to the points at  the
          hearing.


     iii) The judge failed to consider the evidence given by two additional
          witnesses adequately.


      iv) In assessing risk on return resulting from  political  activities
          carried out in the UK  the  judge  failed  to  consider  relevant
          country guidance relating to the  additional  interest  that  the
          authorities might have in political  activities  carried  out  by
          Iranian Arabs: see SA (Iranian Arabs - no general risk)  Iran  CG
          [2011] UKUT 41.

Decision and reasons

3.    I have considered the First-tier Tribunal decision in detail.  I  have
    taken into account the grounds of appeal and the oral submissions  made
    by both parties at the hearing. This is a finely balanced decision, but
    in my assessment the cumulative effect of  the  issues  raised  in  the
    grounds   of   appeal   render   the   First-tier   Tribunal   decision
    unsustainable.

4.    Although many of  the  credibility  points  made  by  the  judge  were
    unarguably open to her to make, as a whole, the decision fails to  take
    into account or give weight to evidence that supported the  appellant's
    account. The judge assessed the plausibility of a number aspects of the
    claim in light of what she "would have expected" rather than  assessing
    the credibility of the claim in the context of the background  evidence
    relating to the nature of the Iranian regime  and  the  other  evidence
    produced in support of the claim. The Tribunal should be  cautious  not
    to place undue weight on plausibility in coming to adverse  credibility
    findings: see HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 and Y v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA
    Civ 1223.

5.    The Tribunal gave reasons for rejecting some aspects of  the  evidence
    given by the supporting witnesses but not others. Despite stating  that
    the evidence of the witnesses had been considered as part of a holistic
    assessment the judge rejected the credibility of the evidence given  by
    Ms Khatib  because  she  had  already  found  the  appellant's  account
    incredible rather than  assessing  whether  Ms  Khatib's  evidence  was
    reliable and therefore capable of supporting  his  account.  The  judge
    rejected Mr Nejadfazel's evidence because of  apparent  concerns  about
    his political affiliations, but failed to make  findings  on  the  core
    aspects of his evidence  whereby  he  outlined  what  he  knew  of  the
    appellant's problems in Iran from the appellant and  other  members  of
    his family.

6.    Although the judge asked a number  of  'clarifying  questions'  during
    the course of the evidence, the appellant has identified several points
    where the judge made negative findings on matters that were not  raised
    in the reasons for refusal letter and did not appear to be put  to  the
    appellant to answer at the hearing.

7.    Taken alone, the above concerns might not be sufficient to render  the
    decision unsustainable. What has tipped me to conclude that the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of  law  is  the
    final point relating to the assessment of risk  on  return.  The  judge
    referred to the relevant country guidance decision in BA (Demonstrators
    in Britain - risk on return) Iran [2011] UKUT 36, but failed to  assess
    the risk on return in the particular circumstances of this case,  which
    included the additional  element  of  the  appellant's  ethnicity.  The
    headnote to SA (Iran) makes clear that ethnicity  might  enhance  other
    risk factors even if an Iranian Arab is not likely to be at risk solely
    for reasons of his ethnicity:

       "The Iranian state is suspicious of those Iranian  citizens  who  are
       also Arabs and regards London as a  centre  of  separatist  activity.
       Being an Iranian Arab returned from the United Kingdom enhances other
       risk factors but an Iranian Arab does not risk persecution  or  other
       ill treatment solely by reason of ethnicity."

8.    I am conscious of the need for anxious scrutiny of  protection  claims
    and the potentially serious consequences of return to a country such as
    Iran. In light of the  concerns  about  some  aspects  of  the  judge's
    credibility assessment, and her failure to consider a matter  that  was
    relevant to a proper assessment of risk on return, I conclude that  the
    decision involved the making of an error of law and must be set  aside.
    Both parties agreed that the appropriate course of action is  to  remit
    the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The decision is set aside

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 01 November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan





