
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08778/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October 2020                   |On 02 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SKINNER


                                   Between

                                   [A R H]
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of 20 August 2019 refusing his  application
    for international protection.

2.    That  appeal  having  been  dismissed,  he  sought  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal against it, and following a  hearing  on  5  March
    2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Allen found errors of  law  in  the  decision
    such that it required to be reconsidered in relation  to  the  specific
    issue of internal relocation.

3.   The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd who claimed to be at risk on  return  to
    Iraq.  The judge concluded that he would be able to obtain a CSID  with
    the help of family members, and in respect  of  various  matters  other
    than the appellant's ethnicity and place of origin found him  generally
    to lack credibility.

4.   It is not necessary to say a great deal about  the  appeal  before  us.
    Mr Spurling relied on and developed the  points  made  in  his  helpful
    skeleton argument in which he argued that as a matter of feasibility it
    was not open  to  the  appellant  to  return  to  parts  of  government
    controlled areas of Iraq in particular Baghdad,  and  as  a  matter  of
    reasonableness he could not relocate to the IKR.

5.   Mr Walker accepted that, considered  in  the  context  of  the  country
    guidance in SMO [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) and given the situation set out
    in the skeleton, there were difficulties as regards the  reasonableness
    of the appellant relocating to the IKR.  It had been held that  he  was
    from Mosul.  It appeared that he fitted within the  guidelines  in  SMO
    with regard to return to Iraq and in particular to the  IKR.   He  also
    was of minority  status  being  a  Kurd  and  a  Sunni  Muslim.   As  a
    consequence on behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Walker conceded that
    relocation elsewhere in Iraq would be unreasonable.

6.   In the circumstances, as we stated at the hearing, we  find,  in  light
    of the concession of the Secretary of State and  the  evidence  in  the
    country guidance that this appeal falls to be allowed on the basis that
    it would be unreasonable for the appellant to relocate  away  from  his
    home area elsewhere in Iraq.  The appeal is as a  consequence  allowed.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed   Date 20 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

