
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08788/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2018                           |On 13 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  Mr B b a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Cohen, Counsel, instructed by Coram Children's
Legal    Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr M McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq and a Kurd, born on 1 May 1992.  He
    entered the UK on 27 November 2007 and claimed asylum on  arrival.   He
    was, at that stage, 15 years old. Whilst his application for asylum was
    refused, he was granted discretionary leave to remain until 1  November
    2009 as an unaccompanied minor.  His application for  an  extension  of
    discretionary leave on humanitarian grounds was refused.  The Appellant
    appealed but his appeal was dismissed on 2 February  2011  and  he  was
    appeal rights exhausted on 9 March 2011.   The  Appellant  then  lodged
    further submissions that were refused, but following a judicial  review
    the Secretary of State accepted that the Appellant has raised  a  fresh
    claim and refused the fresh claim on 28 June 2018  with  the  right  of
    appeal.

 2. The Appellant's appeal came before Judge N M K Lawrence for hearing  on
    10 August 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  7  September
    2018, the judge dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal was sought,
    in time, on the basis that the judge had made two  material  errors  of
    fact: firstly, as to whether or not the Appellant had the  same  mobile
    telephone number after April 2014, as to the  Appellant  not  obtaining
    his telephone records and as to the Appellant not calling a witness and
    secondly, by failing to apply  a  material  finding  contained  in  the
    country guidance decision AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 005544
    (IAC) and failed to take into account material considerations which are
    as follows:-

          a) The Appellant is an Iraqi national.

          b) He is Kurdish.

          c) He is a Sunni Muslim.

          d) He originates from Kirkuk.

          e) He did not attend school in Iraq and cannot read or  write  in
             Kurdish Sorani or Arabic.

          f) He has at no point resided in Baghdad or the IKR prior to  his
             flight.

          g) He has no family in Baghdad.

          h) He has been in the UK since 2007.

          i) There is no  identifiable  Kurdish  area  in  Baghdad  on  the
             evidence, see AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544
             (IAC) at 119.

          j) If removal were to  proceed  it  would  be  by  laissez-passer
             provided by the Iraqi government.

          k) A laissez- passer is a one-way travel document which enjoys no
             status or value as an identity document within Iraq.

          l) The Appellant is otherwise undocumented and does not possess a
             CSID card.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    in a decision dated 4th October 2018.

      Hearing

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Cohen produced a  skeleton
    argument  dated  20  November  2018  and  also  a  transcript  of   the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  She made submissions
    in line with the grounds of appeal and the skeleton argument  and  made
    reference to the relevant aspects in the transcript which show that the
    judge had made material errors of law.  In  particular,  she  submitted
    that the Appellant's case is that he lost contact with his  mother  and
    uncle after April 2014, which was the last time he spoke to them on the
    telephone.  She submitted  it  was  clear  from  the  Court  of  Appeal
    judgment in AA (Iraq) (op cit) at  [101]  that  this  corroborated  the
    Appellant's account, in that in June 2014, ISIL took control of Kirkuk;
    there was sexual violence against Sunni residents and a massive flow of
    internal refugees, so it  was  reasonably  likely  the  Appellant  lost
    contact with his mother and uncle at that time as he said.  It is  also
    notable that this postdates his original asylum appeal and decision and
    so could not have been taken into account at that time.   She  reminded
    the Upper Tribunal that the country guidance decision was  binding  and
    made reference to [67] of the judgement in R on the matter of SG (Iraq)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940.   She
    submitted that on this basis the judge's  findings  at  [32]  that  the
    Appellant was not in contact with his family in Iraq was  unsustainable
    and given that that was  the  basis  upon  which  the  Appellant  could
    contact them and seek their assistance in securing a CSID, his  finding
    in that respect was also unsustainable.

 5. In relation  to  the  matters  pertaining  to  the  Appellant's  mobile
    telephone, set out at [13], [14] and [15] of the judge's  decision,  it
    was clear from the transcript of the Appellant's evidence that contrary
    to the judge's finding the Appellant has not changed his phone  number,
    he has lost his mobile phone.  Ms Cohen submitted that because it was a
    pay- as-you-go mobile  telephone  it  would  not  have  been  possible,
    contrary to the judge's assertion, for him to have  retained  the  same
    telephone number, similarly, in terms of obtaining a  record  of  phone
    calls from the service provider.  Ms Cohen invited the Tribunal to find
    there had been a material error of law to set aside  the  decision  and
    remake the decision.

 6. In his submissions, Mr McGirr stated although  he  did  not  know  what
    evidence was available in relation to pay-as-you-go phone  numbers,  he
    accepted that there appears to be some merit in the other points raised
    in the grounds of appeal that First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K  Lawrence
    had materially erred and invited me to set aside the  judge's  decision
    and reasons.

     Decision and Reasons

 7. In light of Mr McGirr's helpful concession  that  there  were  material
    errors of law, which vitiated the findings and conclusion of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, I set aside that decision and remit the appeal for
    a hearing de novo before a different Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal.
    In light of the fact that it will be necessary  for  the  Appellant  to
    give oral evidence and that evidence to be assessed and  that  he  will
    require a Kurdish Sorani interpreter, the matter will need to  go  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  The hearing should be listed for two hours
    with a Kurdish Sorani interpreter.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 9 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

