
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08943/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Priory Courts, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd April 2019                    |On 09th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     EK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MadE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Khan of Fountain Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against a decision of Judge Asjad  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 9th  October
    2018.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a national of Albania born 10th March 1987.  Her asylum
    and human rights claims was refused on 5th July 2018.  She appealed  to
    the FtT.

 4. The appeal was heard on 3rd September 2018.  The claimant's application
    was made as she feared persecution on account of her  membership  of  a
    particular social group, as a former  victim  of  trafficking  for  the
    purpose of sexual exploitation, as a woman, and as a  potential  victim
    of domestic violence.

 5. The judge noted that the claimant's case had  been  considered  by  the
    Competent Authority and a Conclusive Grounds  decision  had  been  made
    that the claimant was not a victim of trafficking.

 6. The judge found, notwithstanding that decision, that the  claimant  had
    been trafficked from  Albania  to  Italy  for  the  purpose  of  sexual
    exploitation.  The judge also found that the claimant had a child  born
    out of wedlock, and was pregnant with a second child.

 7. The judge concluded that  because  the  claimant  had  previously  been
    trafficked, and would be returning to  Albania  as  a  woman  with  two
    illegitimate children, she would be unable to internally  relocate  and
    it would not be reasonable for her to  do  so.   The  judge  took  into
    account AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT  80  (IAC).
    The appeal was allowed on asylum grounds.  The judge made no  reference
    to human rights.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary, it was claimed that the judge had erred  in  law
    by re-visiting the trafficking issue, and finding that the claimant had
    been trafficked, notwithstanding the decision  made  by  the  Competent
    Authority that this was not the case.  It was submitted that the  judge
    had erred by finding the claimant would be  at  risk  on  return.   The
    judge had failed to make a finding that the claimant would be  at  risk
    from either traffickers or her family.  It appeared that the judge  had
    concluded that simply being a victim of  trafficking  would  place  the
    claimant at risk.  It was submitted that this was not in line with  the
    country guidance TD and AD (Trafficked  women)  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00092
    (IAC).  It was submitted that despite identifying some of the  relevant
    factors to be considered, in relation to risk on return, the judge  had
    failed to make any assessment of those factors, and had erred in law by
    failing to take into account the most recent country guidance case law.

 9. It was submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  considering
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation, by failing to engage
    with country guidance, and failing to provide any reasons  for  finding
    that sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation  would  not  be
    available.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lambert of the  FtT  on  21st
    October 2018.





Error of Law

11. On 17th January 2019 I heard submissions from both parties in  relation
    to error of law.  Full details of the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, the grant of permission, the submissions made by both  parties,
    and my conclusions are contained in  my  decision  dated  17th  January
    2019, promulgated on 31st January 2019.  I found  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law  and  set  aside  the  FtT  decision.   I  set  out  below
    paragraphs 19-28 of my  decision,  which  contain  my  conclusions  and
    reasons for setting aside the FtT decision;

         19.  In my view Mrs Aboni was right to concede that the  judge  did
             not err in considering the issue of trafficking.  Although  ES
             had not been decided when the judge considered this case,  the
             approach adopted by the judge is in  line  with  the  guidance
             given in ES.   That  guidance  indicates  that  a  judge  when
             considering an appeal based upon trafficking, is not bound  by
             the decision of  the  Competent  Authority,  but  the  correct
             approach is to consider all the evidence in the  round  as  at
             the date of hearing, applying the  lower  standard  of  proof.
             This is the approach adopted by the judge  in  this  case  and
             that approach discloses no error of law.

         20.  In my view the judge did err in law when considering  risk  on
             return,  sufficiency   of   protection   from   the   Albanian
             authorities,  and  internal  relocation,  for  the   following
             reasons.

         21.  The judge neglected  to  refer  to  the  most  recent  country
             guidance decision, that being TD and AD.  I accept  Mr  Khan's
             submissions that the judge's  reasoning  at  paragraph  23  is
             brief, but do not accept his submission that the  reasons  are
             adequate.  In my view the reasons given are inadequate.

         22.  The judge sets out at paragraph 23 paragraphs (e) and  (f)  of
             the head note to AM and BM.  The six factors to be  considered
             (and they are not an  exhaustive  list)  are  referred  to  in
             paragraph (f).  The judge  does  not  consider  all  of  those
             factors, and only considers the presence  of  an  illegitimate
             child.  There is no consideration of  the  social  status  and
             economic standing of the trafficked woman's family, the  level
             of education of  the  trafficked  woman  or  her  family,  the
             trafficked woman's state of health,  particularly  her  mental
             health, or the  area  of  origin  of  the  trafficked  woman's
             family.

         23.   The  judge  does  not  adequately  consider  sufficiency   of
             protection or internal  relocation.   The  Respondent  in  the
             refusal decision makes reference to background information  in
             relation to protection from the authorities.  The  judge  does
             not refer to any background evidence to support her conclusion
             that the claimant would be at risk.

         24.  The judge gives inadequate reasons  for  concluding  that  the
             authorities could not provide sufficiency of  protection,  and
             for concluding that the Appellant does not  have  an  internal
             relocation option.  A judge must give  sufficient  reasons  to
             show that conclusions made are sustainable, and to explain  to
             a losing party, why the appeal has been lost.  It is  unclear,
             on reading the decision, why  the  judge  finds  there  is  no
             sufficiency of protection or reasonable relocation option.

         25.  I conclude therefore that the judge erred  materially  in  law
             and the decision of the FtT must be set aside and re-made.

         26.  There has been no challenge to the findings made by the  judge
             that the claimant has been trafficked, and has  at  least  one
             child who is illegitimate.  Those findings are  preserved.   I
             do not find  it  appropriate,  having  considered  the  Senior
             President's Practice Statements at paragraph 7, to remit  this
             appeal to the FtT.

         27.  I do find it appropriate to have a further hearing before  the
             Upper Tribunal.  It is a matter for the claimant as to whether
             any further evidence is called.  It  is  understood  that  the
             claimant does not need an interpreter.  If  that  is  not  the
             case the Upper Tribunal must be informed immediately.

         28.  The next  hearing  will  focus  upon  risk  on  return  for  a
             trafficked person with an illegitimate child or  children,  to
             include sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 2nd April 2019

12. At the resumed hearing the claimant attended but was not called to give
    oral evidence.  I ascertained that I  had  received  all  documentation
    upon which the parties intended to rely, and that each party had served
    the other with any documentation upon which reliance was to be  placed.
    I had the Respondent's bundle with Annexes A-D which  had  been  before
    the FtT, and the claimant's bundle which had been before the FtT  which
    comprises sections A-D, and I  had  a  supplemental  bundle  served  on
    behalf of the claimant with sections A-D comprising 114 pages.

13. The representatives were ready to proceed and there was no  application
    for an adjournment.

14. I heard oral submissions from the representatives.  Both spoke at  some
    length  and  I  have  recorded  those  submissions  in  my  Record   of
    Proceedings.  It is not necessary to reiterate them here,  and  I  will
    summarise very briefly below, the oral submissions that were made.

15. Mr Mills submitted  that  the  appeal  should  be  dismissed.   It  was
    submitted that the claimant claimed to fear her family  but  she  would
    not have to return to her family.  There was  no  real  risk  that  she
    would be re-trafficked.  It was submitted that the claimant may face  a
    certain stigma because she would be  returning  with  two  illegitimate
    children, but that does not amount to persecution.

16. It was submitted that the claimant could return to Tirana  and  country
    guidance case law indicated that there were  shelters  for  victims  of
    trafficking, with adequate accommodation.

17. Mr Mills submitted that there would  be  an  adequate  support  network
    available, provided by the Albanian authorities, and  referred  to  the
    Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  Albania:  People   Trafficking
    published in March 2019 (the CPIN ) in support of this submission.

18. It was submitted that the claimant would not be at risk if returned  to
    Albania, but in any event there is a sufficiency of protection provided
    by the authorities, and a  reasonable  internal  relocation  option  to
    Tirana, as demonstrated by country guidance case  law  and  the  latest
    background information on Albania.

19. Mr Khan relied upon the skeleton argument contained in  the  claimant's
    supplemental  bundle.   I  was  asked  to   consider   the   background
    information in the round.  Mr Khan submitted that Mr Mills had  painted
    an optimistic picture in relation  to  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation.  Mr Khan submitted that the reality is that  there
    would not be  sufficiency  of  protection,  or  a  reasonable  internal
    relocation option.

20. I was asked to take into account that the claimant's family  come  from
    the north of Albania.  It is accepted that she has been the  victim  of
    human trafficking.  The claimant could  not  return  to  the  north  of
    Albania because she fears her family because she has  two  illegitimate
    children.  She could not return to the south  of  Albania  because  her
    traffickers were from the south.

21. I was asked to take into account that Albania is a  small  country  and
    wherever the claimant went she would be easily found.

22. I was asked to take into account the US Department of State  Report  on
    Trafficking in Persons published in June 2018 as  being  more  balanced
    background information, than the CPIN published in March 2019.  Mr Khan
    submitted that although there had been improvements in Albania  so  far
    as combatting trafficking is concerned, the position was that  overall,
    the Albanian authorities could  still  not  provide  a  sufficiency  of
    protection to the claimant and she would not be safe if  she  relocated
    in Tirana.

23. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

24. I have taken into account all the evidence that has been  supplied  and
    considered that evidence in the round.

25. The claimant must prove that she has a well-founded fear of persecution
    by reason of her membership of a particular social group, and she  must
    show that she is unable or, owing to  such  fear,  unwilling  to  avail
    herself of the protection of the authorities in Albania.

26. The claimant  would  be  eligible  for  humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules if she does not  qualify  as  a
    refugee but establishes substantial grounds for believing that  if  she
    was removed from the UK, she  would  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk, unwilling to  avail
    herself of the protection of the country of return.

27. In relation to Articles 2 and 3 of the  1950  Convention  the  claimant
    must establish that if removed from the UK there is a real risk of  her
    being killed, or subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment
    or punishment.

28. In relation to risk on return the burden of proof is  on  the  claimant
    and can be described as a reasonable degree of likelihood, which  is  a
    lower standard than  the  normal  civil  standard  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

29. There is a preserved finding that the claimant has been the  victim  of
    trafficking.  I find the factual matrix to be as follows.

30. The claimant originates from the northern part of Albania.  She married
    in November 2011.  Her husband was also from the north of Albania.  The
    claimant is highly educated.  She  confirmed  in  her  initial  witness
    statement that she  has  a  degree  from  Tirana  University  and  when
    interviewed in connection with her  asylum  claim  confirmed  that  she
    holds a Masters degree.  The claimant and her husband lived in  Tirana.
    The marriage was not successful and they separated in January 2013  and
    her husband returned to the north of Albania.  It is not clear  whether
    a formal divorce has taken place but the claimant has  had  no  further
    contact with him.  Her family had not attended her  wedding,  and  they
    did not support  her  after  her  separation  from  her  husband.   She
    remained living on her own in Tirana where she had rented accommodation
    and employment.  She confirmed in her asylum interview that she  worked
    for an Italian company as a supervisor.

31. The claimant started another relationship and  on  1st  September  2013
    travelled to Italy to rejoin her boyfriend  who  she  described  as  an
    Albanian with an Italian passport.  It was this man who was responsible
    for her being trafficked.  He took her to Milan and left her there  and
    she was forced into prostitution.  She eventually escaped and travelled
    to the UK using false identification papers.

32. The claimant has two children, both of whom were born in the  UK.   The
    eldest was born on 11th September 2013.  She does not know the identity
    of the father.  The second child was born on 14th November  2018  as  a
    result of a relationship with a Spanish citizen who has now returned to
    Spain and with whom she has no further contact.

33. The claimant has not had any contact with  her  family  or  her  former
    husband since she left in Albania in September 2013.

34. I must now consider whether the claimant has proved that she  would  be
    at risk on return to Albania, taking into account the factual matrix as
    set out above.  I  take  into  account  the  guidance  in  TD  and  AD.
    Paragraph (b) of the head note indicates that much of Albanian  society
    is governed by a strict code of  honour  which  means  that  trafficked
    women would have very considerable  difficulty  in  reintegrating  into
    their home areas on return, and this would also affect their ability to
    relocate internally.  Those who  have  children  outside  marriage  are
    particularly vulnerable.

35. Paragraph (d) of the head note indicates that in the past few years the
    Albanian  government  has  made  significant  efforts  to  improve  its
    response  to  trafficking.   This  includes  widening  the   scope   of
    legislation,  appointing  a  new  anti-trafficking  co-ordinator,   and
    providing training to law enforcement officials.  There is in general a
    Horvath-standard sufficiency of protection but it will not be effective
    in every case.  The  particular  circumstances  of  the  case  must  be
    considered.

36. Paragraph (e) confirms there is in place a reception and  reintegration
    programme for victims of trafficking.  Returning victims of trafficking
    are able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and may be able to stay there
    for up to two years.  During this initial period after  return  victims
    of trafficking are supported and protected.  Unless the individual  has
    particular vulnerabilities such as physical or  mental  health  issues,
    this option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable, and whether it
    is must be determined on a case by case basis.  On this point,  I  find
    that the claimant has no particular vulnerabilities in  that  she  does
    not have any physical or mental health issues.

37. Paragraph (f) confirms that once asked to leave the shelter a victim of
    trafficking can live on her own.  She will face significant  challenges
    including but not limited to stigma, isolation, financial hardship  and
    uncertainty, a sense of physical insecurity and the subjective fear  of
    being found either by family or former  traffickers.   Some  women  are
    said to have the capacity to negotiate these challenges  without  undue
    hardship.  There  will  however  be   victims   of   trafficking   with
    characteristics, such as mental illness or psychological scarring,  for
    whom living alone in  these  circumstances  would  not  be  reasonable.
    There must be a careful assessment of all the circumstances.

38. Paragraph (g) confirms that re-trafficking is  a  reality  and  whether
    that risk exists will turn in part on  the  factors  that  led  to  the
    initial trafficking and  the  personal  circumstances  of  the  victim,
    including her background, age, and her willingness and ability to  seek
    help from the authorities.  In the claimant's case, she was tricked  by
    an individual who she regarded  as  her  boyfriend.   She  has  had  no
    further contact with that individual since September 2013.   I  do  not
    find that she would be duped again given the traumatic experience  that
    she has endured.

39. Paragraph (h) confirms that  there  are  a  number  of  factors  to  be
    considered when considering whether an individual would be at  risk  of
    persecution  having  been  trafficked,  and  whether  there  would   be
    sufficiency of protection from the authorities.

40. Firstly, the social status and economic standing of her family must  be
    considered.  On this point I accept the claimant's  evidence  that  her
    family originate from the north of Albania and  her  father  worked  in
    farming.  I accept the family would not have a high  social  status  or
    economic standing.

41. I  must  then  consider  the  level  of  education  of  the  victim  of
    trafficking or her family.  There is no  comprehensive  evidence  about
    the education of her family, but the claimant has confirmed that she is
    highly educated, holding a Masters degree.  She  had  employment  as  a
    supervisor before leaving Albania.

42. I then must consider the claimant's state of health,  particularly  her
    mental health.  The evidence does not indicate that  the  claimant  has
    any significant physical or mental health problems.

43. I next must consider whether there is an illegitimate child.   In  this
    case the claimant has two illegitimate children.

44. I next must consider the area of origin, and I accept that the claimant
    originates from the north of Albania, but studied, lived and worked  in
    Tirana.

45. The next factor to be considered is the claimant's age.  As  previously
    mentioned, she is now 32 years of age.

46. I next must consider what support network would be available.

47.  It  is  in  relation  to  the  support  network  that  the  background
    information is relevant.

48. I do not find that evidence  has  been  submitted  to  prove  that  the
    claimant would be at risk from her family if she returned  to  Albania,
    despite having two illegitimate children.  Her case is that her  family
    have in effect disowned her, but that occurred  prior  to  her  leaving
    Albania.  The claimant's evidence is that her family did not attend her
    wedding in 2011 and have not had contact with her since.

49. The claimant does not suggest that she would be at risk from her former
    husband and I find no evidence to indicate that she would  be  at  such
    risk.  I do not find that evidence has been produced to  indicate  that
    the  claimant  would  be  at  risk   of   being   re-trafficked.    The
    circumstances that led to her becoming a  victim  of  trafficking  were
    that she was tricked  by  a  boyfriend.   I  do  not  find  that  those
    circumstances are likely to arise again.

50. In any event, TD and AD confirms that there is in general a sufficiency
    of protection provided by the Albanian authorities.   That  is  country
    guidance case law and I have not  been  provided  with  any  background
    information to persuade me to depart from  that  country  guidance.   I
    appreciate that the guidance is that in general there is a  sufficiency
    of protection but the circumstances of each individual must  be  looked
    at.  This I have done.

51. I do not find that evidence has been submitted  to  indicate  that  the
    claimant would not receive a sufficiency of protection.

52. If returned, the claimant, as confirmed by country guidance  case  law,
    could join the reception and reintegration  programme  for  victims  of
    trafficking.  The CPIN at paragraph  9.2  confirms  that  the  combined
    capacity of the various shelters is sufficient and there is no national
    capacity problem.  The director of the National  Reception  Centre  for
    Victims of Human Trafficking (NRCVHT) has said  that  there  has  never
    been a situation where a person seeking admission to a shelter has been
    refused.  They have more capacity than requests at present.

53. There are shelters in Tirana.  I find that the Appellant  could  return
    to Tirana where she resided prior to  leaving  Albania.   According  to
    paragraph 9.1.1 of the CPIN there are two shelters in Tirana for women.
     The US State Department Report  confirms  that  the  shelters  provide
    assistance to trafficking victims, including food,  counselling,  legal
    assistance, medical care, educational  services,  employment  services,
    financial  support,  long  term   accommodation,   social   activities,
    vocational training, and post-reintegration follow-up.

54. Paragraph 9.4.1  of  the  CPIN  confirms  that  centres  are  regularly
    inspected, and licensed and regulated by  the  Inspectorate  of  Social
    Services so they must adhere to the  official  standard  regarding  the
    level and quality of care and the standard of security they provide for
    clients.  The Human Rights  Officer  from  the  US  Embassy  in  Tirana
    thought the shelters were very good,  particularly  those  run  by  the
    NGOs, who are among the best civil society organisations in Albania.

55.  The  US  State  Department  Report  at  page  30  of  the   claimant's
    supplementary bundle confirms that there are four  shelters  comprising
    the National Coalition of Anti-Trafficking Shelters (NCATS) and  it  is
    the NCATS which provide the assistance referred to above.  In addition,
    the government provide free vocational training,  textbooks  for  child
    victims, and free access to healthcare. The government offered  limited
    integration support and  did  not  provide  funding  for  reintegration
    services.

56. The CPIN makes reference to a report published in 2016 by  GRETA  which
    is  the  Council  of  Europe,  Group  of  Experts  on  Action   against
    Trafficking in Human Beings, and the report concerns the implementation
    of the Council of Europe Convention on Action  against  Trafficking  in
    Human Beings by Albania.

57. I am satisfied that the country guidance in TD and  AD,  and  the  most
    recent background evidence indicates that the claimant and her children
    would be accommodated in a  shelter  in  Tirana  where  they  would  be
    supported and protected.  They could stay in that shelter for up to two
    years.  I find that there is an adequate reintegration programme.   The
    GRETA Report at paragraph 10.1.1 of the  CPIN  confirms  that  when  an
    individual leaves the shelter, the regional welfare services draw up an
    individual reintegration plan and victims of trafficking enjoy priority
    access to jobs and are offered state-remunerated internships.  The NGO-
    run shelters seek the co-operation of employment agencies and potential
    employers to facilitate access to the labour market  which  nonetheless
    remains difficult.

58. At 10.1.2 there is described a three-stage programme  of  support,  the
    first stage being crisis intervention, typically for the  first  three-
    six  months,  the  second  being  transition  to  independent   living,
    typically for at least a year, and the third being  full  independence,
    up   to    three    years.     This    support    includes    arranging
    education/vocational training in co-operation with both government  and
    private  industry,  supporting  job   searches,   including   arranging
    internships and subsidising salaries and assisting in the set-up  of  a
    small business.

59. At 10.2.1 it is stated that if no family support  is  available  to  an
    individual when they  leave  the  shelter,  there  is  assistance  with
    payment of rent for their new accommodation, typically  for  six-twelve
    months.  The Municipality of Tirana also assist with this, which is the
    only Municipality which does.

60. Other economic help is described at 10.3 of the CPIN  such  as  centres
    which provide lunch for women and their children, and the state can and
    does support women with children by providing financial support to  pay
    for kindergarten and a single mother can send a child  to  nursery  for
    free.

61. The GRETA Report 2016 referred to at 10.3.5 confirms that legally every
    victim leaving a shelter must receive a monthly payment until they  are
    able to find work, although this amount alone would not  be  enough  to
    enable victims to lead independent lives.

62. At 10.7 of the CPIN there  is  reference  to  the  stigma  attached  to
    victims of trafficking and there is reference to the  director  of  the
    NRCVHT confirming that  prejudice  against  people  who  have  been  in
    shelters has decreased due to a change in mentality and is now  a  very
    manageable issue and there are no  problems  for  people  who  want  to
    reintegrate and work.  However, for an individual  leaving  a  shelter,
    because this situation is confidential, potential employers  would  not
    be told that the woman has been a victim.

63. With reference to women living alone, there is reference at  10.8.4  to
    the fact that although in some parts of Albania there may be  a  stigma
    to living alone, this is not true of Tirana.

64. The UN Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers
    and Members of their Families published a report in December 2016 which
    confirmed that victims of trafficking are  provided  with  free  health
    service.

65. My conclusion having studied all the background  evidence  to  which  I
    have been referred, and taking into account the guidance in TD and  AD,
    is that the claimant could return to Tirana without being at risk.  She
    and her children would receive support and protection in a shelter  for
    a period of up to two years.  There is a reintegration programme  which
    could assist the claimant when she leaves the  shelter.   The  claimant
    would be well placed to find employment taking into  account  her  high
    level of education, and that she  had  previous  employment  experience
    before  leaving  Albania  in  a  supervisory  position.   I   find   no
    satisfactory evidence has been submitted to indicate that the  claimant
    would be at risk if returned, and no satisfactory evidence provided  to
    indicate that the Albanian authorities would not provide a  sufficiency
    of protection.   Therefore,  I  conclude  that  the  claimant  has  the
    reasonable option of returning to Tirana where  she  previously  lived,
    and I conclude that as she would not be at risk of persecution or  ill-
    treatment, she is not entitled to a grant  of  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection, and there would be no breach of Articles 2 or 3.

66. I now consider Article 8.  I find that the claimant has  established  a
    private life in the UK and she has family life with her children.   The
    best interests of the children would be served by remaining with  their
    mother.  The children are not British citizens and have  not  lived  in
    the UK for seven years.

67. I consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which entails the  claimant  proving
    that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  into
    Albania.  In considering this  I  follow  the  guidance  in  Treebhawon
    [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) in which it was found that mere hardship,  mere
    difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval and  mere  inconvenience,  even
    where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the test of very  significant
    obstacles.

68. In relation to integration I follow the guidance in Kamara [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 813.  This confirms that there must be a broad evaluative judgment.
     It must be considered whether an individual is enough of an insider in
    terms of understanding how life in society in the country of return  is
    carried on.  The individual must have the capacity  to  participate  in
    life in that country and have a reasonable opportunity to  be  accepted
    there and operate on a day-to-day basis.  The individual must  be  able
    to build up within a reasonable time a variety of  human  relationships
    to give substance to their private or family life.

69. I conclude that the claimant has not proved that there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to her  integration.   The  claimant  would  have
    accommodation provided for her when she returned, and  there  would  be
    education  provided  for  her  children.   She  would  have  access  to
    healthcare.  The claimant does not have any physical or  mental  health
    issues.  The claimant would be able to search  for  employment  and  is
    well qualified.

70. The reception and reintegration programme is  effective,  according  to
    the background evidence, and because of that support, I find  that  the
    claimant  would  not  face  very  significant  obstacles,   and   could
    reintegrate in Albania, the country of which she is a citizen.

71. I consider Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  take  into
    account section 117B of the 2002 Act.  This confirms the maintenance of
    effective immigration control is in the public interest.  It is in  the
    public interest that a person seeking leave to remain can speak English
    and is financially independent.  The claimant can speak English but  is
    not financially independent.  I place little weight  upon  the  private
    life  that  the  claimant  has  established  because  this   has   been
    established while in the UK with a precarious immigration status.

72.  I  do  not  find  that  the  application  discloses  any   exceptional
    circumstances which would lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
    the claimant or her children if they returned to Albania.   I  conclude
    that their removal would not breach Article 8.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

I dismiss the claimant's appeal on asylum grounds.

The claimant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I dismiss the claimant's appeal on human rights grounds.

An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of  her  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 3rd April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 3rd April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

