

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/08978/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Wednesday 4 October 2017               | On Thursday 12 October 2017     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting
                 Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal,  as
a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Respondent  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This  direction  applies  amongst
others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier Tribunal
       albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal. The Respondent appeals against a decision of
       First-Tier Tribunal Judge Metzer promulgated on 13 March 2017  ("the
       Decision") allowing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of
       State's decision dated 14 August 2016 refusing his protection claim.




    2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He arrived in the  UK  in
       February 2016 and claimed asylum on  22  February.   His  protection
       claim is based on the following factors.  He claims  that  he  is  a
       Muslim from Jaffna.  He says that his uncle was  in  charge  of  the
       intelligence division in Killinochi and his aunt was a member of the
       intelligence  division  of  the  LTTE  in  Vattakachi  region.   The
       Appellant says that he helped his uncle and aunt by reporting on the
       army's location.  He did this between December 2008 and January 2009
       for two months when he last had contact with his uncle and aunt.  He
       says that his uncle surrendered  to  the  authorities  in  the  last
       stages of the civil war and the Appellant has not  seen  him  since.
       The Appellant says that he continued to report on army locations  to
       men in his village until April 2009.


    3. The Appellant does not claim to have been a member of the LTTE.   He
       says though that he received compulsory training by them  for  three
       months.  He also says that he made a complaint to the  Human  Rights
       Commission about the disappearance of his uncle and aunt.


    4. The Appellant claims to have been arrested on 16 April 2009 and  was
       detained for ten days during which  time  he  says  he  was  beaten,
       tortured and questioned about   the whereabouts  of  his  uncle  and
       aunt.  He says he was released on reporting conditions.


    5. The Appellant says he then studied at Jaffna Hindu College  who  pay
       respects to LTTE heroes.  He says that he attended  a  demonstration
       on 21 June 2014 against the actions of the Sinhalese people  against
       the Muslim people.   He says that he was detained thereafter by  CID
       who he says suspected him of LTTE involvement due  to  his  previous
       actions supporting his uncle and aunt and suspected him of continued
       support due to attendance at this demonstration.


    6. The Appellant says that he was again detained,  this  time  for  six
       months, during which time he was tortured and sexually  abused.   He
       was again  questioned  about  his  uncle  and  aunt  and  his  other
       activities.  The Appellant says that he  admitted  to  carrying  out
       these  activities  because  he  was  paid  and  committed  to  Tamil
       nationalism.  He says he was released on payment of a bribe.  He was
       never charged.
    7. The Appellant also claims that he has assisted the Federal Party  by
       delivering chairs  to  various  locations  and  helping  to  conduct
       rallies.


    8. The Respondent did not believe the Appellant's  claim.   She  raised
       various issues about the credibility of that  claim,  including,  in
       particular, the (lack of) plausibility that  the  authorities  would
       question the Appellant about his uncle and aunt when, on  his  case,
       his uncle had already handed himself over to the authorities and the
       (lack of) plausibility that the authorities would take  an  interest
       in  a  demonstration  that  was   pro-Muslim   but   not   pro-Tamil
       independence.  His claim to have supported  the  Federal  Party  was
       also disbelieved due to his inability to answer questions about that
       party.


    9. The Appellant did not give evidence at the hearing of his appeal  as
       he produced medical evidence, consistent with  his  claims  to  have
       been ill-treated in 2009 and 2014, which also  stated  that  he  was
       unable to give evidence  due  to  his  mental  health  condition.  A
       further report confirms that the scars which the Appellant bears are
       "typical" of  or  "consistent"  with  the  causes  reported  by  the
       Appellant.


   10. In support of his claim, the Appellant produced also a  letter  from
       his mother, corroborating his version of events and two letters from
       MPs, one attesting to his problems arising  from  the  demonstration
       and  the  other  confirming  that   the   Appellant   reported   the
       disappearance of  his  uncle  and  that  the  Appellant  remains  of
       interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.


   11. The Judge allowed the appeal on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent's
       credibility findings were based on lack of plausibility rather  than
       credibility in the  sense  of  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
       account.  The Judge noted that the  Appellant  had  not  given  oral
       evidence and recognised the difficulties therefore  in  testing  his
       evidence.  Based on the other evidence though and that the Appellant
       had not provided any inconsistent account, the  Judge  accepted  the
       claim as credible, He also  considered  the  claim  as  against  the
       country guidance and noted that this  is  an  unusual  case  on  its
       facts.  However, since the categories in GJ  were  not  said  to  be
       exhaustive and having regard also to what was said by the  Court  of
       Appeal in "NP", the Judge found the claim to  be  made  out  to  the
       lower standard of proof.


   12. The Respondent's grounds repeat much of what is said in the decision
       letter as to her reasons for not  accepting  the  claim.   She  also
       asserts at [9] of the grounds that the Judge failed to  have  regard
       to the country guidance.  Mr Jarvis though did not seek in his  oral
       submissions to rely on the grounds other than what is said  at  [10]
       as follows:-


           "It is further submitted that the judge appears to rely  on  the
           medical/psychiatric evidence as supporting the  appeal  and  the
           letter from the two MPs and the appellant's mother but gives the
           reader  of  the  determination  no  clue   what   was   in   the
           reports/letters that specifically is relied on by the judge  and
           that is material as the  evidence  is  that  the  appellant  was
           released by the authorities without  charge  in  late  2014  and
           remained in Sri Lanka for 14 months before coming to  the  UK  a
           fact which does not appear in the determination at all."


   13. Permission was granted by Tribunal Judge  Doyle  on  25  July  2017.
       Having summarised the grounds and the way in which the Judge reached
       the Decision, the operative part of the grant appears as follows:-
            "...
            [4]  The Judge's findings are set out between [13] and [19]  of
           the decision.  At [18] the Judge declares that he does not  need
           to consider the facts of this case against the country  guidance
           given in the case of GJ and Others (post-civil  war:  returnees)
           Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  In AF (2004) UKIAT  00284
           the Tribunal said that failure by Adjudicators to follow country
           guidance cases was an error of law.
            [5]  At [14] & [15] the Judge places significant weight on  the
           medical and psychiatric evidence, but the Judge does not analyse
           the reports, nor does he explain why he places  such  weight  on
           them.  The Judge's findings of fact are brief.  It  is  arguable
           that the Judge's  fact  finding  exercise  is  inadequate.   The
           grounds arguably identify material errors of law.  Permission to
           appeal is granted."


   14.  The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision  contains
       a material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision or remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      Decision and Reasons


   15. I can deal briefly with what is said at [4] of the permission grant.
        This is based on [9] of the Respondent's grounds on which Mr Jarvis
       did not rely.  He was right not to do so.  The Judge deals with  the
       country guidance at [16] to [17] of the Decision.  First, the  Judge
       finds that the Appellant might, arguably, come within the categories
       in GJ because he  is  someone  perceived  to  be  a  threat  to  the
       integrity of the Sri Lankan State.  The Judge clearly recognised  at
       [15] that the demonstration in 2014 was in support  of  Muslims  and
       not Tamils per se but found (and was  entitled  to  find)  that  the
       demonstration  was  nonetheless  about  separatism  and   that   the
       authorities may have perceived  that  as  a  pro-LTTE  demonstration
       particularly since it took place in a Tamil dominated area.


   16. Second, the Judge does not claim to be entitled to ignore GJ  as  is
       suggested by the permission grant.  Instead, he points to the  Court
       of Appeal's judgment  in  MP  (Sri  Lanka)  and  NT  (Sri  Lanka)  v
       Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829
       (wrongly referred to in the Decision as NP), in particular  what  is
       said by Underhill LJ at [50] which is as follows:-


           "...The clear message of the Upper Tribunal's guidance is that a
           record of past LTTE activism does not as such constitute a  risk
           factor  for  Tamils  returning  to  Sri   Lanka,   because   the
           Government's concern is now only with current or future  threats
           to integrity of Sri Lanka as a unitary state; and that  that  is
           so even if the returnee's past links with the LTTE were  of  the
           kind characterised by UNHCR as "more elaborate".  I respectfully
           agree with the Vice-President that that is a conclusion which it
           was entitled to reach.  It  is  also  clear  that  the  Tribunal
           believed that "diaspora activism", actual or perceived,  is  the
           principal basis on which the Government of Sri Lanka  is  likely
           to treat returning Tamils as posing a current or future  threat;
           and I agree that that too was a conclusion which it was entitled
           to  reach.   But  I  do  not  read  para.   356(7)(a)   of   its
           determination as prescribing that diaspora activism as the  only
           basis on which a returning Tamil might  be  regarded  as  posing
           such a threat and thus of being at risk on return.   Even  apart
           from cases falling under heads (b)-(d) in  para.  356(7),  there
           may, though untypically, be other cases (of which NT may  be  an
           example)  where  the  evidence  shows  particular  grounds   for
           concluding that the Government might  regard  the  applicant  as
           posing a current threat to the  integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
           single state even in the absence of evidence that he or she  has
           been involved in diaspora activism."


   17. The Judge was therefore entitled to reach the view that this was one
       of those untypical cases  and  therefore  did  not  run  counter  to
       country guidance and consideration of that country guidance in other
       cases.


   18. I turn then to the basis on which the Respondent put her  case,  via
       Mr Jarvis, at the hearing before me.  He submitted that  the  errors
       appear at [13] and [14] of the Decision which read as follows:-


            "[13]      The parties agreed  that  the  reasons  for  refusal
           letter dealing specifically with credibility at Paragraphs 32-41
           were  essentially  more   about   plausibility   than   strictly
           credibility.  There was the issue as to  whether  the  Appellant
           would assist his aunt and uncle and continue to advise the  LTTE
           following their disappearance was challenged and  it  was  noted
           that in relation to the demonstration in  June  2014,  that  was
           essentially a demonstration in support of  Muslims  and  not  in
           support of the LTTE.  Essentially, the Respondent did not accept
           the Appellant was involved with the LTTE.
            [14] Having considered the medical and psychiatric evidence and
           taking into account the letters from the Appellant's mother  and
           the two MPs, noting that it was always difficult in relation  to
           disputed issues on credibility (although  possibly  less  so  in
           relation to plausibility)  when  the  Appellant  does  not  give
           evidence or even provide a witness statement, I  find  that  the
           Appellant has established to the relevant standard  that  he  is
           credible in relation to the background of his claim.   The  date
           of the initial arrest was 16.04.09, about a month before the end
           of the war and the guidance dated August  2016  in  relation  to
           Tamil separatism supports the contention  that  the  Sri  Lankan
           authorities are  concerned  about  persons  falsely  accused  of
           working to re-start  the  LTTE  or  bringing  the  country  into
           disrepute (at  Paragraph  6.2.8).   There  are  ongoing  arrests
           detailed in the guidance in the period 2014 to  2016  of  Tamils
           connected and suspected of links to the LTTE"


   19. I  can  deal  shortly  with  the  complaint  made  at  [10]  of  the
       Respondent's grounds as pleaded that the Judge  has  failed  to  say
       what it is about the mother's letter, the letters from the  MPs  and
       the medical evidence which is relied upon to support the Appellant's
       case.  The content of the Appellant's mother's letter is set out  at
       [7] of the Decision.  Although the MPs' letters are not cited in any
       detail, they are referred to at [8] of the Decision as  "supportive"
       and even a cursory glance at their content would tell the reader why
       the Judge concluded that they were in  support  of  the  Appellant's
       case.  Dr Martin's report is set out in short summary at [9] of  the
       Decision and, as there recorded, confirmed  that  the  scarring  was
       typical of the causation alleged.  The report  in  relation  to  the
       Appellant's mental health is summarised at [10] of the Decision. The
       point is again made that it concludes that the Appellant's  clinical
       presentation is consistent with what he says happened to him. Whilst
       the factual findings may be short, the Respondent has failed to show
       that the Judge does not explain how the other evidence supports  the
       Appellant's case.


   20. The point made by Mr Jarvis is more subtle.  He says that  what  the
       Judge has failed to do is  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant  is
       credible.  That  required  consideration  whether  the  claim  is  a
       consistent one which is consistent with the background evidence.  As
       he points out, even criticisms based on  lack  of  plausibility  are
       points to be considered in relation to credibility.


   21. Further and  in  any  event,  Mr  Jarvis  pointed  to  [33]  of  the
       Respondent's decision which took issue with the Appellant's claim to
       be of interest to the authorities because of their interest  in  the
       Appellant's uncle and aunt when, on the Appellant's  own  case,  his
       uncle had already surrendered to the authorities and had on his case
       disappeared (and  was  therefore  presumably  still  in  detention).
       Whilst Mr Jarvis accepted that many of  the  points  raised  in  the
       Respondent's decision were  about  (lack  of)  plausibility  of  the
       claim, he said that this element goes further.  The claim  that  the
       authorities are interested in the Appellant because of his uncle and
       aunt is inconsistent with his claim  that  the  authorities  already
       have his uncle in their control. He said that  this  point  was  not
       sufficiently dealt with at [13] of the Decision.


   22. I accept that the Judge has not referred directly to  this  part  of
       the Respondent's decision at [13] and [14] of the Decision or to the
       apparent tension  between  the  uncle  having  surrendered  and  the
       authorities still asking about him, the general  point  made  by  Mr
       Jarvis is answered, as Mr Paramjorthy  submitted,  at  [15]  of  the
       Decision.  Having recorded the medical evidence and found that to be
       consistent with the claim which  the  Judge  had  indicated  he  was
       minded to accept, he continued as follows:-


           "...The fact that [the Appellant] claims to have  been  arrested
           in 2014 as being a Muslim as opposed to because he was Tamil  in
           my  opinion  can  be  disregarded  as  essentially  it   was   a
           demonstration about separatism and was anti-government  and  the
           authorities may well have perceived that as being in  favour  of
           insurrection and in support of the LTTE  in  a  Tamil  dominated
           area.  I find that the Appellant has established  to  the  lower
           standard that he is continuing interest to  the  authorities  by
           reason of his family profile concerning his uncle and aunt which
           resulted in his arrest and detention in both 2009 and 2014 which
           although post-conflict was  consistent  with  the  guidance  and
           objective evidence of arrest and detention that they  themselves
           or their family members being connected to the LTTE."


   23. Thus, the Judge found that the original interest  in  the  Appellant
       arose from his association with his uncle and aunt and  interest  in
       them but, that interest having been excited in 2009, the  attendance
       at the demonstration is found by the Judge to be what triggered  the
       arrest and detention in 2014.  That is consistent with  the  reasons
       given by the Appellant at Q95  in  interview  that  the  arrest  and
       detention was triggered  by  his  previous  problems  with  CID  and
       connected with the demonstration as giving rise to a  perception  of
       ongoing support for the LTTE.


   24. I note incidentally that the Appellant's case  in  relation  to  his
       uncle and aunt is that he has not had any contact  with  them  since
       January 2009 but that he  understands  that  his  uncle  surrendered
       "during the final stages of the war".  He does not specify  a  date.
       It is therefore conceivable that, at the time that he  was  arrested
       in April 2009, his uncle had not yet surrendered (the  conflict  did
       not end until May 2009).  That is not a reason given  by  the  Judge
       but might conceivably  explain  the  lack  of  plausibility  of  the
       Appellant's account on the Respondent's case.


   25. Be that as it may, even if the Judge did not explain why he  thought
       the authorities might be interested in the Appellant because of  his
       uncle when on the Appellant's case, the uncle had surrendered,  that
       is immaterial.  It is the 2014 arrest and  detention  which  is  and
       must be the focus of the claimed risk, being  the  longer  and  more
       serious of the two detentions claimed and also coming as it did some
       years after the end of the conflict.  On the basis  of  the  Judge's
       reasoning at [15] of the Decision, his finding that  this  detention
       did occur as claimed and for the reasons given was open to  him  and
       he has provided adequate reasons for his finding.  No issue is taken
       by the Respondent that the Appellant did have the association  which
       he claimed with his uncle and aunt or that they assisted the LTTE as
       claimed.


   26. Insofar as the Respondent's grounds as pleaded at [10] criticise the
       Judge's failure to take issue with why the Appellant would remain in
       Sri Lanka after his release from the 2014 detention  for  a  further
       fourteen months, there is no error.  This is not a point  put to the
       Appellant at interview nor raised by the Respondent in her  decision
       letter.  Further, the Appellant does not actually give  a  date  for
       when in 2014 he was detained and he was detained for six months.   I
       accept though that he must have remained in Sri Lanka for  a  number
       of months after he was released, not least because he says  he  last
       supported the Federal Party in August 2015.  However, the Respondent
       did not take  issue  with  this  and,  since  there  was  no  cross-
       examination of the Appellant for the reasons I have  already  given,
       it was not a point which the Judge should have  raised  of  his  own
       volition.


   27. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  does  not
       contain a material error of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.


      DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law.  I  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Metzer
    promulgated on 13 March 2017 with the consequence that the  Appellant's
    appeal stands allowed


          Signed                        Dated: 11 October 2017

[pic]

        Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
