
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08478/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd April 2018                             |On 17th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                               Mr dm abu nasir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Collins, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant who is  a  man
    from Bangladesh born on 3rd November 1984.  He claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis that he was a gay man and as such would be at risk on  return  in
    Bangladesh.  The Appellant had arrived in the UK in August 2010 with  a
    student visa valid until January 2015.  His  leave  as  a  student  was
    curtailed in May 2012 to  expire  in  July  2012  because  he  was  not
    studying.  Five years later, in February 2017, he claimed asylum.  That
    asylum claim was rejected by the Secretary of  State  and  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart at Taylor House in October  2017
    and in a determination promulgated on 10th November 2017 she  dismissed
    his appeal on all grounds.

 2. The Appellant had claimed, in support of  his  claim  to  be  gay,  two
    incidents in Bangladesh.  One incident occurred when he was  at  school
    when he claimed to have been touching a school friend repeatedly over a
    period of time culminating in his hugging him  in  the  changing  rooms
    when he was getting changed.  That student complained and  reported  it
    to a teacher who  however  took  no  further  action.   In  the  second
    incident the Appellant claims he sexually  assaulted  his  cousin  when
    they were sleeping together in the same bed and despite quite a serious
    sexual assault in relation to what he  claims  was  taking  place,  the
    cousin slept through it.  The Judge found both of  those  incidents  to
    have been fabrications by the Appellant.  The Judge noted there was  no
    supporting evidence before her in terms of any  witnesses  despite  his
    claim to have been actively gay in the UK since he arrived.  The  Judge
    therefore found that he was not gay as claimed and therefore would  not
    be at risk from anyone on return to Bangladesh.  She found that he  had
    not lost contact with his family and would not be at risk from them and
    would return to Bangladesh to resume the life he had had there prior to
    coming to the United Kingdom.

 3. The grounds upon which permission to appeal  was  granted  are  six  in
    number.  The first ground falls into three parts.  The first  that  the
    Judge failed to set out in her Decision and Reasons the legal test  and
    principles that she had to apply.  That I find is not an error of  law.
    There are as many different styles of writing decisions  as  there  are
    Judges.  Some Judges set out the law in laborious detail over  numerous
    pages  at  the  beginning  of  a  Decision  and  Reasons.   Regrettably
    sometimes that is not accurate because it is an example of cutting  and
    pasting and re-using old templates.  Some more experienced  Judges  set
    out, in very brief form, the burden and  standard  of  proof  and  some
    Judges will go straight to the actual issues without  setting  out  the
    law.  It is not an error of law not to set out the law; it is an  error
    of law not to apply the correct law and the correct burden and standard
    of proof.  This particular appeal was one of the  more  straightforward
    ones in that there was a single issue.  The issue was, was it  credible
    that this Appellant was gay? If that was  credible  the  Judge  had  to
    decide how he would live in Bangladesh and if  he  was  going  to  live
    discreetly whether that was through fear or general  choice.   She  did
    set out the case of HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC  31  on  that
    basis.

 4. The second criticism contained in Ground 1 is the use by the  Judge  of
    the words "fantasy" and "concocted".  The actual criticism of the Judge
    using those words is a little unclear.  It  is  absolutely  clear  from
    reading the Decision and Reasons what the Judge meant, namely that  the
    Appellant had made up the  incidents  that  he  said  had  happened  in
    Bangladesh in order to support a claim to be gay.  The Judge's findings
    are absolutely clear and the  ordinary  definitions  of  "fantasy"  and
    "concocted" makes clear what she meant.  Perhaps the use  of  different
    words may have been better; however the reasoning is quite clear.

 5. The third criticism in  Ground  1  argues  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    properly set out the HJ (Iran) test.  The Judge did  not  set  out  the
    entirety of the test but she clearly had in mind that her task  was  to
    decide whether or not the Appellant was gay and if so how he would then
    behave and why in Bangladesh.  There is no  error  of  law  there;  she
    clearly applied the correct law.

 6. The second ground argues  that  the  Judge  failed  to  identify  which
    Immigration Rules she was dealing with. That is misguided  because  the
    Judge set out clearly in paragraph 1 of the Decision and  Reasons  that
    she was looking at paragraph 336 of the Immigration Rules  in  relation
    to asylum and paragraph 339F of the Immigration Rules  in  relation  to
    humanitarian protection.

 7. Ground 3 and Ground 4 were not pursued in front of me.  Mr Collins  was
    correct to do so.  Ground 3 contained a criticism of the Judge  failing
    to deal with Article 8 when the Record of Proceedings makes clear  that
    in the absence of a finding that the Appellant was  gay  those  matters
    could not be advanced and there was no family life in the UK.  Ground 4
    relates to the failure to make an anonymity direction  and  again  that
    was abandoned by Mr Collins before me.

 8. Ground 5 suggests that it was a material error of law to make two minor
    typographical  errors  in  paragraph  50  and  paragraph   51.    Those
    typographical errors are de minimis and in no way  infect  the  overall
    quality of the decision.

 9. Ground 6 criticises the Judge for attaching  no  weight  to  a  witness
    statement.  That was not pressed in front of me. The Judge was entitled
    to attach no weight and she gave reasons why the main  issue  was  that
    the Appellant was making an incredible claim  to  be  gay  without  any
    supporting witnesses despite a very considerable period of time in  the
    UK when he claimed to be actively gay.

10. I therefore find the Decision and Reasons does not contain  a  material
    or indeed any error of law and so the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 16th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 16th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
