
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08516/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2017                            |On 14 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     HMA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born in October 1997 whose
    protection claim was refused by the respondent.  His subsequent appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal was heard by Judge Lawrence. In a decision
    promulgated on 30 March 2017, the appeal was dismissed.  The appellant
    is now appealing against that decision.

 2. The appellant's father was an Iraqi diplomat and the appellant
    initially arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 July 2013 on a diplomatic
    dependant visa.  In August 2015 the appellant's father informed him
    that the family would be returning to Iraq.  The appellant left his
    family home and claimed asylum.

 3. The appellant's claim, in summary, is that he faces a risk to his life
    on return to Iraq because he is a Sunni Muslim with a distinctive
    surname which links him to Saddam Hussein and a well-known Sunni town.
    He claims that his name enhances the risk he faces as a Sunni.  He
    further claims to be at risk of kidnapping because he has been living
    in the west.

 4. Judge Lawrence dismissed the appellant's appeal for several reasons.

      a) Firstly, he noted that the appellant had described in his statement
         an incident where he was stopped and questioned at a checkpoint
         because of his name but allowed to pass because his first name is a
         common Shia name notwithstanding his last name possibly links him
         to a predominantly Sunni city.

      b) Secondly, he did not accept the appellant's account of being in
         Iraq in 2014 which is when the above described incident at a
         checkpoint was said to have taken place given the absence of
         evidence to support this.

      c) Thirdly, he thought the appellant's claim to fear Islamic State was
         without merit as he had never been to territories they control.

 5. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge failed to make an adequate
    finding on whether the appellant is Sunni and the risk he faces as a
    Sunni. They also argue that the judge failed to address the risk he
    faces of kidnapping as a returnee from the west.  A further argument in
    the grounds is that the judge has not addressed the risk arising from
    the appellant's name which it is alleged shares key elements with
    Saddam Hussein.

 6. Before me, Mr Harding reiterated many of the points made in the grounds
    of appeal.  He stressed that the appellant is a Sunni and faces a risk
    because of this.  Properly interpreted, in his view, the recent country
    guidance case of BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018
    (IAC) recognises that being a Sunni is a factor relevant to risk, as is
    having lived in the west and the risk of kidnapping, particularly at
    checkpoints from Shia militia.  He argued that the judge failed to
    consider these points and that taken cumulatively the appellant would
    be at risk.  He also highlighted the similarities between the
    appellant's name and Saddam Hussein and argued the judge had failed to
    address the increased risk to the appellant arising from this.  He
    further argued that the judge had dismissed the core arguments of the
    appellant without giving adequate reasons for doing so.

 7. The position of Mr Singh is that this was an adequately reasoned
    decision where the judge has taken an approach which is consistent with
    BA.  He noted that the judge had taken into consideration the
    appellant's name, noting that it was in fact a Shia name.

 8. The appellant's case at its highest is that he is a westernised Sunni
    Muslim with a distinctive Sunni surname that links him to Saddam
    Hussein' s hometown who is at risk of kidnapping and being stopped by
    Shia insurgents at checkpoints as well as from the general absence of
    security and general danger in Baghdad.

 9. The difficulty for the appellant is that the recent country guidance
    case of BA taken together with the evidence that was before the First-
    tier Tribunal does not support a conclusion that he would face a real
    risk of serious harm on return to Iraq.

10. In BA it was made clear that Sunni identity alone is not sufficient to
    give rise to a real risk of serious harm (paragraph 107 (v)). BA also
    found that the risk to a westernised returnee of kidnapping is not
    sufficient to found a protection claim (paragraph 107(iv)). In BA it
    was acknowledged that the longer a person has been outside Iraq the
    greater the risk could be.  However, the appellant only left Iraq in
    2013.

11. The appellant's claim to face a further or distinct risk because of his
    surname is not supported by evidence. The burden of proof is on the
    appellant and there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal (or
    me) to show an additional or heightened risk because of his surname.
    In fact, the only evidence about the appellant's name concerns his
    first name which, according to a report of the Finnish Immigration
    Service which is cited at paragraph 90 of BA, is a common Shia name.

12. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal was consistent with BA and that the judge has reached a
    decision that was open to him based on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and stands.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 10 November 2017              |

