
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08324/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                            |On 3 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    [W A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  30  March  1985.   He
    appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colvin
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 19
    June 2018 to refuse to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection  in
    the United Kingdom.

2.    He  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  that  he  became  an  atheist  in
    October/November 2017 as a result  of  a  long  thought  process.   His
    parents are practising Muslims and until the age of 33 he also believed
    in Islam.  He gradually stopped praying regularly when he  became  busy
    in the United Kingdom.  In March 2017 he met an Indian man called  [PM]
    who is a born atheist and was visiting from India.  They began  meeting
    and became good friends over the next four months when  they  had  long
    discussions about atheism.  [PM] showed him tube  talks,  documentaries
    and links to articles.   He  read  books  by  Lawrence  Cross,  Richard
    Dawkins and Stephen Hawkins.  He then started discussing about God  and
    religion with his housemates who  were  Muslims  and  they  called  him
    kaffir.  He stopped going for Friday prayers.   In  September  2017  he
    joined Humanism which is a UK based  organisation  that  supports  non-
    religious people.  He started attending events on a monthly basis where
    he shared his doubts about the  existence  of  God.   He  concluded  in
    October 2017 that there is no supernatural power and  leaving  religion
    behind him had given him a sense of freedom.  In December 2017 he  told
    his parents on the phone but they became angry and have disowned him.

3.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and [RT].  She is  the
    Campaigns Officer for the Humanists UK and is responsible for the  work
    supporting asylum claimants and works also with the Home Office on non-
    religious issues.

4.   The  skeleton  argument  which  was  relied  on  by  Ms  Heybrook,  the
    appellant's Counsel below, stated that the appellant avers that he will
    be at risk of persecution should he be  returned  to  Pakistan  on  the
    basis of his apostacy.  While it is  true  to  say  that  he  indicated
    during his interview that he thought he was at risk  from  his  family,
    objective evidence indicates that he would also be at risk  from  state
    and non-state actors at large were his atheism to become known.

5.   The judge stated that the issue in this case was  one  of  credibility,
    whether the appellant is a genuine convert to atheism.   He  based  his
    credibility  findings  on  the  appellant's  immigration  history,  the
    appellant's inability to name the speaker at the Humanist meetings that
    he attended, and the supporting letter from  Humanists  UK  drafted  by
    [RT] who had not met the appellant but had been in  an  email  exchange
    with him on 18 June 2018 and signed by Richy Thompson who had no direct
    contact with the appellant.  At paragraph 26  the  judge  made  further
    adverse credibility findings against the appellant.

6.   On the evidence the judge  found  that  the  appellant's  asylum  claim
    based on a conversion to atheism had no substance even when assessed on
    the lower standard of proof and was made at a time soon  after  he  was
    encountered by Immigration Enforcement Officers as a likely  last-ditch
    attempt to stay in the  UK.   The  judge  found  that  the  appellant's
    registration and attendance at some Humanists UK events was  purely  to
    bolster his asylum claim  rather  than  any  genuine  interest  in  the
    subject matter.

7.   Mr Burrett took issue with the judge's use of the term  "conversion  to
    atheism".  He said  atheism  has  both  a  religious  and  a  political
    context.  In Pakistan  the  appellant  will  be  considered  to  be  an
    apostate.  That was how the appellant's case  was  pleaded  before  the
    judge.

8.   Mr Burrett submitted that the  Humanists'  supporting  network  is  for
    those who do  not  believe  in  a  religion.   Even  if  the  appellant
    embellished his attendance at Humanist meetings, that would not  matter
    if he is an atheist.  What the appellant needs to establish is to  what
    extent he engaged in activities to become an atheist.  This  point  was
    not considered by the judge who looked at his case  as  if  it  were  a
    conversion to atheism.

9.   Mr Burrett said that the approach that the judge  should  have  adopted
    was to examine his behaviour before and after he became an atheist  and
    the journey he took from the Islamic  faith  to  atheism  in  order  to
    assess the appellant's credibility.

10.  Mr Burrett said the judge was also required to examine to  what  extent
    the appellant was likely to communicate his atheism.  We know  that  he
    has been discussing atheism in the UK, something that he cannot  do  in
    Pakistan.  The Humanist organisation was there to provide  evidence  on
    the appellant's activity having become an atheist.  He  submitted  that
    even though the appellant  brought  in  the  Humanist  organisation  to
    support his case, corroboration was not required.

11.  Mr Burrett submitted that if the approach of the judge is  flawed  then
    there has to be reconsideration on the evidence.

12.  Ms Fijiwala went through the judge's decision and  submitted  that  the
    judge's findings  on  the  evidence  were  properly  reasoned  and  not
    perverse.

13.  I  find  that  whilst  corroboration  is  not  a  requirement  in  this
    jurisdiction, it was the appellant who decided to seek the  support  of
    the Humanists UK, and therefore the judge was entitled to consider that
    evidence in his assessment of the credibility of the appellant's claim.

14.  Nevertheless, I find that the judge erred in law for the reasons  given
    by Mr Burrett.  I find that none of the judge's findings dealt with the
    appellant's answers to questions 44 to 50 of the interview  as  to  his
    journey to become an atheist.  The issue is not whether  the  appellant
    converted to  atheism  or  humanism  but  whether  he  is  an  apostate
    following his claim that he has abandoned his religion  and  become  an
    atheist.

15.  I find that the judge's  failure  to  deal  with  all  aspects  of  the
    appellant's case, issues that were important to his  case,  means  that
    the judge committed a fundamental error of law.

16.  I find that the judge's decision cannot stand.   It  is  set  aside  in
    order to be re-made.

17.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Taylor House to be reheared by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Colvin.


No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 29 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

