
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08240/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On March 4, 2019                             |On March 7, 2019              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                               mr Ebrahim [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Mottershaw, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Mr Zada


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, an Iranian national, claimed  to  have  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on June 30, 2010 and he  claimed  asylum  the  following
    day.   The  respondent  rejected  his  application  but   granted   him
    discretionary leave to remain as a minor until December 22, 2010.

 2. The appellant applied in time for further leave to remain, but this was
    refused by the respondent  on  January  14,  2011.   He  appealed  this
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal and his appeal came before Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Wilson and in a decision promulgated  on  March
    10, 2011 the Judge rejected his application and subsequent applications
    for permission to appeal were refused.

 3. Further submissions were lodged, and this led to  a  consent  order  on
    March  21,  2018  when  the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider   those
    submissions relating to sur place activities.

 4. The respondent refused this application for protection on June 20, 2018
    and on June 29, 2018 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. An appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Bannerman  on
    August 9, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on  October  31,  2018  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 6. Permission to appeal was sought on November 8 and on November 21,  2018
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hodgkinson  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 7. At an earlier hearing on January 22, 2019 Mr Bates, Senior Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer,  accepted  that  the  Judge   had   not   provided
    satisfactory reasoning for rejecting the sur place activity claim.   Mr
    Bates accepted that the Judge had not fully engaged with  the  guidance
    issued in AB and Others (Internet activity - state  of  evidence)  Iran
    [2015] UKUT 0257 and following the more recent decision of  HB  (Kurds)
    CG [2018] UKUT 430 he accepted the  Judge  should  have  attached  more
    weight to the issue of his Kurdish ethnicity, when considering risk  on
    return.

 8. Having accepted there was an error in law, I adjourned the  appeal  due
    to the lack of an interpreter being  present  and  the  fact  that  the
    previous decision dated back to August 2018.

 9. I preserved the findings given by the FTT Judge Bannerman  set  out  in
    paragraphs 49 to 54 and directed that the resumed  hearing  would  hear
    additional oral evidence as to  whether  there  had  been  any  further
    activity as well as oral submissions on the risk on return  facing  the
    appellant having regard to relevant case law and country evidence.

10.  Since  the  last  hearing  the  appellant's  solicitors  have   lodged
    additional evidence as follows:

      a) A statement in which he reiterated he used  Facebook  to  advertise
         his activities and he believed in what he wrote and that  he  would
         not delete his account.

      b) Evidence from his Facebook account of more recent activities  (with
         translation).

11. No anonymity decision is made.

    PRELIMINARY MATTERS

12. I raised with the representatives the new  Facebook  evidence.  Neither
    representative had compared  the  recent  bundle  of  evidence  to  the
    appellant's live Facebook account. A  cursory  check  of  his  Facebook
    profile, in court, revealed that only his own  posts  appeared  on  his
    profile.

13. Other posts made by Adnan Dastyar, and included with the new  evidence,
    did not appear on the appellant's  public  Facebook  profile  but  were
    viewable on  Adnan  Dastyar's  profile  and  such  posts  "tagged"  the
    appellant. As long as the appellant was on Facebook his name  would  be
    visible on such posts.

14. Mr McVeety indicated that he accepted  the  appellant  had  posted  but
    would be arguing motive.

    ORAL EVIDENCE

15. The appellant adopted his recent statement and confirmed  the  pictures
    on page 6 were of him and others attending a demonstration on  February
    10, 2019 outside the Iranian Embassy. He stated that his friends shared
    his posts and he had 423 Facebook friends.

16. Under cross-examination he maintained he would not delete his  Facebook
    account as he believed in what he had posted.  If  he  did  delete  his
    account, he believed that his  shared  posts  would  remain,  and  that
    people would know what he had been doing from his posts.

    SUBMISSIONS

17. Mr McVeety invited the Tribunal to dismiss his appeal. The issue to  be
    considered was what would happen if the appellant were returned.  There
    were two limbs to his sur place activities  namely  his  attendance  at
    demonstration and his Facebook posts. FTT Judge Bannerman found he  was
    not a credible witness and those core findings had been  preserved.  HJ
    (Iran) was not a liar's charter and if he was not genuine  objector  he
    could close his Facebook account down. The Tribunal had  already  found
    he had not come to the attention of the authorities in Iran  so  unless
    there  was  something  that  brought  him  to  the  attention  of   the
    authorities the only remaining risk factors were:

      a) He was a Kurd.

      b) He had left illegally.

      c) He had claimed asylum.

18. If the appellant closed his Facebook account, he submitted there was no
    evidence to support the appellant's claim that his posts  would  remain
    anywhere on Facebook.

19. The FTT Judge had found he was neither an organiser  nor  a  leader  at
    demonstrations and there was no evidence the  authorities  used  facial
    recognition outside their Embassy. Taking his  case  its  highest,  the
    appellant may have been seen by someone outside the Embassy but  as  he
    had no profile from Iran they would not know who he was. The only  risk
    factor was he is a Kurd but being Kurdish was not enough albeit it  was
    a factor to take into account. He invited the Tribunal  to  reject  his
    appeal.

20. Miss Mottershaw invited the Tribunal to allow the appeal.  She  adopted
    her skeleton argument and submitted that following the case of HB being
    Kurdish and a failed  asylum  seeker  meant  he  would  be  subject  to
    heightened scrutiny on return especially as he had left  illegally  and
    had been absent from Iran for some time. Taking into account his online
    activity  and  his  attendance  at  demonstrations  she  submitted  the
    appellant would face a real risk of persecution.

21. If his Facebook account was not deleted, then it would be discovered on
    return as he would be subject to heightened questioning.  Even  if  the
    account was deleted, she submitted it was reasonably likely the account
    would come to the attention of the authorities as he will be identified
    at a pinch point and questioned. The appellant had continued to  attend
    at  demonstrations  and  Miss  Mottershaw  submitted  the   authorities
    monitored both the internet and demonstrations and she submitted it was
    not fanciful to suggest he would be of interest. Whether he deleted his
    Facebook account  mattered  little  because  he  was  linked  to  other
    activists online.

22. She invited me to allow the appeal.

    FINDINGS

23. When this appeal came before Judge Bannerman,  he  was  concerned  only
    with the appellant's sur place activities. In finding an error in law I
    preserved a number of his findings which followed on from the  previous
    findings of Judge Wilson. Both Judge Bannerman and Judge  Wilson  found
    the appellant had given an account that was lacking in credibility  and
    was implausible. They both rejected his claim that  he  had  undertaken
    activities against the state in Iran.  His  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom and any possible risk on return had to be looked at against the
    background that the appellant was not of any interest  to  the  Iranian
    authorities prior to leaving Iran.

24. I have to consider whether he would be at risk  of  persecution  having
    regard to the following factors:

      a) His social media activity.

      b) His attendance at demonstrations.

      c) The fact he is a Kurd.

      d) He left Iran illegally, He would be returned  as  a  failed  asylum
         seeker.

25. The additional Facebook evidence provided for the resumed  hearing  was
    limited in that since appearing before Judge  Bannerman  on  August  9,
    2018 he had personally posted three messages on Facebook.

26. His first post dated back to November 26, 2018 but did not appear to be
    a political comment. His second post on February 10, 2019  contained  a
    number of photographs of a demonstration that had taken  place  outside
    the Iranian Embassy the same day and his picture appeared in one of the
    photographs. That post had been "liked"by 48 people and there  were  52
    comments albeit the details of those comments were  not  provided.  The
    most recent post was from February  20,  2019  in  which  he  shared  a
    picture and commented that many Kurdish citizens had been  arrested  by
    the Iranian security forces in January 2019 and  that  on  average  two
    people were arrested every day. 13 people had  "liked"  this  post  and
    three people had  commented  on  it  albeit  their  comments  were  not
    provided.

27. Other posts attributed to Adnan Dastyar were political  in  nature  and
    whilst they were  not  viewable  on  the  appellant's  public  Facebook
    profile they did referred to his name.

28. These additional Facebook posts do not, in my opinion, alter the  views
    expressed by Judge Bannerman in paragraph  51  of  his  decision.  Miss
    Mottershaw did not seek to persuade me that the appellant was either  a
    leader or an organiser  of  any  demonstrations  and  again  there  was
    nothing contained in the new  evidence  that  would  detract  from  the
    finding made by Judge Bannerman at paragraph 52 of his decision.

29. It was put to the appellant by Mr McVeety that he could  simply  delete
    his Facebook account and there would be no risk to him as the  deletion
    of his account would remove his social media  presence.  The  appellant
    claimed that anything he had shared would still remain but there was no
    expert evidence to confirm that would be the case and it seems  logical
    that if his account is  removed  then  any  posts  he  has  made  would
    similarly be removed. Deletion of his account would remove  his  social
    media presence and there would be no risk to the appellant  unless  the
    posts had already been viewed or screenshot by the Iranian authorities.



30. Miss Mottershaw submitted that these activities taken together with his
    ethnicity, illegal exit and failed asylum status  would  place  him  at
    risk.

31. Dealing with his Facebook account I find the following:

      a) The appellant is entitled  to  open  and  operate  a  social  media
         account.

      b) His personal posts were viewable by the general public.

      c) His posts on his Facebook account opposed the government and it  is
         arguable that if he did not delete the account  and  on  return  he
         disclosed  the  existence  of  his  account  and  password  to  the
         authorities then this could create an  actual  or  implied  adverse
         profile.

      d) Since the previous hearing in August 2018 he has  only  posted  two
         personal messages of a political nature on Facebook and both  those
         were  in  February  2019-shortly  before  this  hearing.   It   was
         previously found that  he  had  created  his  Facebook  account  to
         enhance a protection claim and in such circumstances, it would  not
         necessarily breach the HJ (Iran) principle to expect him to  delete
         his Facebook account.

      e) The fact he had shared posts would not automatically create a  real
         risk in light of the fact that  the  deletion  or  closure  of  his
         account would have the automatic  effect  of  deleting  such  posts
         although I accept a deletion of the account would have no impact if
         the entries had been  screen  printed  or  converted  into  another
         format or had been seen by the authorities.

32. The appellant was neither a blogger nor  a  journalist  nor  an  online
    activist. His claim about his activity in Iran was previously  rejected
    (on two occasions) and he would not have been of any  interest  to  the
    authorities in Iran before he came here. It was not  reasonable  likely
    the authorities would have been monitoring him.

33. The decision of AB is not an authority that persons returning to  Iran,
    otherwise than with a regular passport,  and  who  had  anti-government
    Facebook accounts would be at risk. Recently, the Court of  Session  in
    EZ and SSHD [2017] CSOH 30 repeated the fact that AB was not a  country
    guidance case.

34. It is not sufficient for the appellant to claim that because he  has  a
    Facebook account he would be at risk. The appellant must establish  his
    claim to the lower standard of proof.

35. Whilst I accept the  appellant  has  attended  demonstrations  and  has
    shared a number of posts he does of course have the option  of  closing
    down his Facebook account which would have the effect of  removing  all
    the posts he has created. No evidence has  been  adduced  to  show  the
    authorities have viewed or have had access to his account or  would  be
    able to recover his Facebook account once it has been deleted.

36. He was previously found not to be a genuine  opponent  of  the  Iranian
    authorities and  therefore  requiring  him  to  close  down/delete  his
    Facebook account would not contravene the HJ (Iran) principle.

37. Although he has attended demonstrations, in light of my findings  above
    and following BA (Demonstrators in  Britain-risk  on  return)  Iran  CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC), I do not find it reasonably likely he would  have
    come to the attention of the authorities.

38.  The  Tribunal  in  HB  concluded  that  whilst  Kurds  in  Iran   face
    discrimination the evidence did not  support  a  contention  that  such
    discrimination is, in  general,  at  such  a  level  as  to  amount  to
    persecution or Article 3  ill-treatment.  The  mere  fact  of  being  a
    returnee of Kurdish ethnicity with or without  a  valid  passport,  and
    even  if  combined  with  illegal  exit,  did  not  create  a  risk  of
    persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. However, Kurdish ethnicity  was
    nevertheless a risk factor which, when combined with other factors, may
    create a real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

39. However, none of the factors listed in the headnote of HB apply in this
    case in view of the previous findings. The additional evidence that has
    been submitted since this matter was last heard by Judge Bannerman does
    not alter the appellant's political profile or situation. If  anything,
    they add weight  to  Judge  Bannerman's  finding  that  his  sur  place
    activity was nothing more than attempt to bolster his protection claim.

40. The Tribunal referred in AB to the "pinch point" and  whilst  I  accept
    returning the appellant, a Kurd, without a passport is likely  to  mean
    the authorities would question him on his return I  find  that  as  his
    claimed opposition to the authorities in Iran was rejected and his  sur
    place activities have been undertaken to enhance his  protection  claim
    he would not  be  required  to  disclose  anything  about  his  deleted
    Facebook account or his  attendance  at  demonstrations  because  those
    beliefs were not genuinely held.

41. In the absence of any evidence  suggesting  the  authorities  have  the
    capacity or ability to access deleted accounts or posts, he  has  since
    deleted, I find that as he would only be returned as a  failed  Kurdish
    asylum seeker who left illegally he would have no adverse profile which
    would interest the authorities.


    NOTICE OF DECISION

42. Having previously set aside the decision, I  remake  the  decision  and
    dismiss the appeal on all grounds.


Signed                              Date 05/03/2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed                              Date 05/03/2019

[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

