
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08238/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st July, 2017                            |On 3rd August 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                     m V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Caseley instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Stefan Kotas s Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is an Iranian citizen born on [ ] 1987.  She  claimed  to
    have arrived in the United Kingdom on 19th  January  2016  and  claimed
    asylum on 31st January,  2016.   On  22nd  June  2016,  the  respondent
    refused the appellant's claim and the appellant appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fowell.
    The appellant claimed to be a Christian convert who would  be  at  risk
    from the authorities on her return to Iran, having converted from Islam
    and who, on her return, would evangelise or proselytise.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant,
    but did not believe the whole of it.   He  did  not  believe  that  the
    appellant was involved in  religious  church  activities  in  Iran,  or
    indeed was involved in Christianity in Iran.  He was satisfied that she
    was not a Christian convert at all. He found  that  she  was  regularly
    attending church in the United Kingdom and concluded that witnesses  on
    her behalf had  been  duped  by  her.   He  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant's conversion to Christianity was genuine. Those findings have
    not been the subject of challenge.

4.   The appellant claimed to have been active  online  through  a  Facebook
    account and the judge noted that she had only started to be  active  on
    22nd January 2017, approximately one month before  the  hearing  before
    the judge.  He noted that there were no ordinary posts, in the sense of
    messages  about  non-religious  day-to-day  activities.    Her   online
    activity comprised printed images posted on Instagram and  on  Facebook
    with her wedding photograph as  her  profile  picture.   There  was  no
    accompanying commentary, just a bare picture  or  biblical  quote.   He
    concluded from this that her motive in setting up her accounts  was  to
    purely bolster her asylum claim.  He found it to be  self-serving.   At
    paragraph 73 of the  determination  he  referred  to  and  quoted  from
    paragraph 107 of AB and Others (internet activity - state of  evidence)
    Iran [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC).  At paragraph 74 the judge (inaccurately as
    it turns out) stated that he had no information about privacy  settings
    or evidence  to  show  that  a  Google  or  other  search  against  the
    appellant's name would reveal her Facebook account.  He found that  the
    burden on the appellant had not been discharged and that she had failed
    to demonstrate that there was a risk on return.  He went on to consider
    the appellant's Article 8 claim and concluded that  her  removal  would
    not be disproportionate.

5.   There were detailed and lengthy grounds submitted.  The first  referred
    to paragraph 74 of the determination and pointed  out  that  there  was
    evidence which  had  been  attached  to  a  skeleton  argument  clearly
    explaining that an icon appearing on a Facebook page indicated that  it
    was public. Reliance was placed on  paragraph  475  of  AB  and  Others
    (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC) and
    it was suggested that the appellant's Facebook activities might be  the
    subject of an investigation by the Iranian authorities on  her  return,
    when they are interrogating her.

6.   The second challenge suggested that the judge  misunderstood  the  oral
    evidence the appellant gave in relation to the date when she left Iran.
     It is claimed that in evidence-in-chief she  corrected  what  she  had
    earlier said in a statement, but accepted that  her  evidence  may  not
    have been clearly translated.

7.   The third challenge suggested that the judge was wrong  in  failing  to
    take into account background evidence regarding memory  and  recall  of
    individuals generally.  Instead, he felt he  could  not  attribute  the
    appellant's change of evidence in relation to the date  that  she  left
    Iran, on stress or confusion, but  the  background  evidence  suggested
    that it is often difficult for an honest witness to remember  correctly
    an important date.

8.   The last challenge asserted that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  all
    relevant factors in the Article 8 analysis and erred  at  paragraph  80
    when he was confused about the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and conflated two different issues.

9.   Counsel addressed me at some considerable length  and  could  not  have
    said anymore on the  appellant's  behalf.   She  pointed  out  that  at
    paragraph 80 of the determination the judge had misquoted Article 8 and
    misapplied the Rules.  Counsel accepted, however,  that  the  appellant
    could not qualify under the Immigration Rules.

10.  As to the first challenge Counsel reminded me that the appellant  would
    be travelling back to Iran on a Home Office travel  document  and  that
    would  excite  the  interest  of  the  Iranian   authorities.    During
    questioning she may be asked about her Facebook account and will in all
    honesty have to admit to having a Facebook account and explain why  she
    opened it.  The mere fact that she has claimed  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom will cause difficulties for her, because as the Tribunal  point
    out at paragraph 464 of AA, seeking asylum is regarded  as  being  rude
    about the government of Iran.  It was clear,  Counsel  suggested,  that
    the judge failed to appreciate the evidence he was given  at  paragraph
    48 of  his  determination.   I  pointed  out  to  Counsel  that  I  had
    difficulty in understanding the error.  The grounds themselves  suggest
    that the appellant's answers to questions put to her were  not  clearly
    translated, although there  appears  to  have  been  challenge  at  the
    hearing to the interpreter being used.

11.  Mr Kotas drew my attention to paragraph 45 of the  determination  where
    the judge very clearly considered the discrepancy  in  the  context  of
    stressful confusion and discounted it.  The appellant had claimed  that
    she left Iran on 19th January, 2016 but was fingerprinted in Greece  on
    9th  December,  2015.   The  judge  was  very  clearly  aware  of   the
    possibility that someone might give incorrect  evidence,  because  they
    were suffering from  stress  or  confusion,  but  in  respect  of  this
    evidence he discounted that possibility.  There was no medical evidence
    to suggest the appellant had memory difficulties and no merit at all in
    ground 3.

12.  As to the allegation of misstatement of evidence  and  the  claim  that
    the judge materially misunderstood the chronology of events  being  put
    forward by the claimant, Mr Kotas reminded me that it was  demonstrated
    that she had lied about her presence in  Greece.   There  has  been  no
    direct challenge  to  the  credibility  findings.   The  witnesses  the
    appellant called in order to  support  her  claim  to  be  a  converted
    Christian were found by the judge to have been duped by  the  appellant
    and no challenge has been made to those findings.  There is no merit in
    ground 2 either he submitted.

13.  As to the first challenge and the appellant's  internet  activity,  the
    decision in AB is not authority for the proposition that  any  internet
    activity by an appellant must result in  a  risk  on  return  to  their
    native country.  At paragraph 62 the judge deals with  the  appellant's
    evidence relating to her Facebook account.  He found that her  creation
    of that account was self-serving and intended  purely  to  bolster  her
    asylum claim.  At paragraph 73 the judge points out that there  was  no
    blogging, in the sense of publishing online articles, merely a  picture
    and biblical quotes.

14.  As the judge points out, in AB evidence was  presented  in  respect  of
    the appellants and what may be revealed by an internet  search  against
    their name and the privacy settings employed.  There  was  no  evidence
    before this judge to show what  Google  or  other  search  against  the
    appellant's name would reveal.  If when questioned she was asked  about
    Facebook she could not be expected to lie.  She would explain that  she
    created a Facebook account a month  before  her  asylum  appeal  in  an
    attempt to bolster a false asylum claim.

15.  Mr Kotas pointed out that AB was not a country  guidance  case  and  as
    the Tribunal itself were quick  to  point  out,  it  was  difficult  to
    establish any clear picture about  the  risks  consequent  on  blogging
    activities in Iran (see paragraph 466 and 472 of AB).   This  appellant
    has not been critical of the regime.  The core of  her  claim  was  not
    critical of the Iranian government at all.  He referred me to what  the
    Court of Appeal said in SS at paragraph 24.  While not being on exactly
    the same point, the principle he submitted, is the same.

16.  As to the appellant's Article 8 claim, it is clear that  the  appellant
    could not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules.   She  was  not  in  a
    relationship for two years before she made her claim  and  she  is  not
    married.  What the judge says at paragraph 87 was  a  conclusion  which
    was open to him on the evidence.  There is nothing perverse  about  it.
    Mr Kotas submitted that the determination should be upheld.

17.  In making submissions to me in  closing,  Counsel  suggested  that  the
    fact that the appellant has narrowly missed meeting the requirements of
    the Rules is something which should be taken into account.  AB does not
    suggest that anyone posting material will be at risk,  but  this  judge
    accepted that she had placed material in her Facebook account.  He  has
    failed to apply AB to the evidence before him.  It is not relevant that
    she was not critical of the Iranian government; the risk would still be
    there.

18.  I reserved my determination.

19.  There has been no challenge to the judge's findings that the  appellant
    is not a genuine convert to  Christianity  and  neither  is  there  any
    challenge to his findings that she sought to mislead the United Kingdom
    authorities as to the date she travelled.  He found that  one  "blatant
    untruth" was that she did not leave Iran on  the  date  she  originally
    said, because she had been fingerprinted in  Greece  on  9th  December,
    2015.  He was clearly alert to the possibility that this may have  been
    caused by stress or  confusion  on  the  part  of  the  appellant,  but
    discounted that because  that  claim  was  maintained  in  her  witness
    statement long after the stress of her interview and right  up  to  the
    point when it was shown to be false.  He was entitled to do  this.  The
    judge found that the appellant opened  her  Facebook  account  on  22nd
    January, 2017, approximately a month before the hearing of  her  appeal
    and did so purely to bolster her  asylum  claim.  That,  again,  was  a
    finding open to him to make  on  the  evidence  and  it  has  not  been
    challenged.

20.  So far as  the  first  challenge  is  concerned,  I  accept  there  was
    evidence before him in the form of a print from Facebook, headed  "What
    audiences can I choose from when I share".  But looking at the Facebook
    material as  it  appears,  I  am  unable  to  detect  what  is  of  the
    appellant's material is public (if  any)  and  what  is  private.   The
    prints from the internet are  certainly  not  clear  and  not  entirely
    legible.  For all I can  discern  from  the  prints,  having  read  the
    Facebook note attached to Counsel's submission, I am completely  unable
    to detect what privacy settings were used with each page and I  do  not
    believe that anyone else could do so either.  I am therefore unable  to
    detect any error on the  part  of  the  judge.   There  was  clearly  a
    printout relating to privacy settings, but there  was  nothing  on  the
    actual pages adduced in evidence, of the appellant's Facebook  account,
    to show what pages (if any) were in the public  domain  and  what  were
    private.

21.  I have concluded that on her return to  Iran,  this  appellant  is  not
    going to be in any different  position  to  any  other  failed  Iranian
    asylum seeker.  On return to Iran, if questioned she  will  explain  to
    the authorities that she falsely created a false story claiming to be a
    convert to Christianity in order to stay in  the  United  Kingdom.   If
    asked if she has a Facebook account she can explain that she does.  The
    judge  believed  that  it  was  considerably  more  likely   that   the
    appellant's arrival in the United  Kingdom  had  been  expected  by  Mr
    Ghabel; that it had been arranged in advance; and that is why  she  had
    told the Home Office that Mr Ghabel was  her  boyfriend.   If,  as  the
    judge suggests, she came to the United Kingdom to be with  someone  who
    had successfully obtained recognition as a  refugee  and  she  were  to
    explain this to the Iranian authorities, then there  is  no  reason  to
    believe that she would be at any risk on  her  return.   She  certainly
    will be questioned because she will be travelling on  her  Home  Office
    travel document, but I do not believe that the judge erred in  thinking
    that she would not be at risk on return.

22.  As for the judge not considering  objective  material  suggesting  that
    even honest witnesses sometimes make mistakes in giving their evidence,
    I find that the judge did not.  He was clearly alert to the possibility
    that she might have been mistaken and made an  error  as  a  result  of
    stress.  There was no evidence (medical or otherwise) to  suggest  that
    this appellant suffers from any problems of memory recall.

23.  I do not accept either that there was  any  mistake  to  the  evidence.
    The appellant had very clearly lied as to the date when she claimed  to
    have left Iran.

24.  So far as Article 8 is concerned, the appellant  cannot  bring  herself
    within the Immigration Rules and the finding of the judge at  paragraph
    87 of the determination is one which  was  open  to  him.   It  is  not
    claimed that it is a perverse conclusion and the  mere  fact  that,  on
    considering the evidence in the round one might  not  necessarily  have
    reached the same conclusion, is no reason  for  setting  that  decision
    aside.

25.  I adopt all the submissions of Mr Kotas  and  have  concluded  that  in
    making his decision, Judge Fowell has not erred in  his  determination.
    I uphold it.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 Chalkley
       Date 02/08/2017
