

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA084892016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 June 2017                           |On 27 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     RM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Pickering of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for  asylum  and
       ancillary protection on 4 August 2016. His appeal was  dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox ("the Judge") following a hearing on 4
       October 2016.

    2. I make an anonymity order  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as  this  was  an  asylum  and
       ancillary protection claim.

The grant of permission


    3. Upper Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission  to  appeal  (25  April
       2017) on the grounds that it is arguable that  the  Judge  erred  in
       relation to;
          1) a lack of finding on his Catholic faith,
          2) a lack of finding on the availability of an alternative for him
             to military service,
          3) the failure to  consider  determinations  from  the  First-tier
             Tribunal or New Zealand, and
          4) whether he may be required to participate in war crimes.


Appellant's position

    4. Miss Pickering conceded that there was no merit in (1) as the  Judge
       did consider his Catholic faith [41], and the  issue  was  not  what
       faith he had, but what the risk  was  for  not  performing  military
       service.


    5. Miss Pickering conceded that there was no merit in (3)  above  given
       the  lack  of  evidence  that  [11]  of  the  President's   Practice
       Direction of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and Upper Tribunal had been complied with,  and  there  was
       plainly no error if  not  following  a  decision  from  outside  the
       jurisdiction.


    6. Miss Pickering conceded that there was no merit  in  (4)  given  the
       lack of evidence of war crimes.


    7. The only point from the grounds she summited was arguable related to
       a lack of finding on the availability of an alternative for  him  to
       military service. She submitted that VB and another  (draft  evaders
       and prison  conditions)  Ukraine  CG  [UKUT]  00079  (IAC)  was  not
       relevant as that was not promulgated until 1 March 2017 even  though
       it was heard on 31 October 2016 which was 4 weeks after this  appeal
       was heard.

Discussion

    8. In my judgement,  there  was  no  material  error  of  law  for  the
       following reasons.


    9. VB considered evidence 4 weeks after this appeal was  heard  by  the
       Judge. There is no evidence they had more or fresher  evidence  than
       he did. On his assessment of the evidence before him he reached  the
       same conclusion as the Upper  Tribunal  did  in  VB,  which  he  was
       entitled to do. The fact the Judge did not have VB is  not  relevant
       as it is the evidence and not the determination that is the key.  He
       can not be said to have erred in his assessment of  risk  given  the
       proximity between the hearings.  Therefore,  whether  there  was  an
       alternative to military service or not is not the key as even if  he
       had to perform military service, the punishment  for  a  failure  to
       perform it does not amount to persecution. In this  case  the  Judge
       was entitled to find for the  numerous  reasons  he  gave  that  the
       authorities had no adverse interest in him  despite  him  coming  to
       their attention on a number of occasions and there were therefore no
       aggravating factors that enhanced his risk.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.




Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
26 June 2017
