
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08647/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 4 November 2020               |On 10 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     NEB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mozham, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Morocco,  appeals  with  permission
         against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Anthony)
         (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")  who   dismissed   his
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         20 December 2019.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 4 November 2020, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video  as  did
         the appellant so that he could  listen  and  observe  the  hearing.
         There were no issues regarding sound, and no substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

Background:

      4. The history of the appellant is set out  in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 May 2015 and
         claimed asylum on 6 May 2015. He had a screening interview  on  the
         same day was substantively interviewed twice,  first  on  15  March
         2019 and again on the 20 May 2019.

      5. The basis of the appellant's  claim  that  he  was  injured  in  an
         accident in 1992 when hit by a  train  as  a  result  his  leg  was
         amputated. It was said that he had engaged a lawyer and that he had
         spoken to a police officer about his treatment. As he was  rude  to
         him he threw a stone at the government car  and  was  arrested  and
         imprisoned for nine months. After he was released he  left  Morocco
         to travel to France where he claimed asylum.  He  was  detained  in
         France for six months and was given  notice  to  leave  and  so  he
         returned to Morocco. He was deported there in 1995.  The  appellant
         stated that he had been imprisoned by  the  authorities  the  seven
         years where he was beaten and interrogated. As a result, he  became
         depressed and was transferred to a mental health  hospital  between
         2007 - 2010 and whilst there he  managed  to  pay  a  bribe  to  an
         officer who allowed him to escape.

      6. The basis of his claim was that he was from West  Sahara,  that  he
         escaped detention and would therefore be at risk on return and also
         as he had converted to Christianity.

      7. The FtTJ set out the factual issues within  the  determination.  It
         was not accepted that the appellant was from Western Sahara or that
         he was of Sahwari ethnicity. It was accepted that the appellant was
         an amputee, and this could be a member of a particular social group
         ("PSG") but did not accept that the amputation occurred because  of
         the train accident  as  claimed.  Nor  was  it  accepted  that  the
         appellant was arrested, tortured, and imprisoned  by  the  Moroccan
         authorities. It was also not accepted that he escaped  from  mental
         health hospital by paying a bribe. Lastly it was not accepted  that
         he was a genuine Christian convert.

      8. The appellant appealed that decision, and his  appeal  came  before
         the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Anthony). The  FtTJ  heard  evidence
         from the appellant and also the Reverend.

      9. In a decision promulgated on 20  December  2019  he  dismissed  his
         appeal. In relation to the protection claim the judge set  out  his
         findings at [34 - 80]. The  judge  considered  each  head  of  risk
         beginning with the train accident at [45 - 49],  the  first  arrest
         and imprisonment at [50 - 54], leaving Morocco at [55  -  59],  the
         rule 35 report at [60 - 61], the second arrest/imprisonment at  [62
         - 66] and his escape and the mental health hospital at [67 - 69].

     10. I observe at this stage that none of the findings of fact  made  by
         the judge in relation to his  factual  account  relating  to  those
         paragraphs above are challenged in the grounds submitted on  behalf
         of the appellant. The findings of fact that are  challenged  relate
         to the FtTJ's assessment of his ethnicity at [34 -  44]  where  the
         judge concluded that  he  was  not  from  Western  Sahara  and  the
         assessment of whether he had genuinely converted to Christianity as
         set out at [71 - 81] where the judge  concluded  that  he  was  not
         satisfied  that  he  had  genuinely   converted   from   Islam   to
         Christianity.

     11. Permission to appeal was sought and permission was granted by  FtTJ
         Haria on 21 January 2020.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     12. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     13. Mr Mozham, Counsel on behalf  of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the
         written  grounds  of  appeal.  There  were  also  further   written
         submissions dated 1 May 2020.

     14. There  were  also  written  submissions  filed  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent in a Rule 24 response dated 29 April  2020  and  further
         submissions addressing the materiality of Ground  1  dated  11  May
         2020.

     15. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions. I intend  to
         consider their respective submissions when addressing  the  grounds
         of challenge advanced on behalf of the appellant.

     16. There are two grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant.  I begin
         by considering ground 1.



Ground 1:

     17. Dealing with ground 1, it is submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
         that the FtTJ made a mistake of fact at paragraphs [34] and [40] of
         the  decision  when  referring   to   the   appellant   having   an
         "identification card".

     18. Mr Mozham submitted on behalf of the appellant that  the  appellant
         had stated in the screening  interview  and  substantive  interview
         that he had no ID card, and the document was neither  in  the  Home
         Office bundle or the appellant's bundle. Thus, it is submitted that
         the FtTJ's findings of fact as to  the  appellant's  ethnicity  and
         that the appellant was not from Western  Sahara  was  not  properly
         reasoned.

     19. Ms Pettersen on behalf of the respondent made reference to the rule
         24 response in which her colleague had stated that it may not  have
         been sufficiently clear what document the judge was referring to at
         paragraphs 34 - 40 but that in any event any  such  error  was  not
         material in the light of the findings made by the judge relating to
         the other evidence that was before the judge  including  the  birth
         certificate which demonstrated that he was born in Tan  Tan  (which
         is not in Western Sahara)  and  that  the  expert  report  did  not
         address the issue of  disputed  ethnicity.  The  judge  gave  other
         reasons for reaching his overall conclusion  at  paragraphs  [38  -
         44].

     20. Having considered the submissions in  the  light  of  the  evidence
         before the FtTJ I am not satisfied that  the  FtTJ  fell  into  any
         material error. In fact, having closely considered  the  documents,
         the judge does not appear to have been in error at all.

     21. The appellant claimed to have been born in Western Sahara and  that
         he was of Sahrawi ethnicity. The judge set out his findings of fact
         and analysis at paragraphs [34 - 44] of his decision. At  [34]  the
         judge set out the appellant's factual claim and the  evidence  that
         he had provided.  In  particular  the  judge  identified  that  the
         appellant had produced  a  copy  of  his  birth  certificate  which
         confirmed that he had been born in Tan Tan. The respondent did  not
         dispute his place of birth but that the objective  material  stated
         that Tan Tan was not located in Western Sahara (see  paragraphs  35
         and 36). This is a point raised in the decision letter and  as  the
         FtTJ observed at [36] the appellant was  given  an  opportunity  to
         respond to this in his interview but he did not appear to know that
         Tan Tan was outside the geographical boundaries of Western Sahara.

     22. At [34] the judge also referred to the following "the appellant has
         also provided an identity card which confirms that the  details  on
         the card are identical to the details in the  family  civil  status
         book number issued by the office of civil  status  commune  of  Tan
         Tan". At [40] he made reference again to that ID card  although  it
         is plain in my judgement that  the  FtTJ  throughout  his  decision
         referred to  the birth certificate (which it is accepted was before
         the judge confirming he was born in Tan Tan).

     23. Whilst the grounds and Mr Mozhan submitted that there  was  no  "ID
         card" when I went through the documents with the parties there  was
         in fact such a document  or  one  that  could  be  referred  to  as
         "identity document".

     24. In the respondent's bundle (unhelpfully and  paginated)  there  are
         two documents; both are untranslated but  the  second  document  is
         clearly the birth certificate as it refers to the " Extrait  D'Acte
         De Naissance" and gives both the place of birth as Tan Tan and  the
         date of birth of 4/5/1979 which is consistent with the  appellant's
         date of birth.

     25. The other document which is untranslated in the respondent's bundle
         is also exhibited in the appellant's  bundle  at  page  45  and  is
         translated at page 46. The translation reads as follows:

             "The Kingdom of Morocco

             Ministry of Interior

             district of xxx

             office of civil status of the commune

             certificate number (not given)

             Personal ID card for civil status

             This  document  is  a  summary  of  the  birth   registration,
             according to his Majesty's degree issued on ..."

         The document then sets out the appellant's first name,  his  family
         name, his date of birth, his place of birth which is  Tan  Tan  and
         the  name  of  his  father  and  mother.  At  the  bottom  it  says
         "distinctive features" which makes reference to his neighbourhood.

     26. This document is not the translation of the  birth  certificate  in
         the respondent's bundle headed "Extrait d'Acte de naissance" but is
         a translation of the document at page 45 of the appellant's  bundle
         which is a different document. The translation  does  refer  to  it
         being a "personal ID card for civil status".  Therefore,  when  the
         FtTJ made reference to the "ID card" at paragraphs 34  and  40,  it
         looks as though he was referring to this document. Even if  it  was
         not an ID card in the usual sense it  was  a  document  which  made
         reference to it being a "personal ID". Therefore, the judge did not
         make an error in referring to  an  identity  document.  Whilst  the
         appellant claimed he did not have any ID, this is a document, along
         with  the  birth  certificate  that  the   appellant   subsequently
         provided.

     27. Having considered the evidence, the judge's finding on the issue of
         the appellant's ethnicity was entirely one that was open to him  on
         that evidence. I am satisfied that is so for a number  of  reasons.
         Firstly, the birth certificate, which was before the  judge  stated
         that he was born in Tan Tan which is not  in  Western  Sahara  (see
         paragraphs 35 - 36). The identity document or the  second  document
         refers to the same place of birth. Even if the document referred to
         by the judge as an "ID document" was not before him, the judge  was
         still entitled to place weight upon  the  birth  certificate  which
         provided the same information. As the judge  observed,  the  expert
         who had provided a report was not asked to comment on the issue  of
         ethnicity and whether the appellant identified as  Western  Saharan
         /Sahrawi by virtue of the ethnicity of  his  father.  As  the  FtTJ
         identified at [39]-[40] by reference to paragraph 36 of the  expert
         report, (that Sahrawis have Moroccan identification cards  but  are
         marked differently in order to warn about their Saharawi  origins),
         the document which the judge referred to as the ID document  (which
         appears at 46 of the appellant's bundle, has no such information or
         mark on it. The same is true of the birth certificate.

     28. The judge also observed that the expert was provided with documents
         for the purposes of preparing the report but was not provided  with
         the appellant's birth certificate or  the  document  which  I  have
         identified at page 46. Therefore, the expert report that  proceeded
         on the basis that he was from Western Sahara could  not  have  been
         given weight on that particular issue. Thus, the  finding  at  [40]
         was a finding wholly open to the FtTJ to make.

     29. In any event, the FtTJ did not solely rely upon those documents and
         gave other reasons for disbelieving  the  appellant.  At  [41]  the
         appellant had said in his substantive interview that  the  Moroccan
         authorities would not issue him with any papers because he is  from
         Western Sahara. However, as the judge observed, it was  clear  from
         the documents provided to the respondent (which included the  birth
         certificate) that that was not the position. Furthermore, whilst he
         was questioned regarding documents in his  interview,  he  did  not
         provide a credible explanation as to how he could be identified  as
         Western Saharan from those documents.

     30. Also, at [42] the judge took into account that he did not claim  to
         be Western Saharan/Sahwari in his screening interview  and  he  was
         clear also that Tan Tan was in South Morocco  and  his  nationality
         was Moroccan. It was open the judge to find that it was  not  until
         his witness statement on 6 May 2016 that he claimed  that  Tan  Tan
         was in West Sahara and that  he  was  not  recognised  as  Moroccan
         national. That was a finding that the judge was  entitled  to  make
         and expressly took into account the guidance of YL  (rely  on  SEF)
         China (2004) UKIAT 00145 at  [43]  when  placing  weight  upon  his
         inconsistent evidence.

     31. Furthermore, the judge gave adequate and sustainable reasons as  to
         why he disbelieved his  account  as  to  events  in  Morocco  which
         included the train accident, being imprisoned on two occasions  and
         escaping from a mental health hospital. None of those  findings  of
         fact have been challenged in the grounds and  those  findings  were
         relevant to the appellant's general credibility.

     32. I am satisfied that even if the FtTJ was in error about there being
         an   "ID  document",  any  error  would  not  be  material  to  the
         assessment because when the other  evidence,  including  the  birth
         certificate, was taken together, for the reasons given above it was
         open to the  judge  to  reach  the  conclusion  at  [44]  that  the
         appellant had not demonstrated that he was from Western  Sahara  or
         of Sahrawi ethnicity.

     33. Therefore, ground one is not made out.

Ground 2:

     34. As to ground 2, Mr Mozham  submits  that  the  FtTJ  erred  in  his
         assessment  of  the  appellant's  conversion  to  Christianity.  He
         submitted that the judge  accepted  that  the  Reverend  had  given
         evidence in good faith at [74] and that the only other reason given
         for rejecting his evidence was  that  the  Reverend  did  not  have
         experience of distinguishing between a genuine convert  or  a  non-
         genuine  convert  (at  [75]).  He  therefore   submits   that   the
         conclusions reached by the judge  were  not  based  on  any  proper
         reasoning and that the judge had simply stated  that  the  Reverend
         was not competent to give a view.

     35. Secondly, Mr Mozham submitted that the judge fell into error having
         found  that  the  appellant  was  not  credible  relating  to  past
         persecution and it was "entirely possible that  the  appellant  had
         pulled the wool over  the  Reverend's  eyes".  This  ground  quotes
         paragraph 38 of the decision in TF (Iran) v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2018] CSIH 58, 2019 SC 81.

     36.  He  submits  that  the  judge  did  not  adequately  assessed  his
         conversion to Christianity independently of the claim  relating  to
         events in Morocco.

     37. Ms  Pettersen  submitted  that  whilst  the  grounds  referred  the
         decision of TF and MA, the judge did not fall  into  error  because
         the judge took into account the appellant's lack  of  knowledge  of
         Christianity shown by the interview which  was  taken  three  years
         after he began studying to be a Christian and also  that  alongside
         his motivation for attending the church. She  submitted  that  when
         taken into the context of the evidence and that  of  the  Reverend,
         the judge was entitled to reach the conclusion that  the  appellant
         was not a genuine Christian convert.

     38. I have therefore carefully considered the submissions in the  light
         of the evidence before the FtTJ and in the light  of  the  relevant
         jurisprudence. Whilst the grounds cite the decision in TF (Iran)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH 58, 2019  SC
         81, it does not appear  that  it  was  put  before  the  FtTJ  when
         advancing submissions on behalf of the appellant.

     39. In the decision of  the Extra Division of the Inner  House  of  the
         Court of Session in TF (Iran) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] CSIH 58, 2019 SC 81 the appeal concerned an issue
         about the genuineness of a claimed conversion. The remainder of the
         opinion was concerned with the  type  of  evidence  that  would  be
         admissible  to  support  the  genuineness  of   a   conversion   to
         Christianity. At [58] the Court stated that  evidence  should  come
         from individuals with:

             "sufficient knowledge of the practices of the church of  which
             they are a member;  sufficient  experience  of  observing  and
             interacting with  those  seeking  to  become  members  of  the
             church; sufficient knowledge and experience of others who have
             gone  through  similar  processes  of  engagement  in   church
             activities with a view to becoming members of the church; and,
             in  cases  such  as  these,  sufficient   knowledge   of   the
             individuals concerned and of the manner  in  which  they  have
             thrown themselves into church activities.'


     40. In TF there had been independent evidence including  oral  evidence
         from  one  which  supported  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's
         conversion. The evidence given  was  detailed  and  extensive  (see
         paragraph 9 - 16). The judge fell into error because he  failed  to
         engage with the evidence and as a result the appeal was remitted.

     41. At paragraph [59] the Court stated:

             'Of course, it remains for the court or tribunal to  make  the
             final decision, and nothing in the expert  evidence  can  take
             that away from the court or tribunal. To  this  extent  it  is
             legitimate to question the experts on their opinions and as to
             the basis upon which they have reached those opinions. In some
             cases, it may be appropriate to question  the  objectivity  of
             the assessment made by the witness, or to suggest  that  there
             may be an element of wishful thinking  given  the  evangelical
             mission of the particular church. But, as we have already made
             clear, that exercise should not start with any  predisposition
             to reject the evidence because it does not fit in with some  a
             priori view formed as to the credibility of the appellant. The
             evidence should be considered on its merits  and  without  any
             preconception, based upon  an  assessment  of  the  individual
             appellants, that it  is  suspect  or  otherwise  falls  to  be
             disregarded'.


     42. In a  more  recent  decision  of  MH  (review;  slip  rule;  church
         witnesses) Iran [2020] UKUT 125 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal  set  out
         in its headnote that:-

              "written and oral evidence given  by  "church  witnesses"  is
             potentially significant in cases of Christian conversion  (see
             TF and MA). Such evidence is not aptly characterised as expert
             evidence,  nor  is  it  necessarily  deserving  of  particular
             weight, and the weight to be attached to such evident is  that
             the judicial factfinder".


     43. The Tribunal went on to refer to the decision  of  TF  and  MA  and
         stated at [48-49] as follows:

             "48. We do not understand Gilbart J to have suggested that  it
             is impermissible as a matter of law for a judge who is  tasked
             with assessing a  claimed  religious  conversion  to  consider
             anything other  than  whether  the  individual  is  an  active
             participant in the church. That he did not intend  to  suggest
             as much is clear, in our judgment,  from  the  final  sentence
             which we have underlined. Insofar as this paragraph is  relied
             upon by representatives in support of a submission that active
             participation in church activities suffices, without more,  to
             demonstrate the  truthfulness  of  a  conversion,  we  do  not
             consider that to be the  position.  On  the  contrary,  it  is
             entirely permissible for a judge in a case of this  nature  to
             turn his mind to a whole range of  additional  considerations,
             including  not  least  the  timing  of  the  conversion,   the
             individual's knowledge of the faith, and the opinions of other
             members of the congregation  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the
             conversion.


             49.           We  are  conscious  that  the  opinions  we have
             expressed above are obiter but we  consider  it  necessary  to
             express them, since it is the experience of  both  members  of
             this Tribunal that TF & MA and R (SA) v  SSHD  are  frequently
             cited in cases of this nature."


     44. A general point from those cases above and from the opinion of  the
         Court as delivered by Lord Glennie in TF and MA is  that  in  these
         cases, as in all others, the fact-finder considers the evidence  as
         a whole, which includes the opinion evidence from the church.

     45. As the Inner House makes clear, the weight to be  attached  to  the
         evidence will be a matter for the  individual  fact-finding  judge.
         There may be enquiries into the extent to which the  person  giving
         the opinion is able to show that  his  or  her  opinion  should  be
         accepted; and, in any event, the opinion evidence needs to  be  set
         in the context of all the evidence in the case, to be considered as
         a whole.

     46. There is nothing in the opinion of the Inner House in TF and MA  to
         cast any doubt at all upon the general principle that it is for  an
         appellant to establish his case and  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge to assess it. It  is  not  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         disprove the case; nor is the  fact-finding  process  delegated  to
         witnesses, however well qualified.

     47.  Mr  Mozham  sought  to  rely  upon  the  recent  decision  of   PS
         (Christianity - risk) Iran  CG  [2020]  UKUT  46  (IAC)  the  Upper
         Tribunal gave country guidance relating to Christians in  Iran  and
         therefore its relevance to this appeal is by way of general  points
         made. At [10] it was stated:

             "10.  That  leads  to  our  second  point:  what  we  mean  by
             'Christian convert'.  It is not possible to make windows  into
             men's souls. Whether someone is, or is not, a Christian  is  a
             matter of fact that is impossible to objectively verify.   For
             example, an  individual  may  pay  very  little  attention  to
             scripture or sermon but might  fervently  believe  that  Jesus
             Christ is the son of God; Christians with a long-held and deep
             belief can still face a crisis of faith at any  given  moment.
              It is no doubt for that reason  that  the  Tribunal  in  Ali
             Dorodian  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department
             (01/TH/1537) preferred to focus on the externally  observable:
             "as we have said, it is church  membership  rather  than  mere
             belief, which may lead to risk".  This difficulty  means  that
             in this jurisdiction decision makers must rely largely on  the
             observations of others to determine whether someone is, or  is
             not, a 'genuine'  Christian.   A  further  complexity  arises.
             There is no doubt for many a path to wholehearted belief, with
             gradations   marked   by   life   events   and   a   deepening
             understanding. At what point along  that  path  an  individual
             might become a 'Christian' is not clearly signposted. There is
             certainly no theological consensus on the matter;  baptism  is
             an indicator, but it should not be regarded as  determinative.
              The terminology used in this decision must therefore be read
             with that caveat in mind. For our purposes  we  are  primarily
             concerned  with  those  whom  the  Iranian  state  regard   as
             'Christians'."


     48. Drawing together that jurisprudence  the  FtTJ's  approach  to  the
         evidence was consistent with it. When assessing the factual  claim,
         the judge took  into  account  a  number  of  considerations  which
         included the timing of the conversion, the circumstances of this at
         [72] where the appellant attended a caf� which hosted refugees  and
         where the appellant then volunteered  and  following  this  made  a
         "public declaration of his conversion to Christianity"  in  October
         2015. The judge found that he had attended Sunday worship [72]  and
         the judge also took into account his knowledge  of  the  faith  (at
         [76]) and also took account of the evidence of the Reverend at  [72
         - 73], evidence relevant to the expression of his faith at [77] and
         his lack of evangelising [78 - 79]. As the decision in MH (as cited
         above) sets out, a judge is entitled to turn his mind  to  a  whole
         range of considerations other than church attendance including  the
         timing of conversion and the individual's knowledge  of  the  faith
         alongside opinions of members of the congregation..

     49. I am also satisfied that the judge did not fall into error  in  the
         way that Mr Mozham submits by reference to the decision in  TF  and
         MA. This concerns the approach in circumstances where the judge has
         found that the appellant is not telling the truth in relation as to
         past persecution. As Lord Glennie points out, the  mere  fact  that
         somebody is not telling the truth in one part of his evidence  does
         not necessarily mean that he is not telling the  truth  in  another
         part of his evidence. Equally, it does not mean that he is  telling
         the truth in the other part of his evidence. If a person's evidence
         is disbelieved, that does not of itself mean that there is evidence
         to the contrary effect. It is a matter of putting all things in the
         balance and looking at everything "in the round".

     50. Whilst the FtTJ did make reference to having found the appellant to
         be "wholly incredible in his claims of past persecution" (at [79]),
         and that the judge found that it was "entirely  possible  that  the
         appellant may pull the wool over the  Reverend's  eyes"  the  judge
         considered a number of other factors. Contrary to the  grounds  the
         judge did not reject the Reverend's evidence solely on the basis of
         the appellant's lack of credibility in relation to his claimed past
         persecution but for reasons referable to the evidence given by  the
         Reverend himself. The judge made a finding that  the  Reverend  had
         given evidence in good faith (at [74]) but the evidence had  to  be
         seen in  the  context  that  the  Reverend  had  no  experience  of
         supporting asylum seekers seeking protection on  account  of  their
         conversion  to  Christianity.  The  judge  took  into  account  his
         evidence set out at [73] in this regard. At [75]  the  judge  found
         that the Reverend's lack of experience meant that he was much  less
         likely to be able to distinguish between a genuine conversion and a
         non-genuine conversion. This was a  permissible  consideration  are
         set out at paragraph 59 of TF  and  MA  where  it  is  said  it  is
         legitimate to question objectivity  and  that  there  might  be  an
         element of "wishful thinking" given the evangelical nature  of  the
         particular church.

     51. Furthermore, the judge was entitled consider the  evidence  of  the
         Reverend in the light of the other evidence  before  the  tribunal.
         The Reverend's evidence was that he made a  public  declaration  of
         his conversion in October 2000 12 months of completing a course for
         his baptism in 2016 and that he continued to attend church. At [76]
         the judge found that the appellant's knowledge of his claimed faith
         was inconsistent with that evidence given by the Reverend and  that
         despite having completed a course of 12 months in 2016  and  having
         regularly attended church, when he  was  interviewed  a  date  some
         three years after his baptism, the appellant was unable  to  answer
         basic questions regarding his faith in his  interviews  which  took
         place in 2019.

     52. Whilst the grounds assert that  the  judge  did  not  set  out  the
         evidence referred to at [76] where the  judge  found  that  it  was
         "plain from  the  substantive  interview  that  the  appellant  was
         struggling to articulate a basic  knowledge  of  his  claim  faith"
         (this is some three years after his baptism) the evidence the judge
         relied  upon  was  set  out  not  only  in  the  questions  in  the
         substantive interviews but also detailed in the decision letter  at
         paragraphs 80 - 88. This included not being  able  to  consistently
         state the denomination of church that he followed  (Q166  interview
         one and Q 38 - 40 interview two), it was unable  to  give  evidence
         concerning Christian celebrations and baptism (question 195 -  199)
         and when asked what courses he did before his baptism  he  was  not
         able to provide a proper response (see question 54).

     53. The judge also identified further inconsistencies  in  his  account
         which related to his faith at [77] and at [78] the judge  made  his
         omnibus finding that he was not satisfied that the appellant was  a
         genuine convert from Islam to Christianity. In the alternative  the
         judge  considered  the  claim  to  have  evangelised   but   having
         considered the evidence of  the  Reverend  which  referred  to  him
         manning a food store and distributing  leaflets,  the  judge  found
         that that was not sufficient to  constitute  evangelising  "in  the
         sense that he engages with the public  regarding  his  faith".  The
         judge went on to find "I  find  the  appellant's  relationship  the
         church stems from an act  of  kindness  by  the  church  offer  the
         appellant and other persons in his position a hot meal. I find that
         the appellant has since volunteered at the caf�  and  extended  his
         voluntary work to include manning the food store. I find that  this
         is not in any way an indication of the strength of his faith nor as
         an indication that he will manifest  his  faith  by  evangelising."
         Those were findings open to the FtT to make.

     54. The question whether the decision contains a material error of  law
         is not whether  another  Judge  could  have  reached  the  opposite
         conclusion  but  whether  this  Judge  reached  a   conclusion   by
         appropriately  directing  himself  as  to  the  relevant  law   and
         assessing the evidence on a rational  and  lawful  basis.  For  the
         reasons set  out  above,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  grounds
         demonstrate an error of law in the decision of the FtTJ.

     55. In this appeal the judge had the advantage of considering  all  the
         evidence in the case and had the  advantage  of  hearing  the  oral
         evidence before the Tribunal, which include both the appellant  and
         the Reverend. In the  well-known  case  of  Piglowska  v  Piglowski
         [1999] UKHL 27, Lord Hoffmann said this:

             "... the appellate court must bear in mind the advantage which
             the first instance judge had in seeing  the  parties  and  the
             other witnesses. This  is  well  understood  on  questions  of
             credibility and findings of primary fact. But it goes  further
             than that. It applies also to the judge's evaluation of  those
             facts. ..."


     56. Furthermore, as the Supreme Court stated in  Henderson  v  Foxworth
         Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41; [2014] 1 WLR 2600 at [62]:

             "It does not matter, with whatever degree of  certainty,  that
             the appellate court considers that it  would  have  reached  a
             different conclusion. What matters  is  whether  the  decision
             under appeal is  one  that  no  reasonable  judge  could  have
             reached.


     57. For those reasons, I am satisfied that it has not been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision should stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
     Dated 5 November 2020







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


         1.   A person seeking permission to appeal  against  this  decision
         must make a written application to the  Upper  Tribunal.  Any  such
         application must be received  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  within  the
         appropriate period after this  decision  was  sent  to  the  person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as  follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the  way  in  which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


         2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for  permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention  under  the  Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10  working  days,
         if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         3.   Where the person making the application is in detention  under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working  days  (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time  that  the  application  for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days, if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


         6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the
         covering letter or covering email.

