
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08723/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th August 2017                   |On 6th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    mr el
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Markus of Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
of Cowley,    Oxford
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as [ ] 1996.  He  appealed  a  decision  to  refuse  him  international
    protection. That appeal was heard on 9th March 2017  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Juss sitting at Birmingham.  Judge  Juss  dismissed
    the appeal. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 21st  March
    2017 the Appellant made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Permission was granted but because the  Appellant  was
    concerned to know whether in fact permission had been  granted  on  all
    grounds a renewed application was made, and on  25th  July  2017  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission.

 2. It is not necessary for me  to  resolve  any  matters  in  this  appeal
    because Mr Wilding concedes that this case does reveal errors of law on
    the part of the judge.  The issue is whether it would be  possible  for
    me to remake the decision. However, in the light of the manner in which
    the case has been decided both parties  agreed  that  the  only  proper
    course is for there to be a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal with no
    preserved findings and for the matter to start again and I so order.

 3. I should say that had  there  not  been  the  concession  made  by  the
    Secretary of State it was most likely that I  would  have  allowed  the
    appeal and remitted the matter in any  event.  The  Judge  has  clearly
    misdirected himself both in how he should  deal  with  findings  in  an
    earlier hearing and the need to look at all the evidence in the round.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed and the matter  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be remade with no preserved findings.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date: 5 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

