
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08773/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2019                             |On 8 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     ABC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, instructed by NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    discretion could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia who was born on 19  October  1993.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 September 2011 with a six  month
    visit visa accompanied by her mother.  Her leave expired on 1  February
    2012 and the appellant, thereafter, overstayed.

 3. On 24 March 2015, the appellant claimed asylum.  That claim was refused
    by the Secretary of State on 28 July 2015.  A subsequent appeal to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  N  J  Osborne)   was   dismissed   in   a
    determination promulgated on 23 November 2016.  Judge Osborne  accepted
    that the appellant had been subject to FGM in Gambia  but  he  rejected
    her claim to be at risk on return as a result of a forced marriage  and
    a further  FGM  procedure.   The  appellant  was  subsequently  refused
    permission to appeal by both the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The appellant became appeal rights exhausted on  8  February
    2017.

 4. On 1 May 2018, the appellant made further submissions to the  Secretary
    of State which was treated as asylum and  human  rights  claims.   This
    included a supplementary report prepared by an expert, Dr Knorr who had
    provided an initial report considered by Judge  Osborne.   On  26  June
    2018, the Secretary of State again refused the appellant's  claims  for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 5. The  appellant  again  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 29 August 2018,  Judge  Davidge  dismissed
    the appellant's claim on all grounds.

 6. On 25 September 2018, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Shimmin)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. On 1 November 2018, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

The Submissions

 8. Mr Dieu, who represented the appellant before me as he had before Judge
    Davidge, relied upon the grounds of appeal.  He accepted, however, that
    he was in some difficulty.  Those grounds contend that the judge failed
    to consider whether the appellant was,  on  the  basis  of  Dr  Knorr's
    supplementary report, at risk of a further FGM procedure  even  if  she
    were not subject to a forced marriage.  Judge Davidge  had  found  that
    she was not at risk of a forced marriage and that, therefore,  she  was
    not at risk from her potential partner or family  of  being  forced  to
    undergo a further FGM procedure, in particular one that allowed her  to
    engage in penetrative sexual activity.

 9. Mr Dieu acknowledged that, as the judge recorded  in  para  17  of  her
    determination, the sole basis upon which he put forward the appellant's
    claim was that she was at risk of a forced marriage with  a  particular
    man.  This was a risk which the judge, as had Judge Osborne before her,
    rejected on the evidence.  He had not put forward the appellant's  case
    on the basis that there was "any generalised risk of forced  marriage".



10. Nevertheless, he drew my attention to paras 10 and  19  of  Dr  Knorr's
    report.

11. Mr Dieu accepted that the basis put forward in  the  grounds,  had  not
    been relied upon before Judge Davidge and that it amounted to  a  claim
    (absent any risk of forced marriage) that the appellant was at risk  of
    persecution or serious ill-treatment contrary to Art  3  by  undergoing
    "corrective" (my word not his) surgery through her own choice.  Mr Dieu
    was unable to identify any case law that  would  support  a  successful
    international protection claim in those circumstances.

12. Mr Howells relied upon the rule 24 response.   He  submitted  that  the
    appellant's case had been put in a particular way before Judge  Davidge
    which she had rejected.  The grounds now sought to put forward a  case,
    on a different basis, namely a generalised risk of forced marriage  and
    consequent risk of a further FGM  procedure.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge could not be criticised for deciding the appeal on the basis  put
    forward by the appellant's Counsel and  for  failing  to  approach  the
    appeal on a distinct basis not relied upon.  He  submitted  that  there
    was, therefore, no material error of law in  the  judge's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal.

Discussion

13. In substance, I accept Mr Howells' submissions and reject those  of  Mr
    Dieu.

14. First, it is plain that the appellant, through  her  Counsel,  put  her
    claim before Judge Davidge on a certain basis.  That was that  she  was
    at risk  of  a  forced  marriage  with  a  particular  man  and,  as  a
    consequence, would be forced to undergo a  FGM  procedure.   The  judge
    rejected, and her adverse finding is not challenged, that basis for the
    claim.  She did not accept that the appellant was at risk of  a  forced
    marriage with a particular man and therefore she did  not  accept  that
    the appellant would be at risk of an FGM procedure as  a  result.   The
    basis now set out in the grounds, which Mr Dieu relied upon albeit with
    some hesitation, was not  one  relied  on  before  the  judge.   It  is
    difficult, in those circumstances, to criticise the  judge's  reasoning
    or her decision to dismiss the appeal.

15. Secondly, in any event, the passages in Dr Knorr's report at  paras  10
    and 19, now relied upon by Mr Dieu, do not in my judgment form a  sound
    basis for the claim as now put forward.   They  are  in  the  following
    terms:

         "10. The re-opening of the vagina (defibulation)  is  often  forced
             through sexual intercourse in the wedding night.  Sometimes, a
             woman's vagina will be cut open by  female  relatives  of  the
             husband or by the traditional circumciser (Ngamanor)  as  part
             of the preparations for the wedding ceremony.

         ...

         19.  Although some affluent, educated and modern families in Gambia
             make their daughters undergo FGC/M  under  more  hygienic  and
             less  painful  conditions  (abroad),  these  are  a)  a  small
             minority and b) not among those  who  practice  a  variety  of
             FGC/M that involves sealing and re-opening."

16. Dealing with these in reverse  order,  para  19  is,  in  my  judgment,
    concerned with "forced" FGM imposed by  families  on  their  daughters.
    Para 10, likewise, merely describes what may occur to a person who  has
    been  subject  to  FGM  if  sexual  intercourse  takes  place   or   is
    anticipated.

17. Thirdly, what this evidence does not establish is that if the appellant
    chose to undergo what is contemplated in paras 10 and 19 of Dr  Knorr's
    report, that would entitle her to international protection.

18. Of course, the appellant has already been  subject  to  persecutory  or
    serious ill-treatment in the form of  FGM  before  coming  to  the  UK.
    However, it is the "forced" nature of this imposed by  her  husband  or
    her family which would amount to  the  serious  ill-treatment  and,  to
    successfully found a claim, against which the relevant state would fail
    to provide a sufficiency of protection.

19. In the instant appeal, as I raised with Mr Dieu during his submissions,
    it is difficult to see what absence of protection  by  the  appellant's
    own country  she  relies  upon  if  she  chooses  to  undergo  what  is
    contemplated in paras 10 and 19 of Dr Knorr's report.  The  absence  of
    protection would, in effect,  amount  to  a  claim  that  the  relevant
    country should prevent the appellant exercising her choice  to  undergo
    the procedure to permit sexual intercourse to take place.  Mr Dieu  was
    unable to identify any authority that might suggest such an  obligation
    is imposed upon the appellant's own country (and  which  would  not  be
    discharged) such that surrogate  protection  in  the  UK  is  required.
    Indeed, of course, any such obligation (if it  were  imposed  upon  the
    appellant's own country) would potentially also apply within the UK and
    impose an obligation upon the UK to prevent the appellant undergoing  a
    'corrective'  procedure.   In  the  absence  of  any  authority,  I  am
    unpersuaded that such an obligation is imposed upon the appellant's own
    country such that the absence  of  protection  mandates  the  surrogate
    protection of the UK so that that the appellant can be said  to  be  at
    real risk of persecution  for  a  Convention  reason  or  serious  ill-
    treatment contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

20. For all these reasons, therefore, the judge did not materially  err  in
    law in dismissing the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Decision

21. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal did not involve the making of a  material  error  of
    law.  That decision stands.

22. Thus, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             16 January 2019
