
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/08926/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25th May 2017                          |   On 6th June 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     ND
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Khan promulgated on 5 January 2017, in which  her  appeal  against  the
    decision dated 11 August 2016 to refuse her  asylum  and  human  rights
    claim, was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iran born on 22 May 1997.   She  entered
    the United Kingdom on 28 June 2015 with  valid  entry  clearance  as  a
    student until 27 September 2015.  The Appellant sought to make a  claim
    for asylum on  26  January  2016  and  underwent  an  asylum  screening
    interview on 15 February 2016.  She was substantively interviewed on  5
    August 2016 and the application refused by the Respondent on 11  August
    2016.  The Appellant's claim was based on fear of persecution on return
    to Iran due to  her  conversion  to  Christianity  in  United  Kingdom,
    pursuant to which she has been preaching both  in  person  and  online.
    The Appellant claims that her family home in Iran  has  been  searched,
    her  father  detained  and  interrogated  for  two  days  and   general
    harassment of her family by the authorities has been continuing.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on the basis  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant had converted to Christianity.  Her account
    was not considered to be credible or consistent and to the contrary was
    found to be vague, evasive and lacking in detail.   There  was  also  a
    failure to substantiate parts of her claim with  evidence  that  should
    have been readily available to her.

 4. Judge Khan dismissed the appeal on 5 January 2017 on all  grounds.   In
    particular, he made adverse credibility findings against the Appellant,
    considering that her  evidence  was  vague  and  evasive,  her  account
    implausible and the only witness who attended in support of the  appeal
    gave evidence which was contradictory and inconsistent.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on four grounds.  First, that Judge  Khan  failed
    to give sufficient reasons for  the  adverse  credibility  findings  he
    made, particularly given that there was background evidence  consistent
    with the Appellant's claim about monitoring of sur  place  activity  by
    the Iranian authorities.  Secondly, that the  number  of  typographical
    and grammatical errors within the  decision  shows  that  there  was  a
    failure  to  exercise  the  most  careful  and  anxious   scrutiny   in
    consideration  of  the  appeal.   Thirdly,  the   decision   does   not
    specifically  refer  to  supporting  documentary  evidence  about   the
    Appellant's claim as to her application for a visa extension, nor  does
    it make any reference to supporting statements from the man she met  on
    the bus, those whom she had evangelised or  from  her  father,  all  of
    which support the substance and plausibility of  her  claim.   Finally,
    the witness evidence was rejected on the basis of one  minor  error  in
    dates which was  not  sufficient  to  disregard  the  entirety  of  her
    evidence.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Parkes on 19  April  2017  on
    all grounds, but with the observation that the ground  in  relation  to
    typographical errors was particularly weak.

 7. Counsel  for  the  Appellant  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    highlighted the evidence in support of the Appellant, as  well  as  the
    background evidence which  showed  activities  and  monitoring  by  the
    Iranian authorities, which was all before the First-tier Tribunal.   It
    was submitted that Judge Khan failed to take this into account  and  in
    any event failed to give reasons for rejecting it or  finding  that  in
    any event the claim was implausible.  It was further submitted that  in
    light of the background  evidence,  it  was  likely  that  the  Iranian
    authorities would monitor an Iranian Church in the United  Kingdom  and
    therefore plausible that they would know of conversions to Christianity
    in such a setting.

 8. On behalf  of  the  Respondent,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    submitted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  amounted  to  no  more  than
    disagreement with the outcome and did not contain any  errors  of  law.
    The decision was detailed and thorough with  cogent  and  well-reasoned
    findings which were open to the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  basis  of
    evidence before it.



Findings and reasons

 9. In paragraphs 8 to 11 of the decision, Judge Khan sets out  in  summary
    form the oral and documentary evidence before him and said that he  has
    considered all documents submitted by both parties  in  coming  to  his
    decision on the appeal.  The oral evidence is summarised in  paragraphs
    21 to 25 and the credibility findings set out in paragraphs 28  to  36.
    Although it is not necessary for a decision to  specifically  refer  to
    each and every piece of evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  in  an
    appeal, the findings in this decision make no reference  whatsoever  to
    any of the supporting  documentary  evidence,  which  included  written
    statements,  a  bank  transfer  receipt,   Facebook   screenshots   and
    background material.  Having considered those documents,  it  is  self-
    evident that there may  have  been  good  reasons  why  they  were  not
    considered to be supportive of the Appellant's credibility or claim, in
    particular the written statements lack detail in substance and in  most
    cases lack the full identity and contact details for the  author.   The
    lack of detail does not assist  the  plausibility  of  the  Appellant's
    claim, nor does it  in  any  event  address  all  of  the  problems  of
    credibility  found  by  Judge  Khan,  such  as  the  vagueness  of  the
    Appellant's evidence, the lack of detail about her claimed  application
    for leave to  remain  as  a  student  and  lack  of  explanation  about
    harassment of her family in Iran.

10. However, it is not possible to conclude that in any  event  the  errors
    are  immaterial  such  that  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  would  have
    inevitably been the same even if  the  documents  had  definitely  been
    considered and reasons for their rejection had been given.  On balance,
    I find that the cumulative failure to refer to any of this material  in
    dismissing the appeal primarily on credibility grounds and the  failure
    to give reasons for its rejection is a material error of law.

11. Further, although the evidence of N R was brief and  not  supported  by
    any written statement, insufficient reasons are given as to why all  of
    her evidence was rejected due to one discrepancy in dates,  given  that
    there was additional written material which  was  consistent  with  the
    oral evidence given as to the Appellant's attendance and involvement in
    the church.  Judge Khan simply recounts the evidence as  to  the  dates
    and states  his  finding  that  the  evidence  (as  a  whole)  was  not
    considered credible or consistent.

12. I deal finally with the  point  as  to  typographical  and  grammatical
    errors in the decision.  Although it is clear the decision  could  have
    been better proof-read, the relatively minor  errors  it  contains  are
    clearly not material and individually were accepted not be material  by
    Counsel for the Appellant.  The errors are not such as to indicate that
    Judge  Khan  failed  to  exercise  careful  and  anxious  scrutiny   in
    determining the appeal.  I do not find any material  error  of  law  in
    this regard, however, for the reasons set out above,  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the appeal on protection grounds
    must be set aside in any event.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law in the appeal on protection  grounds.   As
such it is necessary to set aside the decision in respect of the  protection
claim only.  The decision on the human rights appeal under Article 8 of  the
European Convention on Human Rights was not challenged and that part of  the
decision stands.

I set aside the part of decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  protection
grounds.

Directions to the parties

 1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing of the
    appeal on protection grounds.  The findings in relation  to  the  human
    rights appeal under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights were not challenged and are maintained.


 2. Any further evidence relied upon shall be  filed  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and served upon the other party no later than 14 days prior to
    the hearing of the remitted appeals.


 3. The Appellant is to file with the First-tier Tribunal  and  serve  upon
    the Respondent no later than 14  days  prior  to  the  hearing  of  the
    remitted appeal a skeleton argument setting out relevant  issues,  with
    reference to evidence and case-law.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal may issue further directions as required.

Directions to administration

 1. The appeal is remitted and shall be heard at the Hatton  Cross  hearing
    centre on a date to be fixed by that centre.


 2. The remitted appeal is to be listed before any Judge except Judge Khan.


 3. There is a time estimate of 2 hours for the hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
                Date       5th June 2017


