
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08394/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Determination & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29th November 2018              |On 08th January 2019                     |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   MR AMS
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle (Counsel), Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Brookfield, promulgated on 21st August 2018, following a  hearing
    at Manchester on 10th August 2018.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant  whereupon   the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen or Iraq, and was born on  [~]  1994.
    He arrived in the UK on 2nd July 2017.  He appeals against the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Brookfield, promulgated on 21st August
    2018, following a hearing at Manchester on 10th August  2018.   In  the
    determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant.

The Appellant

 3. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, who was born  on  16th  May
    1994.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 20th June 2018, refusing his application for asylum and for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 4. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he  has  a  fear  of  ill-
    treatment and persecution on account of being a member of a  particular
    social group.  He stands to be accused of an  honour  crime,  which  is
    punishable by death.  The basis of the claim is that he met his partner
    in school in 2013.  They developed a  relationship.   By  2015  he  had
    started  a  sexual  relationship  with  her  and  she   fell   pregnant
    thereafter.  He was forced to flee to Iran.   There  he  contracted  an
    Islamic marriage on 26th August 2015.

 5. He returned back to Iraq in February 2016, without the knowledge of his
    in-laws.  In March 2017 his partner's  family  could  not  accept  that
    their daughter had eloped and her  father,  brother  and  two  paternal
    uncles fired at the Appellant's parents' house.  Because the house  was
    shot at, the parents started to look for the  Appellant  to  kill  him.
    This was because he had brought shame on them.

 6. On 19th May 2017 he fled Iraq.  He now fears that if he is to return to
    Iraq he would be killed by his family and his wife's family because  he
    had eloped.

The Judge's Findings

 7. The judge did  not  believe  the  Appellant's  account.   She  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant had begun a secret relationship  with  his
    wife in March 2015 bearing in mind that there was a  risk  attached  to
    such liaisons which it was not conceivable  that  the  Appellant  would
    entertain.  The judge rejected any account that he and his partner were
    engaged in an illicit relationship.  Such  relationships  were  in  any
    event forbidden in Iraq (see paragraph 10(ii)).

 8. The judge also did not accept that  the  Appellant  had  engaged  in  a
    sexual relationship with his partner outside marriage.  She  held  that
    the parties were married and  that  they  engaged  in  sex  thereafter,
    following which the partner became pregnant  (see  paragraph  10(iii)).
    Consideration was also given to the fact that  the  Appellant  and  his
    wife went to Iran and then returned back to Iraq.

 9. The judge held that there had been ample opportunity for the respective
    families to take reprisals against  them  had  this  been  a  realistic
    possibility (paragraph 10(v)).  Moreover,  the  Appellant's  child  was
    then born in a hospital (paragraph 10(vi)).  The  judge  also  did  not
    find it credible that the Appellant had been assisted by his  aunt,  in
    whose house he  had  allegedly  had  sex  with  his  partner,  and  who
    subsequently enjoined the Appellant to escape  in  order  to  save  his
    life.

10. Finally, the judge noted that the Appellant  had  travelled  through  a
    number of European countries without claiming asylum.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    comprehensively disbelieved the Appellant.  For example,  it  was  said
    (at paragraph 10(ii)) that the Appellant would not have embarked on  an
    elicit relationship with his partner in Iraq,  bearing  in  mind  their
    knowledge of the risks involved, but such a  conclusion  was  perverse,
    because by its very nature victims of honour killings  are  people  who
    are engaged in such illicit relationships.

12. In the same way, it was said that the Appellant's aunt would  not  have
    assisted the couple, but this too was  perverse,  because  it  was  not
    unusual for a close relative or a friend to assist  a  couple  in  this
    situation.  Similarly, the suggestion (at paragraph 10(iii))  that  the
    Appellant and his partner engaged in premarital sex was not believable,
    was also perverse because the fact that  honour  killings  occurred  on
    this basis must mean that premarital sex does take place  in  precisely
    these circumstances.

13. Criticism was also made of the judge's determination on the basis  that
    she had held that the Appellant had been unable to produce  a  marriage
    certificate, but this ignores  the  fact  that  this  was  a  religious
    ceremony that the Appellant had undergone with his partner in Iran, for
    which marriage certificates  are  not  normally  issued.   The  grounds
    further go on to say that the suggestion that  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner were able to return, apparently safely, to Iraq from Iran,  was
    misconceived in its suggestion that there was no risk to  this  couple,
    because when they did return this was without the  knowledge  of  their
    respective families.

14. Moreover, it was said that the suggestion that the  Appellant  and  his
    partner were able to flee through Sulaimaniyah Airport,  and  therefore
    were not at risk, ignores the fact that when they  did  so,  they  were
    doing so without their family's knowledge, but if they were  to  return
    from the UK now, they would be returning on  an  international  flight,
    and it was very likely that their families in the IKR would know  about
    their return.

15. The judge's determination was  also  criticised  for  disbelieving  the
    account that the couple had destroyed their CSID cards at  Sulaimaniyah
    Airport.  This overlooks the fact  that  both  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner were individually interviewed and separately from  each  other,
    and both gave identical accounts in considerable detail as to how  they
    had destroyed their CSID cards.

16. On 14th September 2018, permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis
    of the grounds.  Additionally,  it  was  also  stated  that  the  judge
    appears to have  inverted  the  standard  of  proof  in  at  least  two
    respects.  First, the final sentence of paragraph  10(iii)  is  to  the
    effect that, "I find it is reasonably likely that the Appellant and his
    wife were married  when  they  engaged  in  sex  and  when  she  became
    pregnant", but this requires the  Respondent  to  prove  that  this  is
    indeed the case, and the judge cannot simply  invert  the  standard  of
    proof onto the Appellant.  At another  place  also,  it  was  said  (at
    paragraph 10(xi)) that "it seems to me that a couple fleeing for  their
    lives in Iraq, would be anxious to claim  asylum  in  this  first  safe
    country they reached and would not be intent on reaching  a  particular
    country  before  claiming  asylum".   This,  the  grant  of  permission
    concluded, also involved an inverted standard of  proof,  because  this
    was a scenario that applied pretty much to every  asylum  claim,  given
    that most entrants to the UK had travelled through other countries, and
    it would not just be said that the claim  was  lacking  in  credibility
    because of this method of travel alone.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me on 29th November 2018, Mr Gayle submitted that
    the judge had erred in comprehensively disbelieving the Appellant,  and
    had come to mistaken conclusions as to fact.  Furthermore, there was an
    additional feature now, in that the latest CPIN report of October  2018
    makes it clear (at paragraph 5.6) that the  Iraqi  government  has  now
    stopped issuing CSID cards, and that what  happens  is  that  an  Iraqi
    national card is issued, but this does require quite a lot of detail to
    be provided, which the Appellant would not be able to provide, so  that
    he would be without any ID card at all upon return.

18. Mr Gayle also submitted that the latest country guidance  case  of  AAH
    (Iran) [2018], which was handed down in June 2018, makes it clear  that
    if someone had family support in the IKR,  then  they  were  returnable
    there.  In the instant case, however, there was not only no such family
    support, but both families were clearly hostile to  the  Appellant  and
    his partner, on account of their having committed  an  'honour  crime',
    and in these circumstances, not only did they not have a CSID card, but
    they would not have any family support either.

19. Mr Gayle additionally also went onto submit that the judge had erred in
    stating that the Appellant and his partner could return back to the IKR
    from the UK, given that they had done exactly that, when returning from
    Iran, on the basis that, "there was no credible evidence before  me  to
    indicate his or his wife's family would be aware that the Appellant and
    his wife had returned to the IKR from the UK" (see paragraph  10(viii).



20. This was misconceived, because the Appellant would now be coming on  an
    international flight, and the chances of both  families  finding  about
    the arrival was considerably greater on a flight returning from the UK,
    than would be the case when they returned from Iran,  especially  since
    the evidence was that on that occasion the family members on both sides
    did not know of their arrival.

21. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that he  would  have  to  accept  that
    there were factual errors in the way that the judge  had  come  to  her
    conclusion.  Nevertheless, IFA was available to the parties.   If  that
    was the case, then there was no material error.

22. The parties have been able to return back to Sulaimaniyah  for  a  year
    and had never been located by their family members.  This could clearly
    be done again.  If that was right then there would be no error.

Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, for the reasons  that  Mr
    Gayle has submitted, which have been  well  set  out  in  a  clear  and
    structured format in the Grounds of Appeal, the factual  findings  made
    by the judge were made in error.  For example, it  is  not  logical  to
    stay that one would not embark  upon  an  elicit  sexual  relationship,
    given the risk on account of  'honour  killings',  when  the  objective
    evidence does make it clear that honour killings  happen  in  precisely
    those circumstances.  After, all, the parties in this  case  had  known
    each other since their school days.

24. It is also equally not clear why the judge disbelieved the account that
    the parties met at their aunt's house for sexual relations, and that it
    was the aunt who then attempted to take them to a place  of  safety  by
    asking them to flee, because close family members often  come  to  such
    assistance.  The requirement of there being no marriage certificate  is
    also wrongly posited by the Judge because this  does  not  apply  to  a
    religious marriage, especially one that would have been  undertaken  in
    Iran.  The parties wanted to formalise  their  relationship  through  a
    marriage ceremony, and took steps to do so, and if this is so this only
    adds to  their  credibility  insofar  as  the  relationship  itself  is
    concerned.

25. Second, that leaves the question of internal  relocation.   It  is  not
    possible to decide this question if the factual conclusions arrived  at
    are in themselves flawed, particularly given that  the  feasibility  of
    return is now in a state of flux, following the announcement  that  the
    Iraqi government is no longer issuing CSID cards, and a Iraqi  national
    ID card would have to be procured, with details being provided.  It  is
    not clear why the judge rejected the evidence,  given  by  the  parties
    independently of each other, that they have destroyed their CSID  cards
    at Sulaimaniyah Airport.

26. Given the error, the matter will need to be  looked  at  entirely  anew
    again by another judge.  Therefore, I have remade my  decision  on  the
    basis of the findings of the original judge, the evidence  before  her,
    and the submissions I have heard today.  I am allowing this  appeal  to
    the extent that it is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Brookfield.





 Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law, such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Brookfield, pursuant to Practice
    Statement 7.2(b), because the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact-
    finding which is necessary in order for the decision and the appeal  to
    be remade is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in
    Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



28. An anonymity order is made.

29. This appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 4th January 2019



