
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08310/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 30 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     CD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, instructed by Suzanne Moran
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an order for anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  disclosure  of  any
    matter that may lead to the identification of the appellant  and  other
    parties  to  these  proceedings.   Any  breach  may  lead  to  contempt
    proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Malawi (born  in  1981)  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimes who for reasons  given  in
    her decision dated 29 October 2018  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision dated 10 August 2017 refusing
    the appellant's protection and human rights claims that had  been  made
    after a decision by the Secretary of State to make a deportation  order
    pursuant to section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 3.  The  appellant  had  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2004   and
    unsuccessfully applied for asylum.  His appeal was dismissed and he was
    recorded as an absconder in 2005.

 4. The  judge  noted  the  background  circumstances  as  follows  in  her
    decision:

         "10. The appellant's immigration history is set out in the  Reasons
             for Refusal  Letter  and  in  the  respondent's  bundle.   His
             background is set out in  the  witness  statements  and  other
             documents.  In summary the immigration history and  background
             are as follows:


             .    On 25 March 2004 the appellant made an application at the
                  port of entry for leave to enter the UK as a visitor.   He
                  was travelling on a Malawian passport.   That  application
                  was refused.  He lodged an  application  for  asylum  that
                  day.  The application for asylum was refused on 5 May 2004
                  and his appeal against that was dismissed on  3  September
                  2004.   His  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was
                  refused and his appeal rights were exhausted on 9 December
                  2004.  On 28 January 2005 the appellant was listed  as  an
                  absconder.


             .    In his witness statement the  appellant  claims  that  he
                  lived on the streets from November  2004  until  September
                  2005.  He obtained  a  fraudulent  British  passport.   He
                  registered  with  a  Doctor   and   was   diagnosed   with
                  Sarcoidosis,  a  long  term  health  condition   and   was
                  hospitalised.   After  his  discharge  from  hospital   he
                  obtained employment and accommodation.  He worked as a gym
                  instructor.  He met his  partner,  who  is  from  Northern
                  Ireland, in August 2011 at a football match in Manchester.
                   They were in a relationship for around  one  and  a  half
                  years and he visited her in Northern Ireland  during  that
                  time.  He moved  to  Northern  Ireland  when  his  partner
                  became pregnant.  They moved in together and his  son  was
                  born on 12 November 2012.  The appellant set  up  his  own
                  business.  The  relationship  broke  down  and  there  was
                  acrimony over access to the child.


             .    The appellant was stopped by police in connection with  a
                  car insurance issue and, on 3 June 2014 the appellant  was
                  arrested  by  police  and  remanded  in  custody,  he  was
                  subsequently granted temporary release.  On 3 June 2014 he
                  applied for stateless leave consideration.


             .    On 4 May 2016 the appellant was convicted  of  Possession
                  of a false identity document to improperly  allow  another
                  to obtain personal information.  He received  a  12  month
                  sentence comprised of 6 months in  prison  followed  by  6
                  months on licence.  He was  also  sentenced  to  6  months
                  concurrent sentence for fraud by false representation  and
                  a further count of False identity document  to  improperly
                  allow another to  obtain  personal  information.   He  was
                  fined �250 on conviction of Estreat bail.  The convictions
                  related to possession of a false UK passport and  a  false
                  UK driving  licence  and  their  use  in  obtaining  motor
                  insurance policies.


             .    On 26 May 2016 the appellant was  notified  that  he  was
                  liable  to  deportation  action.    Representations   were
                  submitted by his solicitors.  These  raised  a  number  of
                  issues including  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  is  a
                  national of Zimbabwe rather than Malawi;  the  appellant's
                  health conditions; and his relationship with his child.


             .    Since his release from custody  the  appellant  has  been
                  living in rented accommodation, the rent has been paid for
                  by friends.  The appellant has obtained access to his  son
                  through Court."


 5. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that the earlier decision in
    relation to the protection claim could not be challenged nor could  the
    high threshold to meet Article 3 in relation to medical issues be  met.
    Furthermore, it was accepted that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    private life requirements of Exception 1 as set out in section  117C(4)
    and paragraph 399A of the Immigration  Rules.   As  a  consequence  the
    appellant's case was to  be  considered  under  paragraph  A398(b)  and
    section 117C(3) in the light of the twelve months' sentence.

 6. The judge accepted that the child had a passport and  that  his  mother
    "appeared to be someone born in Northern Ireland".  She  accepted  that
    it was likely the appellant's child is a British citizen who  was  born
    in 2012.  Regard was had to  a  report  by  a  Dr  Zack  regarding  the
    relationship between the appellant and his  son  and  also  an  interim
    contact order dated 19 September 2018.  The judge concluded that it was
    in the child's best interests "to continue and expand contact with  his
    father for his (p)resent and future overall  development".   The  judge
    observed that the child has not visited the appellant in prison who now
    sees the child twice a week although there are significant restrictions
    in that there is no overnight  stay  nor  does  the  child  go  to  his
    accommodation.  The judge accepted that the appellant "has some limited
    involvement in decisions relating  to  the  child  based  on  his  oral
    evidence which included attending parent teacher meetings and being  at
    the hospital during a tonsil operation.

 7. The judge's focus then turned to whether it would be unduly  harsh  for
    the child to live in the country  to  which  the  appellant  is  to  be
    deported being either Malawi or Zimbabwe and  she  concluded  that  the
    child lives with his mother and that it was not likely that  the  child
    would be able to relocate abroad.

 8. As to whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without  his  father,  the  judge  directed  herself  in
    accordance with  MM  (Uganda)  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  616  and  AJ
    (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  1021.   These  authorities  led  the
    judge to consider the appellant's criminal immigration and  history  in
    the context of the unduly  harsh  consideration.   She  concluded  that
    based on all the evidence and her findings and in the light of the case
    law it had not been established that if would be unduly harsh  for  the
    child to remain without the appellant.

 9. As to whether there were very compelling circumstances over  and  above
    those captured by section 117C and the Rules  the  judge  set  out  her
    reasons at [40]:

         "40. I consider the other issues which go  to  determining  whether
             there are very compelling circumstances in this case  such  as
             to outweigh the public interest in  deporting  the  appellant.
             These factors also go to the issue of proportionality.  I take
             into account all of the factors set out above.  The  appellant
             has been convicted of  offences  connected  with  using  false
             documents committed over a lengthy period.  He absconded  from
             Home Office supervision and remained in the UK unlawfully  for
             around 9 years.  During this time he developed a  relationship
             and had a child.  He now has limited contact with  his  child.
             Although he and the child have a genuine attachment there  are
             significant limitations on their ongoing contact and his  role
             in relation to the child.  As is clear from the case law  this
             is not enough to amount to very compelling circumstances  over
             and above those set out in Exception 2.  I have taken  account
             of his medical conditions and find nothing there to show  very
             compelling circumstances to outweigh the public interest."


10. The grounds of appeal argue the judge had misapplied s. 117C(6) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (ground  one)  and  had
    irrationally excluded  factors  in  considering  paragraph  399  as  to
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the  United
    Kingdom without the appellant (ground two) .  She had  also  misapplied
    section 117B of the 2002 Act (ground three).

11. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale
    considered the grounds to have  some  merit  and  that  the  judge  had
    arguably fell into error by balancing the appellant's  criminality  and
    immigration history against whether it was unduly harsh for  the  child
    to  remain  without  the  appellant.   Such  an  approach  was  not  in
    accordance with the judgment in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

12. Mr McTaggart relied on a detailed skeleton argument and  he  began  his
    submissions with the indication  that  he  did  not  intend  to  pursue
    grounds one and three relating to the application of sections 117B  and
    117C of the 2002 Act.  He characterised the remaining  grounds  in  his
    skeleton  (which  incorporated  the  points  raised  in  the  grant  of
    permission) which I paraphrase in part and otherwise quote as follows:


    (i)  Misapplying (or due to  the  sequencing  of  the  decision  -  not
         applying (KO) - with the balancing of the  appellant's  criminality
         and immigration history against whether it was unduly harsh for the
         appellant's child to remain in the UK without the appellant; and


    (ii) Excluding materially relevant factors under paragraph  399  as  to
         whether it was unduly harsh for the  child  to  remain  in  the  UK
         without the appellant.  He considered the former granted by  motion
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale and there was no objection
         to this by Mr Diwnycz.   In  the  light  of  the  positive  factual
         findings by Judge Grimes as to the relationship, the nationality of
         the  appellant's  son  and  the  relationship  between  them.    In
         addition, the judge had found that as  the  child  lived  with  his
         mother he would not be moving to Malawi or Zimbabwe, and  following
         the report of Dr Zack, there is a secure  attachment  and  positive
         link between father and son and that it  is  in  the  child's  best
         interests to continue  and  expand  contact  with  his  father  for
         present and future development.  There were also positive  findings
         regarding the regular contact and contact orders.   These  findings
         resulted in the sole issue whether it would be unduly harsh for the
         child to remain in the United Kingdom without his  father  and  how
         this assessment is to be approached.  In  her  assessment  of  this
         issue the judge had regard to the offences and  he  submitted  that
         significant weight had been given to that  offending  resulting  in
         material error.


13. It is contended in the skeleton that the judge had materially failed to
    take proper account of fraught relationship between the  appellant  and
    his son's mother relating to the second  limb  of  the  recharacterized
    grounds.  It was accepted that there was no direct evidence  about  how
    the mother would react were the appellant to be deported,  nevertheless
    all  the  evidence  indicated  that  this  would  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities mean the end of all contact.  The  judge  had  failed  to
    have regard to aspects  of  the  appellant's  statement  regarding  the
    history of contact orders and the strict  conditions  required  by  the
    child's mother.  Material factors included in addition the report of Dr
    Zack indicating that the appellant had  been  the  recipient  of  false
    allegations from the mother.  Were the appellant unable to  demonstrate
    that it would be unduly harsh the remaining task,  in  reliance  on  RA
    (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness (Iraq) [2019] UKUT  00123
    (IAC), the offences which the Tribunal would need to  have  regard  to,
    but against that it is  contended  the  very  compelling  circumstances
    comprised:


    (a)  Length of time in the UK (since 2004).


    (b)  The presence of a son.


    (c)  Assessed as low risk of reoffending.


    (d)  The fact of the appellant's contribution to the community.


14. In the development of his submissions  at  the  hearing,  Mr  McTaggart
    acknowledged that the judge had noted the restrictions in  the  contact
    order but argued that  contact  had  been  a  "long  hard  road".   The
    restriction in particular relating to the appellant's son's  hair  gave
    an indication how bad the relationship was and it was more likely  that
    contact might not be facilitated and deportation would effectively  end
    contact.  He argued that the judge had not taken all these aspects into
    account which  included  an  indication  that  the  appellant's  former
    partner would not allow telephone contact, the order requiring  contact
    by text only.  Mr McTaggart nevertheless accepted  that  there  was  no
    specific evidence before the judge of the false allegations other  than
    the reference by Dr Zack in her report.


15. By way of response Mr Diwnycz accepted the judge had  not  followed  KO
    which had been published in  the  time  between  the  hearing  and  the
    judge's promulgation of her decision.  At the outset of the  hearing  I
    had invited both parties to consider the most recent  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal as to how KO was to be applied in SSHD v  PG  (Jamaica)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1213.  Mr Diwnycz reiterated in terms  the  observation
    by Holroyde LJ as to the sad consequences that occur when families  are
    split up but that this is the unfortunate consequence  of  deportation.
    He did not accept it would be a case of no contact; the  appellant  and
    his son would be able to speak  and  could  seek  a  variation  of  the
    contact order to achieve this.  Mr Diwnycz clarified that  he  did  not
    consider the judge's error material despite  not  having  followed  KO.
    Both parties were content that, in the event, I set aside the  decision
    I could re-make the decision based on what had been said in the  course
    of argument and the new evidence that had been lodged.


16. In his judgment in PG (Jamaica, Holroyde LJ  set  out  the  legislative
    framework and thereafter the relevant  caselaw  to  a  case  where  the
    appellant had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of  between  one
    and four years.  In particular, he made observations on the  effect  of
    KO and explained how it is to be applied.  The legal  framework  (which
    is also applicable to the appeal before me) is set out [21] to [28]  of
    his decision:


         "The Legislative Framework


         21.  By section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971, a  person  who
             is not a British citizen is liable  to  deportation  from  the
             United Kingdom if the Secretary of State deems his deportation
             to be conducive to the public good.


         22.  Provision is made for the  automatic  deportation  of  foreign
             criminals by section 32 of UK Borders Act 2007, which  so  far
             as is material for present purposes states:


             "32  Automatic deportation


                  (1)  In this section "foreign criminal" means a person -


                      (a)   who is not a British Citizen,


                      (b)  who is convicted in the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                           offence, and


                      (c)  to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.


                  (2)  Condition 1 is that the  person  is  sentenced  to  a
                      period of imprisonment of at least 12 months.


                  ...


                  (4)  For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration
                      Act 1971  (c.  77),  the  deportation  of  a  foreign
                      criminal is conducive to the public good.


                  (5)  The Secretary of State must make a deportation  order
                      in respect of a foreign criminal (subject to  section
                      33)."


         23.  Section 32 accordingly requires the deportation of  a  foreign
             criminal who has been sentenced to  a  term  of  at  least  12
             months' imprisonment,  as  PG  was,  but  is  subject  to  the
             exceptions set out in section 33 of the Act, which so  far  as
             material provides:


             "33  Exceptions


                  (1)  Section 32(4) and (5) -


                      (a)  do not apply where an exception in this  section
                           applies (subject to subsection (7) below),


                      ...


                  (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign  criminal
                      in pursuance of the deportation order would breach -


                      (a)  a person's Convention rights, ..."


         24.  In this appeal, it is contended that deportation of  PG  would
             result in breach of his rights, and the rights of his  partner
             SAT  and  their  three  children,  under  article  8  of   the
             Convention, which provides:


                  "1)  Everyone has the right to respect for his private and
                      family life, his home and his correspondence.


                  2)   There shall be no interference by a public  authority
                      with the exercise of this right except such as is  in
                      accordance  with  the  law  and  is  necessary  in  a
                      democratic  society  in  the  interests  of  national
                      security, public safety or the economic wellbeing  of
                      the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
                      for the protection of health or morals,  or  for  the
                      protection of the rights and freedoms of others."


         25.  With effect from  28th  July  2014  part  5A  of  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 has made specific provision in
             relation to the consideration of article  8  in  circumstances
             such as the present. Section 117A provides:


             "117A    Application of this Part


                    (1)    This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is
                         required to  determine  whether  a  decision  made
                         under the Immigration Acts -


                           (a)  breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for
                               private and family life under Article 8, and


                           (b)  as a result would be unlawful under  section
                               6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


                    (2)    In considering the public interest question,  the
                         court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard
                         -


                           (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed
                               in section 117B, and


                           (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of
                               foreign  criminals,  to  the  considerations
                               listed in section 117C.


                    (3)    In subsection (2), "the public interest question"
                         means the question of whether an interference with
                         a person's right to respect for private and family
                         life is justified under Article 8(2)."


         26.   Section  117B  sets  out  a   number   of   public   interest
             considerations which  are  applicable  in  all  cases.  It  is
             unnecessary for present purpose to refer to these  in  further
             detail. It is however necessary to refer to 117C, which so far
             as is material provides:


             "117C     Article  8:  additional  considerations   in   cases
                    involving foreign criminals


                    (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the
                        public interest.


                    (2)    The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a
                        foreign  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public
                        interest in deportation of the criminal.


                    (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C")  who  has
                        not been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
                        four years or more, the  public  interest  requires
                        C's deportation unless Exception 1 or  Exception  2
                        applies.


                    ...


                    (5)    Exception 2 applies where C  has  a  genuine  and
                        subsisting relationship with a qualifying  partner,
                        or a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
                        with a qualifying child,  and  the  effect  of  C's
                        deportation on the partner or child would be unduly
                        harsh."


         27.  Also with effect from 28th July 2014,  the  Immigration  Rules
             were amended to make provision for consideration of article  8
             claims  by  persons  liable  to  deportation.  So  far  as  is
             material, the amended Rules provide:


             "398.    Where a person claims that their deportation would be
                  contrary to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the
                  Human Rights Convention, and


             ...


                  (b)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                      conducive to  the  public  good  and  in  the  public
                      interest because  they  have  been  convicted  of  an
                      offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a
                      period of imprisonment of less than 4  years  but  at
                      least 12 months;


                  ...


                  the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                  consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it
                  does not, the public interest in deportation will only  be
                  outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraphs 399 and 399A.


             399. This  paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  ...
                  applies if -


                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a child under the age of  18  years
                      who is in the UK, and


                      (i) the child is a British Citizen; or


                      (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for
                           at least the 7 years  immediately  preceding  the
                           date of the immigration decision; and  in  either
                           case


                           (a)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                               live in the country to which the  person  is
                               to be deported; and


                           (b)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                               remain in the UK without the person  who  is
                               to be deported; or


                  (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                      with a partner who is in the  UK  and  is  a  British
                      Citizen or settled in the UK, and


                      (i)  the relationship was formed at a time  when  the
                           person (deportee) was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and
                           their immigration status was not precarious; and


                      (ii) it would be unduly harsh  for  that  partner  to
                           live in the country to which the person is to  be
                           deported,  because  of  compelling  circumstances
                           over and above those described in paragraph EX.2.
                           of Appendix FM; and


                      (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to
                           remain in the UK without the person who is to  be
                           deported.


                      ...


             399C.    Where a foreign  criminal  who  has  previously  been
                    granted a  period  of  limited  leave  under  this  Part
                    applies for further limited leave or indefinite leave to
                    remain his deportation remains conducive to  the  public
                    good and in  the  public  interest  notwithstanding  the
                    previous grant of leave."


         28.  Thus Part 5A of the 2002 Act, and the amended Rules,  together
             provide a structured approach to the application of article  8
             in cases of deportation of a foreign criminal."


17. Thereafter between [29] and [34], Holroyde  LJ  set  out  the  relevant
    caselaw as follows:


         "Relevant Case Law


         29.  In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2016] EWCA  Civ  662,  Jackson  LJ  at  [36]  summarised  the
             approach which Part 5A of the 2002 Act, and the Rules, require
             a tribunal or court to take when considering the position of a
             foreign  criminal  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a  term   of
             imprisonment of at least 12 months but less than 4 years:


                  "... first see whether he  falls  within  Exception  1  or
                  Exception  2.  If  he  does,  then  the  article  8  claim
                  succeeds. If he does  not,  then  the  next  stage  is  to
                  consider  whether  there  are   "sufficiently   compelling
                  circumstances,  over  and   above   those   described   in
                  Exceptions 1 and 2". If there  are,  then  the  article  8
                  claim succeeds. If there are not, then the article 8 claim
                  fails. ... there is  no  room  for  a  general  article  8
                  evaluation outside the 2014 Rules, read with sections 117A
                  to 117D of the 2002 Act"


         30.  In MM (Uganda) it was held that in the context of Exception  2
             in section 117C(5), the interpretation of the  phrase  "unduly
             harsh" required consideration of the public  interest  in  the
             removal of foreign criminals and the need for a  proportionate
             assessment of any  interference  with  article  8  rights.  At
             paragraph 24 of his judgment,  Laws  LJ,  with  whom  Vos  and
             Hamblen LJJ agreed, said that section 117C(2) -


                  "...  steers  the  tribunals  and  the  court  towards   a
                  proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation  in
                  any given case. Accordingly, the more pressing the  public
                  interest in his removal, the harder it  will  be  to  show
                  that the effect on his child or  partner  will  be  unduly
                  harsh. ... What  is  due  or  undue  depends  on  all  the
                  circumstances, not merely  the  impact  on  the  child  or
                  partner in the given case. In the present context relevant
                  circumstances certainly include the criminal's immigration
                  and criminal history."


         31.  It  was  with  that  decision  in  mind  that  Judge  Griffith
             conducted  the  proportionality  exercise  which  Judge  Finch
             upheld.


         32.  However, in KO (Nigeria) the Supreme Court  took  a  different
             view as to the interpretation in this context  of  the  phrase
             "unduly harsh". At paragraph 22, Lord Carnwath (with whom  the
             other Justices agreed) said that on its face, Exception  2  in
             section 117C of the 2002 Act raises a factual issue seen  from
             the point of view of the partner or child. At paragraph 23  he
             went on to say:


             "On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It
             assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond  that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn  by  the  section  itself  by  reference  to  length  of
             sentence. Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal  in
             IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55 and 64) can it be  equated  with  a
             requirement to show "very compelling reasons". That  would  be
             in effect to replicate the additional test applied by  section
             117C(6) with respect to sentences of four years or more."


         33.  At paragraph 32 of his judgment, Lord Carnwath again  differed
             from the approach taken by Laws LJ in MM (Uganda).


         34.  It is therefore now clear that a tribunal or court considering
              section 117C(5) of the  2002  Act  must  focus,  not  on  the
              comparative seriousness of the offence or offences  committed
              by the foreign criminal who faces deportation, but rather, on
              whether the effects of his deportation on a child or  partner
              would  go  beyond  the  degree  of  harshness   which   would
              necessarily be involved for any child or partner of a foreign
              criminal faced with deportation. Pursuant to  Rule  399,  the
              tribunal or court must consider  both  whether  it  would  be
              unduly harsh for the child and/or  partner  to  live  in  the
              country to which the foreign criminal is to be  deported  and
              whether it would be unduly harsh for the child and/or partner
              to remain in the UK without him."


18. It is unarguable that Judge Grimes made an error of law in factoring in
    the appellant's criminal offending in addressing the issue  of  whether
    it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the United  Kingdom
    without the appellant.  After satisfying herself as to the  appellant's
    nationality and the likelihood of the child being British,  she  turned
    her attention to the evidence of  the  relationship  which  included  a
    survey of the evidence of Dr Zack and the court orders  which  included
    the  particular  restriction  relating  to  the  child's  hair   before
    concluding at [21]:


         "21. The conditions are significant and  would  indicate  that  the
             appellant does not have a real role in making decisions  about
             the child. It is clear that the  nature  of  the  contact  and
             ongoing relationship is subject to agreement with the  child's
             mother and the supervision of the Family  Court.   Accordingly
             the parental relationship is limited.  However I accept  based
             on the level of contact that he has a genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship with the child."


    And thereafter concluded as to the child's best interests at [22]:


         "22. I consider the best interests of the child.  I accept  on  the
             basis of Dr Zack's report that the  appellant  and  the  child
             have a genuine and positive link (page 14 paragraph  4.1).   I
             take account of the conclusion reached by Dr  Zack   (page  14
             paragraph 4.2) that, as  he  and  his  father  have  a  secure
             attachment, it is in the child's best  interests  to  continue
             and expand contact with his father, for his present and future
             overall development."


19. The judge then explained in [23] why the child would be unable to  live
    abroad before turning her attention to whether it would be unduly harsh
    for the child to remain in the United Kingdom without his father.  This
    led her to consider the authorities  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 617 and AJ  (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 1021.  She directed herself at [26] specifically  in  relation
    to the appellant's criminal offending:


         "26. I also take account of the guidance given by  Elias  LJ  (with
             whom Vos LJ agreed) in AJ (Zimbabwe) v The Secretary of  State
             for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1021 at paragraph 17:


                  "These cases show that  it  will  be  rare  for  the  best
                  interests of the children to outweigh  the  strong  public
                  interest in deporting foreign  criminals.  Something  more
                  than a lengthy separation from a parent is required,  even
                  though such separation is detrimental to the child's  best
                  interests.  That  is  commonplace  and  not  a  compelling
                  circumstance.  Neither is it looking  at  the  concept  of
                  exceptional  circumstances  through  the   lens   of   the
                  Immigration  Rules.   It  would  undermine  the   specific
                  exceptions in the Rules if the interests of  the  children
                  in maintaining a close and immediate relationship with the
                  deported parent were as a matter of course  to  trump  the
                  strong  public  interest  in  deportation.   Rule   399(a)
                  identifies  the  particular  circumstances  where  it   is
                  accepted that the interests of the child will outweigh the
                  public  interest  in  deportation.   The  conditions   are
                  onerous and will  only  rarely  arise.  They  include  the
                  requirement that it would not be reasonable for the  child
                  to leave the UK and that no other family member is able to
                  look after the child in the UK.  In  many,  if  not  most,
                  cases where this exception is  potentially  engaged  there
                  will be the normal  relationship  of  love  and  affection
                  between parent and child and it is virtually always in the
                  best interests of  the  child  for  that  relationship  to
                  continue. If that were  enough  to  render  deportation  a
                  disproportionate interference with family life,  it  would
                  drain the rule of any  practical  significance.  It  would
                  mean that deportation would constitute a  disproportionate
                  interference with private life  in  the  ordinary  run  of
                  cases  where  children  are  adversely  affected  and  the
                  carefully  framed  conditions  in  rule  399(a)  would  be
                  largely otiose. In order to establish  a  very  compelling
                  justification  overriding  the  high  public  interest  in
                  deportation, there must  be  some  additional  feature  or
                  features  affecting  the  nature   or   quality   of   the
                  relationship which take the case out of the ordinary."


20. This was followed by a review of the negative factors weighing  against
    the appellant in the undue harshness assessment before turning  to  the
    factors weighing "against the public interest" between [33] and [37] as
    follows:


         "33. In weighing the factors against the  public  interest  I  take
             account of the appellant's relationship  with  his  son.   The
             child will be 6 years old in November.  I accept that Dr  Zack
             found that there is a secure  attachment  and  a  genuine  and
             positive link between the appellant and his son.  I take  into
             account Dr Zack's assessment that it is in  the  child's  best
             interests to continue and expand contact with his  father  for
             his resent [sic] and future overall development (page 536).  I
             take account of  Dr  Zack's  opinion  as  to  the  appellant's
             removal from the UK as follows:


                      "Based on the secure  attachment  and  the  warm  and
                      affectionate bond between father and child, I believe
                      that the deportation of [the appellant] is likely  to
                      have a negative impact.  While this impact may not be
                      observable immediately, research  has  reported  both
                      negative  short-term  and  long-term   outcomes   for
                      children who do not enjoy the  involvement  of  their
                      fathers.  In this particular case, it is  my  opinion
                      that [the appellant's] and [the child's] relationship
                      is strong and that [the child] loves his father.  Due
                      to [the appellant's] idea of a  father  and  his  own
                      resiliency, [the child] would not only  miss  out  on
                      their emotional bond but also the  ability  to  learn
                      about himself and acquire skills, eg  of  resiliency,
                      through is father."


         34.  I take  account  of  the  court  documents  outlining  regular
             contact between the appellant and his son.  I note that  there
             are contact orders dating from 2014.  The child did not  visit
             his father in prison.  In oral  evidence  the  appellant  said
             that he has been seeing  the  child  regularly  since  he  was
             released from custody in December 2016.  However  I  note  the
             limited nature of this contact, the appellant sees  the  child
             twice a week and there are significant  restrictions  on  this
             contact in that the child does not  currently  stay  with  his
             father overnight and does not go  to  his  accommodation.   In
             oral evidence the  appellant  said  that  he  makes  decisions
             regarding his son's life and  that  he  has  been  to  parent-
             teacher meetings and that he had been with his son when he had
             his tonsils removed in hospital.  The appellant therefore  has
             some limited involvement in decisions relating to the child.


         35.  In his submissions Mr Wright argued that the appellant and his
             son could continue  their  relationship  after  the  appellant
             leaves the  UK  through  modern  means  of  communication  and
             visits.  Mr McTaggart submitted that if the appellant  is  not
             able to remain in the UK and maintain  contact  with  his  son
             then he will be  lost  to  his  son.   He  submitted  that  in
             circumstances  where  the  appellant's  ex-partner  will   not
             facilitate contact without recourse  to  the  courts  and  the
             child is too young to stay in  contact  himself  then  contact
             will be lost.  In these circumstances, in his  submission,  it
             would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to  remain  in  the  UK
             without his father.


         36.  Although it was submitted that the child's  mother  would  not
             facilitate ongoing contact with the child should the appellant
             be deported this is  somewhat  speculative  and  there  is  no
             direct evidence to support this submission.   It  is  possible
             that an arrangement for contact could be made with the child's
             mother, there is no evidence that any such proposals have been
             made or rejected.  In any event, considering the case  law  as
             set out above, I do not find that this issue is  determinative
             of the appeal.


         37.  I accept that the deportation of the appellant would  have  an
             adverse impact on the appellant's child.   However,  based  on
             all of the evidence and my findings and, in light of the  case
             law set out above, I find that it  has  not  been  established
             that it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the
             UK without the appellant."


21. This was followed by an application of section 117C(6) on  which  there
    is no remaining challenge.


22. Although the judge was wrong to include the  appellant's  offending  in
    her assessment of the undue harshness, the question remains whether, in
    the light of the matters set out between [33] to [37],  the  error  was
    material.  Put another way, in the light of the evidence, is there only
    one answer in this case.  Before considering that question, I  turn  to
    the second limb to the  remaining  challenge  relates  to  the  judge's
    treatment of the evidence, in particular, the argument by Mr  McTaggart
    that had pointed to there being no contact after deportation.  As  will
    be seen his submission on this  point  is  recorded  at  [35].   In  my
    judgment the judge took account of all the relevant evidence  and  this
    aspect of the challenge is no more than a  disagreement  with  findings
    that were properly open to her, including the conclusion on  the  issue
    of contact at [36].  Uncertainty over whether the parties will be  able
    to maintain contact after deportation is likely to be a factor in  many
    deportation cases that involve the split up of families.  It is one  of
    its inevitable consequences.  The evidence before the  judge  was  thin
    regarding the nature of the conflict  between  the  appellant  and  the
    child's mother and in my view the judge was  correct  to  observe  that
    there was no evidence of such proposals having been  made  or  rejected
    for contact to endure after removal.


23. In my judgment even when  the  factors  "weighing  against  the  public
    interest" as set out by the judge are fully discounted, in the light of
    the evidential findings, there is not on  the  facts  of  this  case  a
    degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for
    any child of a foreign criminal facing deportation.  It  is  inevitable
    that the child will be distressed by the absence of the appellant.  The
    twice weekly contact will cease and this will cause the  child  a  real
    sense of loss in the light of the strength of the bond as  observed  by
    Dr Zack.   There is doubt over how effective contact will be made after
    deportation as this will be a matter of negotiation between the parents
    which may  well  result  in  further  court  proceedings.   However  as
    observed by Hickinbottom LJ in this  short  judgment  in  PG  at  [46],
    "...one can only have great sympathy for the entirely innocent children
    involved.  Even in circumstances in which they can remain in the United
    Kingdom with their other parent, they will  inevitably  be  distressed.
    However, in section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act, Parliament has made  clear
    its will that, for foreign offenders who are sentenced to one  to  four
    years, only where the consequences for children are "unduly harsh" will
    deportation be constrained.  That is entirely consistent  with  article
    8.


24. In my judgment, had the judge directed  herself  correctly  as  to  the
    approach to be taken, the only answer she could have  come  to  on  the
    evidence was that it would not be unduly harsh for the child to  remain
    without his father.  There is no challenge to the next level of enquiry
    undertaken by the judge as  to  whether  there  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances" over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2  by
    reference to the rules.  Although I am satisfied  the  judge  erred  in
    law, I do not consider the error material.


25. This appeal is dismissed.




Signed                                  Date 20 August 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

