
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08501/2019
                                                               PA/08503/2019
                                                               PA/08504/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 September 2020                 |On 23 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    B O O
                                    M O O
                                    O C O
                                [all minors]
                                   Nigeria
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr Oghekenekevwe Omoniruvbe, a solicitor with Church
                    Street Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr David Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of B O O, M O O and O C  O,  all  minors,  who  are  the
subject of these proceedings or publish  or  reveal  any  information  which
would be likely to lead to the identification of  them  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellants appeal with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal  dismissing  their  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   respondent to refuse them  refugee  status  under  the  1951  Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds.  The appellants are Nigerian citizens and  all  are
   minors.

2. The appellants sought and received an anonymity  order  from  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.  However, given that they are being represented  by  their
   father who is a solicitor and who is  named  in  these  proceedings,  the
   anonymity order has been amended to limit it  to  identification  of  the
   appellants themselves.

Background

3. The parents  married  in  Nigeria  on  8  December  2001  and  the  three
   appellants were born  in  2002,  2006  and  2012  and  are  all  Nigerian
   citizens.  The appellants' father is now a British citizen  and  has  two
   further children born here with his current partner.

4. The appellants and their parents came to the United Kingdom from  Nigeria
   on 4 December 2016 with valid visit visas and claimed asylum based  on  a
   risk of female genital mutilation to the third appellant and their  being
   unaccompanied asylum-seeking child (which they plainly are not).

5. The appeal of the appellants' mother was heard  at  Hatton  Cross  on  15
   September 2017 and was dismissed.    The  account  of  a  female  genital
   mutilation risk to the third appellant in  these  proceedings,  and/or  a
   risk  arising  from  their  grandparents'   Sango   god   religion,   was
   comprehensively rejected.  The First-tier Judge found  that  neither  the
   mother nor the father (who represents his children in this appeal) was  a
   truthful witness and that both were prepared to lie. That  is  a  serious
   finding against a solicitor of the Supreme Court, but it does not  appear
   that it was pursued at the professional level.

6. In August 2018, the parents separated, and the  appellants'  mother  went
   to live with their paternal grandparents  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
   evidence of the  children  in  their  witness  statements  was  that  she
   remained in touch with them, but at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  it
   was asserted that she had moved out of that address in early January 2019
   and ceased having any contact with her children or the extended family.

7. The appellants also had asylum appeals pending as  unaccompanied  asylum-
   seeking children and it is with those appeals that we  are  concerned  in
   these proceedings.   The  decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Shand  in  the
   mother's appeal in 2017 is the Devaseelan starting point for  the  First-
   tier Judge in these appeals.

First-tier Tribunal decision

8. First-tier Judge  Cameron  in  these  appeals  correctly  identified  the
   Devaseelan starting point set by Judge Shand in 2017.  He  accepted  that
   these appellants were now living with their father  as  the  parents  had
   separated and their mother had moved in with their paternal grandparents.
    The judge rejected the assertion in witness statements and oral evidence
   that in January 2020, just a few weeks before the appeal  hearing  on  25
   February 2020, the mother had left the paternal grandparents home and was
   now out of touch with the whole family.

9. At [51]-[53] in the First-tier Tribunal decision,  the  judge  said  that
   there was no additional evidence on the basis of which he could  properly
   go behind Judge Shand's decision that the appellant's mother  and  father
   were not credible witnesses and that their account of  the  claimed  risk
   was  so  riddled  with  discrepancies  as  to  be  totally   lacking   in
   credibility.  He was not satisfied, to any standard,  that  there  was  a
   real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  for  them   in   Nigeria,
   particularly as their mother  was  an  educated  professional  woman  and
   internal relocation was an option even if there was a risk  in  the  home
   area.

10. The judge found as a fact at [74] that these appellants  currently  with
   their father, following their parents' separation,  but  not  that  their
   father had sole responsibility.  He rejected their evidence that they did
   not know where their mother had gone.    He rejected their Article 8 ECHR
   claim, both within and outwith the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).
    The appeals were dismissed on all grounds.

11. The appellants appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

12. Permission to appeal was granted on  all  grounds  by  First-tier  Judge
   Buchanan, who considered that the First-tier Judge had arguably erred  in
   law in failing to deal  with  the  Sango  god  religion  element  of  the
   appellants' account.  He did not exclude the appellants' claim  that  the
   First-tier Judge had failed properly to direct himself  as  to  paragraph
   298(i)(c) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended),  and/or  to  give
   weight to the medical evidence that the appellants' father  had attempted
   suicide in September 2019 and was a high suicide risk if they were to  be
   removed, with reference to paragraph 298(i)(d).

13. The appellants also claimed that they were not here without leave,  with
   reference to section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971, and that the  First-
   tier Judge erred in emphasising  at  [80]-[82]  the  public  interest  in
   removing those who are not entitled to be here.

14. Finally, the grounds contend that insufficient weight was given  to  the
   best interests of the three children the appellants' father has with  his
   current partner, who are the half siblings of these appellants,  and  one
   of whom has autism.  There was no evidence from the schools of any of the
   children to support any strong relationship between these appellants  and
   their half-siblings, who are British citizens and would not have to leave
   the United Kingdom.

Rule 24 Reply

15. There was no Rule 24 reply on behalf of the respondent.

16. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

17. I heard submissions from both parties.   I  do  not  consider  that  the
   First-tier Judge erred based on the very limited evidence before  him  in
   deciding that there was no evidence which should cause him to reopen  the
   2017 findings in Judge Shand's decision.   The  asylum  and  humanitarian
   protection claims, as well as any Article 3  ECHR  claim,  are  bound  to
   fail.

18. Nor is there any merit in the submissions under paragraph 298(i)(d).

19. I am satisfied, however, that the First-tier Judge  failed  properly  to
   apply paragraph 298(i)(c) of the Rules, which at the material time was as
   follows:

         "298.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
         leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  child  of   a
         parent...present and settled in the United Kingdom are that he:

           i) Is seeking to remain with a parent...in one of the  following
              circumstances:

             ...(c)   one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
             Kingdom and  has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  child's
             upbringing or the child normally lives with  this  parent  and
             not their other parent; ...and

          ii) Has or had limited leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
              Kingdom, and

              a) Is under the age of 18; ... and

         iii) Is not leading an independent life, is unmarried, and has not
              formed  an  independent   family   unit;   and   [all   other
              qualifications not disputed]."
                                                            [Emphasis added]

20. The findings in Judge Cameron's decision establish that  these  children
   normally live with their father, and not their other parent.   They  have
   had limited leave to enter  and  are  all  minors  who  do  not  lead  an
   independent life, and so on.  There is  no  issue  about  their  father's
   ability to accommodate or maintain them.

21. On that basis, as Mr Clarke agreed at the hearing,  these  children  are
   entitled to indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


DECISION

22. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by allowing the
   appeals under paragraph 287(i)(c) of the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
   amended) on human rights grounds only.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     18
September 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



