
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08583/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 December 2020                            |On 22 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                C K A (Iraq)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Jaquiss, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
(Merton Rd)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of C K A who is the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


Decision and reasons

The appellant appeals with permission against the First-tier Judge's
decision dated 12 November 2019 dismissing his appeal against the
respondent's decision on 24 August 2019 to refuse him refugee protection,
humanitarian protection or leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human
rights grounds.

There are a number of significant errors in the judgment.  At paragraph 29
the judge says this: "The appellant claims to fear non-state agents and his
claim does not qualify for consideration under the Refugee Convention.  I
must therefore consider if he is at risk of serious harm or death and in
need of humanitarian protection and under Article 3".  That paragraph
demonstrates the confused approach which the judge has made to the
reasoning of this decision.  A fear of non-state agents does not exclude a
person from the protection of the Refugee Convention.

The question of humanitarian protection is only reached if there is no
Refugee Convention claim upheld and the question of Article 3 should be the
third matter to be considered along with any other human rights issues only
if the Refugee Convention and humanitarian protection have both been found
not to apply.

There are a number of other significant errors identified in the somewhat
discursive grounds of appeal.

It suffices to say that the reasoning of this judgment is inadequate at a
level which cannot be sustained and that accordingly there is no
alternative but to set the decision aside and for it to be remade afresh in
the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of credibility or fact preserved.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      8 December
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



