
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08929/2018
                                                               PA/09370/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 03 May 2019                     |On 09 May 2019                     |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 FARRUKH [J]
                                 ASHMAL [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, advocate, instructed by Gray & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made  previously  for  these
Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not
consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellants against  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Handley promulgated on 2 November 2018, which  dismissed
the Appellants' appeals.

Background

3.    The first Appellant was born on 22 January 1967. The second  appellant
was born on 24 December 1998. Both appellants are national of Pakistan.  The
second appellant is the son of the first appellant.

4.    On 4 July 2018 the Secretary of State refused  the  first  Appellant's
protection claim. On 5 July 2018 the Secretary of State refused  the  second
Appellant's protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Handley ("the Judge") dismissed  their  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decisions. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  29  January
2019 Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McCeachy  granted  permission  to  appeal
stating inter alia

    "I note that the Judge did not comment on the  evidence  of  the  first
    appellant's wife despite the fact that there is a statement from her in
    the bundle. I consider, moreover, that although he properly comments on
    the evidence of Rev Alan Knight it is arguable that he  did  not  fully
    engage with the documentary evidence and the affidavit of Waheed Ahmad.
    I therefore consider that the grounds of appeal are arguable."

The Hearing

6.    (a) For the appellant, Mr Winter moved the grounds of appeal. He  told
me that there are three areas, in particular,  which  taken  separately  are
material errors of law. He told me that the appellant's wife  gave  evidence
corroborating both appellants, but the Judge made  no  findings  at  all  in
relation to her evidence Mr Winter relied on what is said  by  Lord  Malcolm
between [34] and [36] of AR [2017] CSIH 52. He told me that the  failure  to
evaluate the evidence of a supporting witness is a  material  error  of  law
which requires that the Judge's decision should be set aside  and  the  case
should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for fresh findings of fact.

(b)   Mr Winter turned to paragraph 3(v) of the grounds of appeal  and  told
me that (relying again [34] to [36] of AR) the Judge's consideration of  the
documentary evidence produced is flawed. He referred me to the  first  three
items in the appellants inventory of productions. Mr  Winter  told  me  that
the documents confirm  that  the  first  appellant  has  been  charged  with
blasphemy. He argued that the confirming documents were genuine, relying  on
PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ
1011, he told me that even if it was  difficult  to  verify  documents,  the
bona fides of  the  solicitor  who  certifies  the  documents  goes  without
challenge.

(c)   Turning to ground of appeal 3 (iv), Mr Winter told me that  the  Judge
failed to reach a finding on a material matter because the Judge  failed  to
reach a conclusion on the evidence that the  appellant  evangelises  in  the
UK. Relying on AK and SK (Christians: risk)  Pakistan  CG  [2014]  UKUT  569
(IAC). Mr Winter  argued  that  such  a  finding  is  necessary  because  it
determines  whether  there  is  a  greater  risk  of  blasphemy  charges  in
Pakistan.

(d)   Mr Winter told me that those three matters  are  material  errors.  He
then  went  through  the  remaining  grounds  of  appeal  telling  me   that
cumulatively they crete believe a further material error of law. He told  me
that the Judge misapplied the principles in HJ(Iran),  and  that  the  Judge
erroneously relies on plausibility findings between [50]  and  [55]  of  his
decision. He told me that the Judge has given  inadequate  consideration  to
the evidence of the appellant's Minister of religion in the UK. He  told  me
that the Judge's findings run counter to the evidence. He urged  me  to  set
the decision aside and to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
determined of new.

7.    (a) For the respondent, Mr Govan told me that the  decision  does  not
contain material errors of law. He took me to [49] of the decision and  told
me that there the Judge provides a summary of the evidence. He told me  that
the Judge  considered  the  documentary  evidence  in  accordance  with  the
guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed (Starred) 2002 UKIAT 00439.  Mr  Govan  told
me that TF and MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58 has little application in this  case
and argued that the documentary evidence  does  not  specifically  refer  to
blasphemy - so that the Judge's findings at [49] and [59]  of  the  decision
are safe. Mr Govan told me that the Judge could only deal with the  evidence
that was placed before him.

(b)   Mr Govan told me that the grounds of  appeal  amount  to  disagreement
with the facts as the Judge found them to be and are merely  an  attempt  to
challenge the weight the Judge correctly attributed to different strands  of
evidence. He told me that at [54] the Judge  accepts  the  evidence  of  the
appellants'  Minister  of  religion,  but  the  determinative  question  was
whether or  not  the  appellants  face  an  actively  prosecuted  charge  of
blasphemy. Mr Govan told me that the Judge finds that the appellants do  not
face prosecution for blasphemy &  that  the  Judge  correctly  consider  the
guidance in AK and SK (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT  569  (IAC)
before deciding that the appellants can safely relocate within Pakistan.

(c)   Mr Govan urged me to dismiss the appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

8.    The Judge heard oral evidence from both appellants, from the Rev  Alan
Knight and from the first appellant's wife. Between [36] and [44] the  Judge
summarises  the  evidence  of  the  first  appellant.  At  [45]  the   Judge
summarises  the  evidence  of  the  second  appellant.  At  [46]  the  Judge
summarises the evidence the first appellant's wife, and at  [47]  the  Judge
summarises the evidence of Rev Knight.

9.    Between [49] and [53] the Judge analyses the  evidence  of  the  first
appellant. The Judge analyses Rev Knight's evidence  and  draws  conclusions
from that evidence. At [55] the Judge  considers  the  documentary  evidence
from the first appellant's lawyers in Pakistan. The Judge then  goes  on  to
consider the background materials and caselaw. The Judge makes  no  findings
in relation to the second appellant's evidence and no findings  or  analysis
of the first appellant's wife can be found.

10.   At paragraph 36 of AR [2017] CSIH 52 Lord Malcolm said

    "Similar comments apply to the lack of  any  proper  consideration  and
    assessment of the evidence from the supporting witness ...  One  cannot
    simply dismiss this evidence, or in effect ignore it, because  one  has
    already decided that the claimant's account is false.  No  finding  was
    made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge as to whether the  evidence  was
    credible and reliable, and if not, for what reason.  Again it  provides
    direct support for something which is acknowledged to be  difficult  to
    prove.   ...   His  evidence,  which  was   summarised   earlier,   was
    effectively ignored.  We are unable to agree with the proposition  that
    this was "regrettable, but immaterial," especially given that it was  a
    declared purpose of the re-hearing that the evidence  be  given  proper
    consideration.  Given the obvious relevance of this  evidence,  in  our
    opinion it was not sufficient for the Upper Tribunal  Judge  simply  to
    declare that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  reached  "an  overall
    sustainable conclusion", ..."

11.   It  is  understandable  that  the  Judge  would  focus  on  the  first
appellant's evidence, but the absence of consideration of the evidence  from
supporting witnesses is a material error of law.

12.   In PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
EWCA Civ 1011 it was  held  that  in  asylum  claims,  where  local  lawyers
obtained documents from courts in the home country, that did  not  create  a
rebuttable presumption that the  documents  were  reliable.  On  the  facts,
however, although it was undoubtedly the  case  that  false  documents  were
widely available in Sri Lanka,  where  it  had  been  established  that  the
documents in question originated from a court and had  been  obtained  by  2
independent lawyers on 2 separate occasions it was difficult to see how  the
claimant could have falsified a letter from the magistrate of  the  relevant
court and placed it in the court records to be later retrieved in  this  way
and at very least the evidence required detailed analysis and explanation.

13.   The first four items of the appellant's inventory of  productions  are
letters and affidavits from  the  appellant's  solicitor  in  Pakistan.  The
solicitor certified copies of what is said to be a  petition  filed  against
the first appellant. At [55] the Judge considers the purpose of an  FIR  and
draws the conclusion that  the  appellant's  evidence  is  inconsistent  and
lacks clarity. The  Judge  does  not,  however,  properly  engage  with  the
documents produced nor does he engage with the contribution  of  the  author
of the documents.

14.   In AK and SK (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 569  (IAC)  it
was held that along with Christians, Sunnis, Shi'as, Ahmadis and Hindus  may
all be potentially charged with  blasphemy.  Those  citizens  who  are  more
marginalised and occupy low standing social positions, may be less  able  to
deal with the consequences of such  proceedings;  The  risk  of  becoming  a
victim of a blasphemy allegation will depend upon a number  of  factors  and
must be assessed on a case by case basis. Relevant factors will include  the
place of  residence,  whether  it  is  an  urban  or  rural  area,  and  the
individual's level of education, financial and employment status  and  level
of public religious activity  such  as  preaching.  These  factors  are  not
exhaustive; Non state agents who use blasphemy laws against Christians,  are
often motivated by spite, personal  or  business  disputes,  arguments  over
land  and  property.  Certain  political  events  may  also   trigger   such
accusations. A blasphemy allegation, without more,  will  not  generally  be
enough to make out a claim under  the  Refugee  Convention.  It  has  to  be
actively followed either by the authorities in the  form  of  charges  being
brought or by those making the complaint. If it is,  or  will  be,  actively
pursued, then an applicant may be able to establish a real risk of  harm  in
the home area and  an  insufficiency  of  state  protection;  Relocation  is
normally a viable option unless an individual is accused of blasphemy  which
is being seriously pursued; in that  situation  there  is,  in  general,  no
internal relocation alternative.

15.   The Judge correctly takes guidance from AK and SK  (Christians:  risk)
Pakistan  CG  [2014]  UKUT  569  (IAC)  and  carefully   focusses   on   the
determinative issue. That issue is whether or not  the  appellant  faces  an
actively prosecuted charge of blasphemy. The problem is  that,  because  the
Judge creates the impression that he has ignored  evidence  from  supporting
witness, and because of  the  way  the  Judge  deals  with  the  documentary
evidence, his findings of fact on the core issues are undermined.

16.   The Judge's decision is tainted by material errors of law. I  set  the
decision aside.

17.   I consider whether or not I can substitute my own decision. There  was
an inadequacy of fact finding in the First-tier Tribunal. I find  that  none
of the First-tier Judge's findings of fact can  be  preserved.  One  of  the
central issues in this case  is  whether  or  not  the  appellant  faces  an
actively prosecuted charge of blasphemy.  That is a  question  which  cannot
be answered without further evidence and clear fact-finding. I am  asked  by
both parties' agents to remit this case the First-tier Tribunal.

18.   The material error of law in the decision relates to an inadequacy  of
fact finding. I cannot substitute my own decision.  A  further  fact-finding
exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

19.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

21.   I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Glasgow  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge R Handley.

Decision

22.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

23.   I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 2 November  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed      Date 8 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


