
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08770/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 August 2019                             |On 4 September 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Alban, Legal representative, Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss S Rushforth, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iraq,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Solly of the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  8
    April 2019 dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 29 June 2018 refusing his protection claim.

2.   The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was that he would be at  risk
    on return to the IKR because he had been threatened by members  of  the
    Party Democrat Kurdistan Iraq (PDKI) after attending a demonstration in
    Chwor Qorna in September 2015.  The respondent  found  the  appellant's
    claim not credible, as did Judge Solly.

3.   The appellant's grounds of appeal are grouped under two  headings,  the
    first alleging that the judge failed to apply the correct  standard  of
    proof (with particular reference to para  77);  the  second  contending
    that the judge "made a series of factual errors which  have  ultimately
    misdirected her assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility".   These
    errors were said to relate to  the  identity  of  the  organisation  he
    feared; whether he had been inconsistent in the evidence he gave  about
    helping organise a  protest in 2015; the failure of  the  appellant  to
    provide evidence from the 'spy', Sharwin,; and whether  the  photograph
    of the ID for Shalaw could not be genuine because it  was  photographed
    on "very similar background" to another ID; and whether  there  was  an
    inconsistency and implausibility in the appellant's account of   Shalaw
    receiving the arrest warrant issued against the appellant.

4.   At the hearing Miss Rushforth said that the respondent was prepared  to
    concede that the judge's decision was vitiated by legal error.

5.   Having studied the decision of the judge, I am in  agreement  with  the
    representatives that her decision is legally flawed.  Whilst the  first
    ground may not be correct to allege a  failure  to  apply  the  correct
    standard of proof, the impugned  paragraph  -  para  77  -  is  clearly
    erroneous in failing to consider the evidence  as  a  whole.   Para  77
    states:

         "77. Given my findings on his credibility I do not accept that  the
             photographs he produces identifying himself  with  banners  is
             evidence of his attendance at demonstrations as he alleges."

    Contrary to the principles as set out in cases such as  Mibanga  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 367, the judge here compartmentalises  her  treatment  of  the
    photographs from her overall assessment of  credibility.   She  wrongly
    approached the issue  on  the  basis  that  the  photograph  should  be
    rejected because she had found the appellant not credible;  whereas  it
    was her duty to consider the  photos  when  assessing  credibility  and
    before she decided upon credibility.

6.   Given this error I need not deal with ground (2) in any detail save  to
    say that I discern more than  one  significant  error  in  the  judge's
    treatment of the facts identified in this ground.  For example, at para
    60 the judge effectively appears to count  against  the  appellant  his
    failure to produce  evidence  from  Sharwin,  who  on  the  appellant's
    account was acting as a spy for his alleged  persecutors.   That  is  a
    plain error.  At para 51 the judge states:

         "51. The appellant does not say in his account  that  he  took  any
             part in arranging the demonstrations, he says at Q35  that  he
             helped organise this protest. There is inconsistency  in  this
             respect  between  the  evidence  of  Salman  Lochary  and  the
             appellant."

7.   In casting matters this way, the judge appears to have overlooked  that
    at Q35 AIR the appellant had not said that he  was  the  organiser  but
    that "It was reported to this  organisation  that  I  was  one  of  the
    organisers of this protest and they were looking for me."  Nor does the
    appellant in  his  statement  of  4  February  2019  mention  being  an
    'organiser'.

8.   I also consider that the judge failed to  consider  the  issue  of  the
    alleged contradiction in the appellant's account of "whom he fears" (he
    having referred in the AIR to the PDKI and in his witness statement  to
    the KDP (Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan).  At paras 45 to 46 the
    judge stated:

         "45. In the AIR the appellant said he  feared  the  party  Democrat
             Kurdistan Iraq, KDPI, answer to Q33.  He said that he had been
             one of the organisers of a demonstration against the  regional
             government in Kurdistan which took  place  in  September  2015
             (answers to Q35 and 38).

         46.  In  his  witness  statement  and  in  evidence  before  me  he
             indicated that the demonstration was against the  KDP  and  in
             October 2015 (paragraphs 10, 11, 13, 14 and 15 of his  witness
             statement (at B 2 A of the main bundle).   He  says  that  the
             Home Office has incorrectly recorded the name of whom he fears
             in his witness statement before me.  I note that he  did  not,
             on the evidence before me,  raise  these  errors  in  the  AIR
             record earlier than this witness statement which  is  dated  4
             February 2019.  My assessment of this depends on my assessment
             of his credibility."

    The appellant had said that  the  failure  of  his  representatives  to
    correct errors in his AIR was the fault  of  the  representatives.   To
    simply state that the appellant had not raised these errors in his  AIR
    earlier than his witness statement, does not  address  the  appellant's
    proffered explanation.

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the decision of  the  judge  must
    be set aside for material error of law.

10.  I see no alternative to the case being remitted to the FtT (not  before
    Judge Solly).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 23 August 2019

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

