
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08617/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12 November 2018                    |On 03 December 2018                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     f t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, Counsel instructed by Montague
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey of Kurdish ethnicity born on 27
    November 1992.  He is appealing against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies promulgated on 24 August 2018
    dismissing his appeal against the respondent's refusal of his asylum
    and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant claims to be at risk because he was a member of the
    People's Democratic Party (HDP) and a supporter of the PKK.  He claims
    that amongst other things he distributed leaflets for the HDP, joined
    protests and attended seminars.  He claims to have been detained on
    three occasions and that he has been subjected to torture and extreme
    ill treatment.  He also claims that family members have been arrested
    and imprisoned for involvement with the PKK.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The judge did not find the appellant's account credible.  At paragraph
    21 the judge stated that his evidence "lacked substantive detail, was
    internally inconsistent and implausible in parts".

 4. The reasons given by the judge for reaching this unfavourable view of
    the appellant's evidence include the following:-

      a) The judge found that the appellant gave an inconsistent account of
         whether he was a member or merely a supporter of the HDP.  At his
         screening interview he claimed to have only been a sympathiser, but
         subsequently he claimed to have been actively involved since 2014
         and to have applied for membership in 2016.

      b) The judge found damaging to the appellant's credibility that he
         claimed to be unable to obtain confirmation of his HDP membership
         because senior members of the party who acted at the time were
         either detained or had left the country.

      c) The judge found that the appellant was unable to offer details of
         HDP's ethos other than in the most general terms.

      d) The judge found there to be "scant evidence" that the appellant
         required medical attention after being subjected to brutal
         treatment.  The judge also found that the gaps between the three
         claimed detentions undermined the account given that he claimed to
         have been actively involved with HDP and suspected to have links to
         the PKK.

      e) The judge found contradictory that the arrests of the appellant in
         2015 and 2017 were said to be for the same thing, which was that
         his name appeared in a notebook found in a martyr's cemetery.  The
         judge considered that this lacked credibility in the context of his
         claim and of his claim that relatives were sentenced for the same
         reasons.

      f) The judge found damaging to the appellant's credibility that there
         was "scant evidence" that his mother and six brothers were harassed
         or harmed because of the family connection to the PKK.

      g) The judge noted that the appellant had adduced evidence purporting
         to be from the Serious Crimes Court in Turkey which was said to
         concern the convictions of relatives of the appellant.  The judge
         stated at paragraph 29 that several pages of the relevant material
         were untranslated and that he attached "scant weight to the claim
         that [the appellant's] relatives have been charged and imprisoned
         for PKK involvement and that this was a reason for  his arrests.
         In any event he has not shown to the required standard that he is
         related to them".

 5. In light of the credibility findings, the judge concluded that the
    appellant had not shown he would be at risk on return to Turkey or that
    the risk factors identified in IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00312 had been established.




 6. At paragraph 27 the judge made a further finding relevant to the
    assessment of credibility.  He stated :-

         "Further he was released on each occasion without charge or
         reporting conditions as was the modus operandi of the authorities
         if he was genuinely believed to be a supporter of the PKK.  At the
         time of his claimed arrest in 2017 a State of Emergency existed
         which had been imposed at the time of the failed coup attempt in
         July 2016 when supporters of the HDP were arbitrarily detained and
         imprisoned.  That this was not the experience of this appellant
         reinforced the impression that he was not truthful."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 7. The first ground of appeal argues that it is unclear what the judge
    meant at paragraph 27 where it was stated:-

         "Further he was released on each occasion without charge or
         reporting conditions as was the modus operandi of the authorities
         if he was genuinely believed to be a supporter of the PKK".

 8. The grounds state that it is unclear what the judge meant by this
    statement, but that it appears that the judge intended to say that it
    was not plausible that the appellant would have been released without
    charge and/or reporting conditions if the authorities had a genuine
    interest in him.  The grounds argue that this is inconsistent with IK
    where it is recognised that people of interest to the authorities may
    be detained and released thereafter without judicial involvement.

 9. The second ground of appeal also argues that the wording in paragraph
    27 is unclear and/or internally contradictory.  Issue is taken with the
    following statement by the judge:-

"At the time of his claimed arrest in 2017 a State of Emergency existed
which had been imposed at the time of the failed coup attempt in July 2016
when supporters of the HDP were arbitrarily detained and imprisoned.  That
this was not the experience of this appellant reinforced the impression
that he was not truthful."

10. It is argued that the appellant's case was that his last detention took
    place as a result of a raid at the time when security in Turkey was
    tightened following the 2016 coup and therefore the judge was mistaken
    to state that it was not the appellant's experience to be detained
    during this period.

11. This ground of appeal also takes issue with the judge finding as
    damaging to the appellant's credibility his claim that senior members
    of the HDP were unavailable to provide evidence of his membership.  It
    is argued that there is no support for this assertion and that the
    country information shows that thousands of HDP members and supporters
    have been detained and imprisoned in Turkey in recent years.

12. It is also argued that the judge erred by finding that the appellant
    had not shown that he was related to the relatives who he claimed had
    been arrested.  The grounds state this was not raised as an issue at
    the hearing and the judge gave inadequate reasons to support this
    finding.

13. The third ground of appeal maintains that the judge failed to reach a
    clear finding as to whether she accepted that the claimed arrests of
    the appellant's family members took place.  It is argued that a finding
    in respect of the criminal cases against family members was necessary
    in the context of the overall claim as this issue was material to
    credibility and the assessment of risk.

14. Before me, Mr Haywood focussed on paragraph 27 of the decision.  He
    interpreted the first part of the paragraph as stating that the
    appellant's claim lacked credibility because he claimed to have been
    released without charge or reporting conditions.  This, argued Mr
    Haywood, is inconsistent with country evidence which shows that short-
    term detention without charge or reporting conditions is commonplace in
    Turkey.  Therefore, the fact that the appellant claimed to have been
    released on each occasion without charge should support, rather than
    undermine, the credibility of his case.

15. Mr Haywood was also critical of the second part of paragraph 27 where
    the judge stated that it was not the appellant's experience to have
    been arrested and detained at around the time of the failed coup in
    July 2016.  He argued this was plainly wrong given that the appellant's
    claim was that he was arrested and detained in May 2017.

16. Mr Haywood also argued that the judge failed to give reasons to support
    his decision to attach scant weight to the documentary evidence which
    showed that the appellant's relatives were charged and imprisoned.

17. He also argued that it was unfair to attach minimal or no weight to the
    evidence about the arrest of his relatives on the basis that he had not
    shown he was related to them.  Mr Haywood submitted that this issue had
    not been raised at the hearing and that the appellant had been
    consistent throughout his claim that relatives had been arrested.  He
    argued that this is a fairness point; his submission being that it was
    unfair to hold against the appellant something that was not raised at
    the hearing and which he had no notice of being at issue.  He also
    argued that the appellant's claim was that the level of his family's
    connection with the PKK was substantial and that this should have
    affected the approach to the evidence.

18. The response of Mr Whitwell, in short, was that the judge gave a number
    of reasons for finding the appellant's account not credible and that
    taken together these are sufficient to justify the conclusion reached.



Analysis

19. This appeal turned on the judge's assessment of the appellant's
    credibility.

20. As highlighted by the Upper Tribunal in KB &AH (credibility -
    structured approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT 00491 assessment of
    credibility is highly fact sensitive and can be assisted by considering
    indicators such as sufficiency of detail, internal consistency,
    external consistency, and plausibility.

21. It is clear that the judge has considered the internal consistency of
    the appellant's account (she found that he had been inconsistent about
    his membership of HDP).

22. It is also clear that the judge had regard to the plausibility of the
    appellant's account, finding aspects (such as his claim to be unable to
    obtain confirmation of his HDP membership) to lack plausibility.

23. It is also apparent that from the decision that the judge also took
    into consideration the level of detail given by the appellant (finding,
    for example, it damaging to his credibility that he could not give
    details of HDP's ethos).

24. In my view, the judge's reasons for not accepting the appellant's
    account, as summarised above at paragraph 4, were fact sensitive,
    addressed most of the indicators identified KB & AH, and were
    sufficient to support the findings she reached.

25. I arrive at this conclusion even though I accept Mr Hayward's
    interpretation of paragraph 27 of the decision.  I agree with Mr
    Hayward that the judge appears to be treating as damaging to the
    appellant's credibility that he claims to have been released without
    charge (even though this is not consistent with country evidence) and
    that the judge appears to be mistaken as to the appellant's claim to
    have been arrested after the 2016 coup.  However, these errors are not
    material as the judge gave other reasons, which do not rely on and are
    independent of the analysis in paragraph 27, for finding the appellant
    lacked credibility.

26. Mr Hayward argued with some force that it was unfair for the judge to
    find the appellant had not established he was related to the
    individuals who he claimed were arrested, given that this was not
    raised at the hearing and therefore the appellant would not have
    appreciated it was an issue.  However, the difficulty with this
    argument is that the judge's finding that the appellant was not related
    to the arrested individuals was made in the alternative, the judge
    having already found that little weight was to be attached to the
    documents given that they were only partially translated.  The finding
    about the appellant not being related to the arrested individuals was
    therefore not material.

27. In conclusion, I am satisfied that the judge gave adequate reasons for
    finding that the appellant's account lacked credibility and that she
    reached a conclusion that was open to her on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

      a. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
         error of law and shall stand.

      b. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 28 November 2018              |

