
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08070/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by video        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|conference on 03 June 2021           |On 30th July 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P. Anderson, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 31 July 2019  to
    refuse a fresh protection and human rights claim.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 25 September  2019.  The  judge  made  several  findings
    relating to the credibility of the appellant's account, and  solely  on
    grounds of credibility, rejected his claim to be at risk  in  his  home
    are of Nangarhar province.

3.    The  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error of law in a decision promulgated on  14
    February  2020  (annexed).  The  judge's  credibility   findings   were
    preserved, but the Upper Tribunal concluded that the  judge  failed  to
    consider the likelihood of general risk in the appellant's  home  area,
    and if necessary, to then go on to make findings relating  to  internal
    relocation to Kabul.

4.   The file was reviewed due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Various  directions
    were made relating to case  management  and  the  appropriate  mode  of
    hearing. The case was listed for a remote hearing on 23 September 2020,
    but had to be adjourned for a combination of reasons. It is unclear why
    it took so long to relist the case, but it was  listed  for  a  resumed
    hearing on 03 June 2021 to remake the decision. The scope  of  remaking
    was confined to considering whether there is  a  general  risk  in  the
    appellant's home area of Nangarhar province,  and  if  so,  whether  it
    would be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  appellant  to
    relocate to Kabul.

5.   Due to the continued need to take precautions to prevent the spread  of
    Covid 19 the hearing took place in a court room at Field House with the
    legal representatives  appearing  by  video  conference  and  with  the
    facility for others to attend remotely. I was satisfied that  this  was
    consistent with the open justice principle, that  the  appellant  could
    give  evidence  without  impairment,  the  parties  could  make   their
    submissions clearly, and that the case could be heard  fairly  by  this
    mode of hearing. There was no objection to the case proceeding by  this
    mode of hearing.

6.   The appellant gave evidence with the assistance of  a  Pashto  speaking
    interpreter. His evidence and the oral submissions made by the  parties
    are on the record.  I will refer to relevant aspects  of  the  evidence
    within my findings.

Decision and reasons

Risk in Nangarhar province

7.   The appellant says that he comes from  Hesarak  district  in  Nangarhar
    province, which publicly available maps indicate is a rural district to
    the south west of Jalalabad and which lies south east of Kabul.

8.   In 2015 the First-tier Tribunal did not find the  appellant's  original
    account to be at risk from the Afghan authorities  because  his  father
    was a member of Hizb-i-Islami to be credible, and even if his claim was
    taken at its highest, it only  created  a  historic  risk.  In  further
    submissions made in 2019 the appellant claimed  that  the  Taliban  had
    made a threat against him. He produced a copy of a  threatening  letter
    but the First-tier Tribunal rejected the credibility of the appellant's
    explanation as to how  he  obtained  the  evidence  and  therefore  the
    reliability of the letter.

9.   It was submitted on his behalf that the overall security situation  had
    deteriorated in Afghanistan since  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  its
    decision in 2015. Generally, this  was  borne  out  by  the  background
    evidence. The most recent evidence considered by the Upper Tribunal  in
    AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 00130  (IAC).  At  [94]
    the Upper Tribunal noted a SIGAR report from 2019,  which  showed  that
    Nangarhar province had 'significantly higher' rates of  casualties  per
    capita (0.81 per 1,000) than Kabul, and indeed, any other province. The
    SIGAR report showed that the casualty rate  in  Kabul  was  highest  in
    absolute terms (1,703 = 0.31 per 1,000). The Upper Tribunal noted  that
    the only other province with a casualty rate of higher than 500  people
    was Nangarhar province, which had a casualty rate over the same  period
    of 1,517 in the context of a population that  was  one  third  that  of
    Kabul. At [95] the Upper Tribunal went  on  to  consider  figures  from
    UNAMA in 2019, which indicated that the casualty rate for Nangarhar for
    2018 was recorded as 111 per 100,000 inhabitants,  whereas  the  figure
    for Kabul over the same period was 38 per 100,000 inhabitants.

10.  The Upper Tribunal also considered evidence relating to  the  rates  of
    returnees  to  different  provinces,  including  Nangarhar,  which  was
    reported to bear the brunt of the burden, hosting an estimated  15%  of
    returnees nationwide [115]. The figures for overall  returns  indicated
    that there was a  peak  in  2016  (1,064,000),  which  dipped  in  2017
    (617,000), rose again in  2018  (821,000),  but  dropped  significantly
    again in 2019 (453,000) [113]. The Upper Tribunal analysed some of  the
    reasons why returnees might be attracted to Kabul, but there is  little
    analysis of the reasons why Nangarhar might receive  large  numbers  of
    returnees. I find that it is reasonable to take judicial notice of  the
    fact that Nangarhar province borders with Pakistan and is likely to  be
    the first province returnees travel to or  through  if  returning  from
    Peshawar, where a large number of Afghan refugees and displaced  people
    are concentrated.

11.  For a long time the background evidence has shown that the Taliban  and
    other armed groups like Islamic State have had a  significant  presence
    in Nangarhar  province.  This  is  unsurprising  given  that  Nangarhar
    borders areas of Pakistan where those groups also have a stronghold and
    from where attacks can be launched into Afghanistan. The evidence shows
    that  the  Taliban  conducts  operations  against   Afghan   government
    positions  in  Nangarhar,  which  explains   why   the   province   has
    consistently recorded the highest casualty rates per capita.

12.  The most recent country guidance decision also considered figures  that
    indicated what sections of the population were most  likely  to  be  at
    risk. At [96] it considered a UN OCHA report issued in  December  2019,
    which stated that 41% of casualties in the first three quarters of that
    year were women and children. The Upper  Tribunal  observed  that  this
    indicated that those who are economically active and most likely to  be
    travelling around (in that case, Kabul, but it is equally applicable to
    other areas of the country) were at greater  risk  than  those  (mostly
    women) who do not.

13.  The UNHCR Guidelines for Assessing the International  Protection  Needs
    of Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan dated 30  August  2018  makes  clear
    that young men of fighting age are more likely to be subject to  forced
    recruitment by armed groups. The guidelines make several references  to
    evidence of forced recruitment by the  Taliban  of  young  people  from
    schools and madrassas (pg.28), and  there  is  reference  to  a  Danish
    Refugee Council report that stated that young returnee boys and men are
    at particular risk of recruitment by armed groups and criminal networks
    because of their 'high visibility' on return to  a  rural  area  (pg.47
    f.n.298). In the section on forced recruitment  UNHCR  states  that  in
    areas which are under the effective control of armed groups,  they  are
    reported to use a range of coercive recruitment mechanisms.  Those  who
    resist recruitment, and their family members, are reportedly at risk of
    being killed or punished (pg.52-53).

14.  The evidence referred to in the respondent's  skeleton  argument  shows
    that the Afghan government only controlled 10 out of the  22  districts
    in Nangarhar province. In light of this, and the evidence  of  returns,
    it was submitted that the appellant would not be at risk in  Nangarhar.
    However, I  note  that  the  same  evidence  from  UNOCHA  relating  to
    displacement also  refers  to  large  numbers  of  people  still  being
    displaced in Nangarhar province during 2019 due  to  ongoing  fighting.
    When the evidence  is  considered  as  a  whole  I  am  satisfied  that
    Nangarhar continues to  be  an  area  showing  the  highest  levels  of
    conflict and casualty figures  in  Afghanistan.  The  majority  of  the
    province  is  still  in  the  control  of  armed  groups  and  not  the
    government.  The  documentary  evidence  produced  by   the   appellant
    purporting to show a specific threat from  the  Taliban  was  rejected.
    Despite the rejection of that specific threat, I am satisfied that  the
    background evidence relating to the  security  situation  in  Nangarhar
    nevertheless shows on the low standard of proof that if  the  appellant
    returned to his home area, a rural village, as a young man of  fighting
    age who has not lived in the area for many years, he is likely to be at
    risk of forced recruitment and/or would at risk of serious harm  if  he
    refused. As a young man who is more likely to  be  economically  active
    and less likely to be at home, the evidence also shows that he is  more
    likely to be caught up in generalised violence.

15.  For these reasons, I conclude that the  appellant  has  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in his home area of Nangarhar province for  reasons
    of his  attributed  political  opinion  (avoiding  or  refusing  forced
    recruitment) and/or his membership of a particular social group  (young
    men of fighting age).

Internal relocation

16.  I turn to consider whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh  to
    expect the appellant to relocate to  Kabul.  The  most  recent  country
    guidance decision in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan  CG  [2020]  UKUT
    00130 (IAC) came to substantially the same conclusions as the panel  in
    AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) in relation
    to Article 15(c) risk and the availability of internal relocation.  The
    Upper Tribunal found that 'it will not, in general, be unreasonable  to
    unduly harsh for a single adult male in  good  health  to  relocate  to
    Kabul even if he does not have  any  specific  connections  or  support
    network in Kabul and even if he does not have a Tazkera'. The  Tribunal
    went on:

         '...However,  the  particular  circumstances   of   an   individual
         applicant must be taken into account in the context  of  conditions
         in the place of relocation, including a person's  age,  nature  and
         quality  of  support  network/connections  with  Kabul/Afghanistan,
         their physical and mental health, and their language, education and
         vocational skills when determining whether a  person  falls  within
         the general position set out above.

         ... A person with a support  network  or  specific  connections  in
         Kabul is likely to be in a more advantageous  position  on  return,
         which may counter a particular vulnerability of  an  individual  on
         return. A person without a network  may  be  able  to  develop  one
         following return. A person's  familiarity  with  the  cultural  and
         societal norms of Afghanistan (which may be affected by the age  at
         which he left the country  and  his  length  of  absence)  will  be
         relevant to whether, and if so how quickly and successfully he will
         be able to build a network.'

17.   Although  the  general  security  situation  was  not  deemed  to   be
    sufficiently serious to find that there was an Article 15(c)  risk  or,
    taken alone, to render internal relocation unduly harsh the Tribunal in
    AS  (2020)  found  that  the  evidence  showed  that  there  was  still
    'widespread  and  persistent  conflict  related  violence   in   Kabul'
    [253(ii)]. Safety and security issues were still thought to be  'highly
    relevant to the reasonableness of return  but  are  not  by  themselves
    determinative'  [216].  The  Tribunal  in  AS  (2020)  also  considered
    evidence relating to poverty and the humanitarian conditions  in  Kabul
    noting that the challenges that were said  to  face  displaced  persons
    included limited job opportunities, few or no social  protection  nets,
    poor  shelter/housing  conditions,  impeded  access  to  education  and
    healthcare,  and  continuous  fear  of  eviction  [123].  The  position
    remained the same as in 2018, whereby the evidence showed that 'most of
    Kabul's population is poor, lives in inadequate housing with inadequate
    sanitation, lack  access  to  potable  water,  and  struggles  to  earn
    sufficient income to sustain itself in a  society  without  any  safety
    net' [225].

18.  The Tribunal found that there  was  little  evidence  to  suggest  that
    returnees faced hostility because they have returned from the west, but
    face challenges 'primarily because of poverty,  lack  of  accommodation
    and the absence of employment opportunities, as well  as  the  security
    situation'[246]. The  panel  agreed  that  a  person's  age  was  still
    relevant to reasonableness. Returnees of any age without a network will
    face significant challenges establishing themselves  in  Kabul,  but  a
    person who left Afghanistan at a young age may, depending on individual
    circumstances, be less able than  someone  who  spent  their  formative
    years in Afghanistan to navigate the challenges of  the  city  by,  for
    example, finding work and accommodation'[251].

19.  The starting point from the country guidance is that,  in  general,  it
    would be reasonable to expect a single adult male  in  good  health  to
    relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not  have  a  Tazkera  or  specific
    connections there. However, the Upper Tribunal  also  made  clear  that
    there needs to be an individualised assessment of  the  facts  of  each
    case. At the date of the hearing the appellant is a 21 year  old  young
    man. There is no evidence to suggest that he has any significant health
    problems or might be physically unable to work. However, the  appellant
    claims that he left Afghanistan in May 2014, when he was only 15  years
    old. Since his arrival in the UK it is likely that he has been a looked
    after child in the care of social services. He has also had the support
    of his older siblings, who are settled in the UK. He says that  he  has
    studied English, IT and Travel and Tourism. There  is  no  evidence  to
    show that he has had any work experience in the UK. Given that  he  has
    had no leave to remain since he reached his majority,  it  is  unlikely
    that he has had permission to  work.  For  this  reason  I  accept  his
    evidence that he does not have any meaningful work experience.

20.  Any relatives he has mentioned during the course of  his  asylum  claim
    in 2015 and the fresh claim are all said to be in Nangarhar province or
    in the Afghan diaspora outside the country. The appellant first fled to
    Pakistan, which is the more  likely  area  of  displacement  given  the
    proximity of Nangarhar to the border. There is no evidence  to  suggest
    that  the  appellant  has  any  particular  connections,  familial   or
    otherwise, to Kabul. I accept that it  is  likely  that  the  appellant
    would have no support network in Kabul.

21.  The appellant left Afghanistan at a young age. Although  he  is  now  a
    young adult, age is not a bright line issue. The appellant is  still  a
    young person with little experience of independent living and no direct
    knowledge of how to navigate life in Kabul. The most likely option  for
    a person in the appellant's position  would  be  to  find  sub-standard
    accommodation in a tea house and try to  find  manual  work,  which  is
    still in short supply given  the  high  unemployment  rates  in  Kabul.
    However, the country guidance makes clear that the  age  when  he  left
    Afghanistan, his current young age,  lack  of  support  network,  would
    make it more difficult for him to navigate  the  challenge  of  finding
    work and accommodation in Kabul, leaving  this  appellant  particularly
    isolated and vulnerable. There is no evidence to indicate  whether  his
    close relatives in the UK may be in a position to assist him with  some
    financial support. Even if they were able to contribute something,  the
    appellant would be separated from close family  members  who  currently
    provide him with  emotional  support  and  would  find  himself  in  an
    isolated and vulnerable position in an unfamiliar city.

22.  Nothing in  the  country  guidance  dictates  a  certain  outcome.  The
    guidance makes clear that there must be an individualised and  holistic
    assessment in each case. Whilst no one issue, taken alone, would render
    relocation unduly harsh, I am satisfied that the cumulative effect of a
    number of factors is sufficient to show that it would be  unduly  harsh
    for this particular appellant to relocate to Kabul. The evidence  shows
    that there are still  serious  security  concerns  in  Kabul  and  that
    casualty figures remain quite high. The appellant left Afghanistan as a
    child. He has no experience of how to survive there as  an  adult,  and
    for this reason is likely to find the existing challenges of  surviving
    in Kabul even more difficult than most. This is likely to be compounded
    by the fact that he does not have an existing support network in  Kabul
    and would find it more difficult to establish one because of  his  lack
    of experience of how to negotiate adult life in Afghanistan. For  these
    reasons I conclude that it would be unduly harsh for the  appellant  to
    relocate to Kabul.

23.  I conclude that the appellant has a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    for a convention reason. His removal in  consequence  of  the  decision
    would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.



DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on Refugee Convention grounds.


Signed   M. Canavan        Date 27 July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan






____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email


Annex
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08070/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 16 January 2020                   |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD UIST
              (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     M K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. We find that it is appropriate to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V. Adams, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision  dated  31/07/2019  to
    refuse  a  protection  and  human  rights   claim   following   further
    submissions made on 09/05/2019.

2.   The appellant relied on three key sets of  documents  as  part  of  the
    fresh claim.  The first was a document which purported to be  a  threat
    from the Taliban to the appellant.  The  translation  gave  a  date  of
    06/03/1440. The date was then translated to 15/11/2018 in the Gregorian
    calendar.  The second document was a "Public Announcement"  purportedly
    issued by the Taliban.  The  document  was  undated.  It  included  two
    identical photos of the appellant. The copy of  the  document  and  the
    photograph in the bundle are somewhat obscured and unclear.  The  third
    set of documents the appellant relied on was a  series  of  photographs
    that were said to be of the family home, which was destroyed.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 25/09/2019.  The judge made several  findings
    relating to the credibility of the appellant's account and rejected the
    claim.  The first point was that the appellant  failed  to  provide  an
    adequate explanation for the error in  the  date  given  on  the  first
    document.  The appellant's evidence was that "HJ", who was a witness at
    the hearing, visited Afghanistan for a family function from  July  2018
    until September 2018. While she was there her brother-in-law was  given
    some documents by a gentleman called "SW" who the appellant said was  a
    neighbour from  his  village.   The  judge  found  that  there  was  no
    explanation for the discrepancy in the date of the document  which  was
    said to have been handed to HJ at a time that predated the date on  the
    document.  We find that it was open to the judge  to  make  an  adverse
    inference because the appellant provided no adequate explanation either
    in his witness statement nor at the hearing to explain such an  obvious
    discrepancy.

4.   The second point related to the plausibility of the account of how  the
    appellant received the documents.  HJ attended  the  hearing  and  gave
    evidence, but the judge was not satisfied that the rather tenuous chain
    of events that she described was plausible.  At [41]  the  judge  found
    that the whole account of how the documents were brought to the UK  was
    "very suspicious".  We note that the judge failed to consider the  fact
    that the appellant had explained  who  SW  was  in  his  statement.  He
    claimed that SW was a neighbour from the village.  However, even if the
    judge had taken that point into account it would undoubtedly been  open
    to him to find that the account was, even then, inherently implausible,
    or at the very least undermined the appellant's claim that he  was  not
    in contact with anybody in Afghanistan.  It is difficult to see how SW,
    even if he had been handed the documents by  members  of  the  Taliban,
    would have known to bring the documents to the family gathering to give
    it to HJ's brother-in-law, to hand to her, to hand to the appellant  in
    the UK unless there had been some communication between  the  appellant
    or his family members and people in his village. For  this  reason,  we
    find that even if the judge had  considered  the  full  explanation  he
    would have come to the same conclusion about the implausibility of  the
    account.

5.   The third point raised in the grounds relates to the  judge's  findings
    regarding the public announcement letter produced by the appellant.  Mr
    Clarke accepted that it is difficult to see how the  judge  could  have
    justified making his own assessment of the photograph  on  the  letter.
    Not only is the photograph rather grainy, it is notoriously  unreliable
    to assess a person's age solely on  their  appearance.  However,  there
    would be a legitimate credibility issue to raise about how the  Taliban
    could have obtained the photograph.  It seems to be accepted  that  the
    appellant was not asked about this at the hearing. We accept that  this
    is an issue that should have been  put  to  the  appellant  but  having
    appealed the decision complaining that there was unfairness, no witness
    statement has been produced to  show  what  explanation  the  appellant
    might have given had he been asked about this matter in order to assess
    whether it would have made any material difference to  the  credibility
    of his claim.

6.   When we take the credibility findings as a whole,  which  included  the
    judge's consideration of previous negative credibility findings made by
    the First-tier Tribunal, we consider that this last point,  when  taken
    alone and in the absence of any plausible explanation to  show  how  or
    why it might have made a difference to the outcome, is insufficient  to
    undermine the overall thrust of the judge's credibility findings.   The
    judge heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  HJ  and  the  appellant's
    brother. Despite that evidence it seems clear that the  judge  did  not
    find the explanations  about  the  documents  to  be  credible.   Those
    findings were open to him to  make  on  the  evidence.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal's findings relating to the credibility of the account of  more
    recent threats from the Taliban shall stand.

7.   In relation to the second ground, the appellant argued that  the  judge
    failed to consider the country guidance relating to conditions in Kabul
    properly.  At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  the  Tribunal  raised  an
    associated point. Having looked at some of the evidence relating to the
    conditions in the appellant's  home  area  of  Nangarhar  province,  Mr
    Clarke conceded that there was an error of law in the judge's  approach
    to risk on return.  At [43] the judge found that the account  given  by
    the appellant of the way in which he received  the  documents  and  the
    threats from the Taliban was not credible.  He rejected the evidence of
    all three witnesses and found that the fresh claim had been  engineered
    by the appellant.  At the end of the paragraph he concluded:

         "I find that the appellant would not be at risk of  persecution  or
         ill-treatment in his local area and therefore  there  would  be  no
         need for him to relocate to the capital Kabul or anywhere else.  He
         did not claim to be at risk from the authorities and only from  the
         Taliban, non-state actors.  He could  safely  return  to  his  home
         area".

8.   Mr Clarke accepts that there is evidence to show that Nangarhar is  one
    of the provinces where there  is  a  much  higher  level  of  insurgent
    activity and reported security incidents.  He did not go so far  as  to
    concede that there would be a risk on return there,  but  the  evidence
    suggested that the judge did at least need to consider  the  conditions
    in Nangarhar province regardless of whether  he  accepted  the  central
    account given by the appellant: we agree.

9.   Having found that there was no risk in the appellant's home  area,  the
    judge did not go on to consider the  next  relevant  issue,  which  was
    whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant  to  relocate  to
    Kabul.  We doubt that the judge was right to say at [34] that he should
    apply the country guidance in  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118 in the absence of  a  fresh  decision  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal. It was clear that the Court of Appeal set aside at least  one
    part of the Upper Tribunal's country guidance decision.  The  remaining
    guidance would need to be considered with that in mind and in light  of
    any up to date evidence. However, we need not go into that point in any
    detail given that there is a concession that  the  judge's  failure  to
    consider risk on return in his home area amounted to  an  error.  As  a
    matter of fact, the judge did not go on to  consider  whether  internal
    relocation would be unreasonable or unduly harsh.

10.  We conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of an error on a point of law. The judge's  findings  relating  to  the
    credibility of the appellant's most recent account  are  preserved  but
    the Upper Tribunal will remake the decision in relation to the level of
    general risk in Nangarhar province and any relevant issues relating  to
    internal relocation.



DIRECTIONS

11.  The Upper Tribunal has recently reheard AS (Afghanistan).  The  resumed
    hearing will be listed after the Upper Tribunal  has  published  up  to
    date country guidance.

12.  The parties are granted permission to serve any  up  to  date  evidence
    relied upon at least 14 days before the next hearing.

13.  Given the general focus of the remaking  it  is  anticipated  that  the
    appellant will not need  to  give  evidence  unless  new  issues  arise
    relating to his personal circumstances which might be relevant  to  the
    general  conditions  in  Nangarhar  or  the  availability  of  internal
    relocation to Kabul.

14.  If it is thought  necessary  to  call  the  appellant  an  up  to  date
    statement should be served at least 14 days before the next hearing and
    at the same time the Upper Tribunal should be notified if the appellant
    requires the assistance of an interpreter.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
    of law

The decision will be remade at a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal


Signed   M.Canavan                  Date  13 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
