
;[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08369/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th September 2017                         |On 13th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     MI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Thornhill of Thornhill Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, HOPO

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Moore made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 4th January 2017.

 2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on [ ] 1980. He arrived
    in the UK in December 2008 and claimed asylum.   The  claim  was  later
    withdrawn and the appellant absconded.  He made further submissions  on
    15th June 2012 which resulted in the asylum decision, dated 1st  August
    2016, which was the subject of the appeal before the Immigration Judge.

 3. The appellant claimed that he worked for the army in Kandahar  but  was
    suspected by them of joining the Taliban, and was sent  to  prison  but
    escaped during a Taliban attack.  He feared  a  return  to  Afghanistan
    because he had escaped from army custody there  and  also  because  the
    Taliban had threatened him because of his work with NATO forces.   They
    had issued threatening letters to him.  His mother and brother were now
    forced to live in Pakistan.

 4. The judge, in  a  lengthy  determination,  said  that  the  appellant's
    account was vague, inconsistent, implausible,  lacking  in  credibility
    and generally unreliable.  However, as Mrs Pettersen  acknowledged,  it
    is very difficult to see from this determination what the reasons  were
    for the judge concluding as he did.

 5. The judge clearly had concerns about the way  in  which  the  appellant
    came to produce the documents which he relied on, namely  the  original
    Taliban threatening letters, but did not engage with  the  contents  of
    those letters.  Nor did he make any reference to the documents provided
    by the appellant in support of his claim to have  been  in  the  Afghan
    armed forces.  No conclusions were reached in relation to  whether  the
    oral  evidence given by the appellant's witness was credible or not.

 6. Clearly the appellant will have to address the issue of  whether,  even
    if true, the historic events upon which he seeks to  rely  would  place
    him at risk on return to Afghanistan now.   Be  that  as  it  may,  all
    parties agreed that the decision would  have  to  be  reheard  so  that
    credibility findings can be remade.

 7. The original judge erred in law because he  did  not  provide  adequate
    reasons for his conclusions.  The decision is set aside.  It will  have
    to  be  reheard  before  an  Immigration  Judge.   The  appellant   has
    apparently moved to Blackburn and accordingly the appeal is transferred
    to be heard at the Manchester Hearing Centre.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 11 September 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
