
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08639/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On                   14th                   September                   2017
                 On 19th September 2017

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                               MR MUHAMMAD [A]
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Mair (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                             DECISION & REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lawrence promulgated on the 13th March 2017,  in  which
      he dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.

   2. It was the Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that
      he was entitled to asylum on the basis of him  being  a  member  of  a
      particular social group, being a gay man in Pakistan, who would be  at
      risk of persecution upon return.  It is his case that he  had  engaged
      in homosexual activities whilst in Pakistan and on one  occasion  been
      discovered whilst having homosexual sex by his father, and on  another
      occasion whilst at college between 2007 and 2008, when  he  said  that
      someone had climbed a wall and videoed him, having gay sex.  It is his
      case that although he had married a woman Mrs Akhtar in the UK, he had
      had a male homosexual relationship with Mr Nawaz and had  been  caught
      having sex with Mr Nawaz by his wife.

   3. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued in the first ground that the
      Judge failed to take account of material evidence in respect  of  text
      messages between the Appellant and his partner  Mr  Nawaz  which  were
      said to be of a sexual nature, photographs of the  Appellant  at  LGBT
      events, a letter from Adrian Palmers the convenor of the Rochdale  Gay
      and Bisexual Asian Men's Support Group, and  a  letter  from  Mohammad
      Siddique the Appellant's brother-in-law who was said to attest to  the
      breakup of the Appellant's marriage and  his  homosexuality,  together
      with a letter from Peter Cardew, a psychosexual  therapist  confirming
      the Appellant had sought  help  for  erectile  dysfunction  which  was
      situational in that it only occurred with a female partner whereas the
      Appellant could engage in anal intercourse with men.  It  was  further
      argued the judge  had  not  properly  taken  account  of  the  witness
      evidence of 3 witnesses who attended the Tribunal and gave evidence as
      to the Appellant's homosexuality.

   4. Within the second ground of appeal it was argued that the judge  erred
      in finding that it was implausible that someone would climb up a  wall
      to video record a sexual act, take photographs, develop  it  and  then
      put them into the community, whilst the Appellant was in  the  act  of
      sex and that the judge failed to take account of the fact  that  if  a
      mobile phone was used to  produce  the  videos  and  photographs,  the
      digital images could be shown instantaneously and would not need to be
      "developed".

   5. Within the third ground it is argued that the judge erred  in  finding
      the Appellant's ignorance as to the criminal status  in  homosexuality
      detracted from his credibility and that his knowledge of  the  law  in
      Pakistan should be distinct  from  an  assessment  of  the  homosexual
      encounters.

   6.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Gillespie on the 4th April 2017, who found that the Grounds of  Appeal
      were arguable.

   7. In the appeal hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal, Mr  McVeety  on
      behalf of the Respondent conceded  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lawrence  did  contain  material  errors  of  law.   He
      conceded that the judge at [9] when finding that  it  was  implausible
      that someone would climb a wall to video record  a  sexual  act,  take
      photographs, develop them and put them into the community  whilst  the
      Appellant was in the act of sex, appears to  have  misinterpreted  the
      Appellant's account and found that the photographs  and  videos  would
      need to be developed, and that in the modern age, cameras can  produce
      videos and photographs instantaneously on a digital mobile phone. Miss
      McVeety conceded that the judge's misinterpretation as to the basis of
      the case did amount to a material error of law.  He also conceded that
      the judge had not taken into account the  evidence  summarised  within
      the Grounds of Appeal prepared by Miss Mair.  This again  he  conceded
      was a material error of law.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   8. In light of the concessions made  by  Mr  McVeety  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent, I do find that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision
      does contain material errors of law, both at [9] when the judge  seems
      to assumed that photographs or videos  would  need  to  be  developed,
      before being shown to the community, whereas in fact through  the  use
      of a digital device such as a mobile phone, videos and photographs can
      be taken and shown instantaneously.

   9.  I further find that as conceded by Mr McVeety, that the Learned First-
      tier Tribunal Judge has not specifically mentioned within his decision
      the phone messages between the Appellant and Mr Nawaz who was said  to
      be his partner in the UK with whom he lived, the letter for Mr Palmers
      the Convenor of the Rochdale Gay  and  Bisexual  Asian  Men's  Support
      Group, the letter from Mohammad Siddique the  Appellant's  brother-in-
      law, the letter from Peter  Cardew,  a  psychosexual  therapist,  when
      making his findings. Further, although at [23] the  judge  found  that
      "The other 2 witnesses gave evidence  to  the  effect  that  in  their
      opinion the Appellant is gay.  Shahzad has  dropped  him  off  at  gay
      clubs. Attendance at gay clubs or being  members  of  LGBT  groups  or
      photographs taken with other men does not make that man gay."  However
      I do find that the judge has not fully or adequately engaged with  the
      actual evidence given by those witnesses.

  10. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence, as  considered  by
      Mr McVeety, does contain material errors of law and is  therefore  set
      aside.

  11. Given the amount of fact finding that will need to be made given  that
      in my judgement the decision needs to be made again in  its  entirety,
      as agreed by both legal representatives, it is  appropriate  that  the
      case be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  before
      any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Lawrence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lawrence  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside.

The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  before
any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
Lawrence.

I make no order in respect of anonymity, no such order  having  been  sought
before me.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 14th September 2017
