
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/08289/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 April 2019                         |On 08 May 2019                  |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   MR Z.D.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Candola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Foot of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The respondent is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  20  May
    2000. I shall however for sake of convenience refer to the  parties  as
    they were referred to, at the First-tier Tribunal.


 2. The appellant appealed against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chapman from the decision of  the  respondent  of  19  June  2010
    refusing his application for asylum and humanitarian protection in  the
    United Kingdom.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
    in a decision dated 12 December 2018 stating that it is  arguable  that
    the Judge has not taken into account recent jurisprudence  particularly
    the case of Amin CEO/2508/2017 which found that Kirkuk was no longer  a
    contested area and therefore it is arguable that the Judge was wrong to
    find at paragraph 60 that the situation in the  appellant's  home  area
    had not improved.


         First-Tier Tribunal's Findings


 4. The First-tier Tribunal's findings were as follows which  I  summarise.
    The Judge allowed the appellant's appeal  humanitarian  protection  and
    stated that the appellant was at a very young age at  the  time  events
    that he claimed occurred in Iraq which was  in  2015.  The  appellant's
    account is relatively simple, straightforward and unembellished account
    of the incident. The incident was important enough to both his  parents
    to that the family's departure from  the  country  was  necessary.  The
    Judge accepted the appellant's account and found his evidence  credible
    that he was separated from his family in Turkey.


 5. The Judge found that it is highly unlikely that the appellant  will  be
    personally targeted by the Daesh  on  his  return  to  Afghanistan  and
    therefore it was unnecessary to investigate in much detail whether  the
    appellant is at risk from them. The Judge accepted that  the  appellant
    came from the Kirkuk area in Afghanistan which he found is a  contested
    area.


 6. The respondent assertion that the  situation  in  Kirkuk  has  improved
    since the country guidance case was  promulgated.  The  Judge  accepted
    that there is some evidence to support the  assertion  that  Daesh  has
    suffered defeat in Iraq, save for pockets of resistance and insurgency.
    However, the Judge  stated  the  appellant  has  produced  considerable
    evidence which suggest that the situation is not as  clear-cut  as  the
    respondent asserts. There is considerable  objective  evidence  to  the
    effect that there is Daesh presence in Kirkuk, and, in particular,  the
    appellant's country expert of Dr Fattah confirms this to be the case.


 7. The realised stated that having considered Dr Fattah's  report  and  he
    was not satisfied that  the  situation  in  the  appellant's  area  has
    improved to the extent asserted by the respondent. The Judge was of the
    view that he can depart from the  country  guidance  case  because  the
    respondent has not produced  evidence  which  amounts  to  very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence justifying a departure. The  Judge
    followed the country  guidance  cases  and  found  that  the  appellant
    remains at risk of indiscriminate violence in his home area of Kirkuk.


 8. Having found that the appellant cannot return to Kirkuk  the  issue  in
    the appeal is whether the appellant can relocate elsewhere in Iraq. The
    Judge found that the appellant's profile is that he is a Kurdish Sorani
    and Sunni Muslim. He has no family in Iraq he can turn to for  support,
    accommodation or other assistance, for example, obtaining documentation
    because he has no documentation.  The  Judge  further  found  that  the
    appellant was more vulnerable than others of his  age  because  of  the
    lack of family support. The Judge also found that the appellant  has  a
    tendency towards depression would affect him on return. The Judge found
    that relocation to Baghdad would be unduly harsh for the reasons  given
    by the expert Dr Fattah. Stated that relocation to the IKR may still be
    more difficult without a valid passport, CSID and family support.


 9. The Judge allowed the appellant's appeal and found that he will  be  at
    article 15 (c) risk in his home area of Kirkuk and also that he  cannot
    internally relocate elsewhere in his own country. The Judge stated that
    the appeal succeeds on protection grounds succeeds.


         The Grounds of Appeal


10. The grounds of appeal state the following which I summarise. The  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal based on risk
    on return to his home area of Kirkuk. In doing so, it is submitted that
    the Judge has overlooked the relevant case law and therefore arrived at
    a flawed conclusion.


11. At paragraph 60 the  Judge  concluded  that  Kirkuk  has  not  improved
    sufficiently to allow departure from the 2015 case of AA Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and that the appellant remains at 15(c) risk should
    he return there. The Judge has failed to take into account the case  of
    Amin v SSHD [2017] EW HC 2417 (admin) which concluded at  paragraph  63
    that as far as the position in Kirkuk is concerned, and the requirement
    for the claimant to return there to obtain a CSI D,  the  Secretary  of
    State was entitled to take the  realities  on  the  ground  there  into
    account. Kirkuk is no longer a contested area.


12. It was argued that the country guidance cases  must  give  way  to  the
    realities on the ground, a point recognised by the Court of  Appeal  in
    SG Iraq v  the Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 940 at paragraph 47. It was argued that the  position  has  changed
    from the time AA was promulgated.


13. The grounds of appeal further assert that the appellant is now an adult
    and has shown evidence that he is capable of independent living. Having
    had Iraqi identity documents in the past he will be able to  return  to
    Kirkuk  where  he  has  spent  the  majority  of  his  life  and   seek
    replacements. The Judge found at paragraph 55 the appellant is  not  at
    risk from Daesh, and while the appellant does not appear to  have  made
    efforts to contact his family as yet, the option remains open to him.

         The hearing

14. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge. Mr Tarlow on behalf of the Secretary of  State  stated  that  at
    paragraph 60 there is an error of law as set  out  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal. Mr McCarthy on behalf of the appellant stated that the judicial
    review decision of Amin is not enough for the Judge  to  conclude  that
    Kirkuk is no longer  a  contested  area.  The  Judge  considered  clear
    country guidance  to  the  contrary  view.  The  Home  Office's  policy
    guidance states that one can only depart from the country guidance case
    where there are strong grounds and cogent evidence to do so.  The  case
    of Amin cannot in itself to do that.


15. Mr Tarlow in response stated that AA was promulgated in  2015  and  the
    decision in Amin was in September 2017 and that the situation in Kirkuk
    has changed dramatically.


         Discussion and findings as to whether there is an error of law


16. I have considered the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  with  care.
    The Judge considered all the evidence  carefully  and  found  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk from Daesh on his return to Afghanistan.
    He however relied on  the  country  guidance  case  to  find  that  the
    appellant cannot return to his home area of Kirkuk because the  country
    guidance case states that Kirkuk is  a  contested  area  and  that  the
    appellant  would  be  at  15C  risk  on  his  return  to  Kirkuk.   The
    respondent's position is that Kirkuk is no longer a contested area  and
    that the country guidance case was promulgated in 2015 and the case  of
    Amin was promulgated in 2017 which found that Kirkuk  is  no  longer  a
    contested area. The respondent states that this further evidence should
    have been taken into account for the Judge to depart from  the  country
    guidance case.


17. Therefore, the nub of the appeal  is  whether  the  Judge  should  have
    considered this  more  recent  evidence  which  postdates  the  country
    guidance cases. At the hearing I was asked by the  appellant's  counsel
    that I should not rely on Amin to find  that  Kirkuk  is  no  longer  a
    contested area because firstly, it was a judicial review case that  was
    decided  principally  on  the  availability  of  an   internal   flight
    alternative, rather than on  detailed  analysis  of  the  situation  in
    Kirkuk. Secondly  it  was  also  submitted  to  me  that  there  is  no
    indication in the decision as to the nature of the  objective  evidence
    that was before the Judge before he made the decision that Kirkuk is no
    longer a contested area. It was submitted  that  paragraph  63  of  the
    decision Amin is very short and does not have a  detailed  analysis  as
    given in a country guidance case of AA which found  that  Kirkuk  is  a
    contested area. It was also argued that  Amin  is  the  subject  of  an
    appeal to the Court of Appeal and a decision is awaited.  I  was  asked
    that until such time as  the  Upper  Tribunal  promulgates  a  new  the
    country guidance, Kirkuk should be regarded as  a  contested  area  and
    removing the appellant to Kirkuk would be a  clear  breach  of  Article
    15(c).


18. Therefore, what I need to decide is whether the Judge made  a  material
    error of law in his analysis as to whether the  evidence  presented  by
    the respondent was  of  sufficient  cogency  to  displace  the  country
    guidance case for a finding to that Kirkuk is  no  longer  a  contested
    area.


19. The Presidents Guidance states that a country guidance  stands  as  the
    authoritative assessment of the state of play in the country or  region
    unless there is cogent evidence to  show  that  the  situation  on  the
    ground has changed such as departure from the country guidance case  is
    merited. In the case of FA (Libya: art 15(c)) Libya CG [2016] UKUT  413
    (IAC) it was stated that the Judge must consider whether  the  evidence
    before him was sufficient to require him to  depart,  in  whole  or  in
    part, from the Tribunal's published guidance.


20. I do not agree with the  submissions  of  Miss  McCarthy  that  because
    paragraph 63 of Amin is very  short  and  does  not  set  out  all  the
    objective  evidence  considered  by  the  Judge  in  arriving  at   his
    conclusion that Kirkuk is no longer a contested area, does not merit  a
    departure. The Judge in Amin made a clear finding  that  Kirkuk  is  no
    longer a contested area. This finding must have been made by the  Judge
    in Amin having considered relevant evidence, even if it was not set out
    in detail in the decision. The Judge  decided  that  the  Secretary  of
    State was entitled to take the position that Kirkuk  was  no  longer  a
    contested area and that there was nothing to suggest that the  claimant
    could not obtain a CSID from Kirkuk's Civil Affairs  Office.  11  April
    2019


21. I therefore find that the Judge materially erred in law when he did not
    determine the appellant's appeal correctly given the passage  of  time,
    and events since the evidence  considered  in  the  Guidance  case  was
    provided in respect of Kirkuk. The  Judge  should  have,  at  the  very
    minimum, applied the country  guidance  case  with  caution  given  the
    evidence provided of the change of circumstances in Kirkuk. The  First-
    tier Tribunal therefore needs  to  undertake  a  new  analysis  of  the
    Article 15(c) risk, in a new decision.


22. I therefore set aside the decision  of  Judge  Chapman  and  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be placed before any  Judge  other
    than Judge Chapman to determine  whether  returning  the  appellant  to
    Kirkuk would expose him to a risk from  which  Article  15(c)  protects
    him.

   Decision


   The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed
   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal


    Signed by    Dated this 9th day of April 2019

    A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

     Ms S Chana

