
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08347/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 April 2021                      |On 28 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     K T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Daykin, Stuart & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 21 August 2019 to refuse his asylum and protection claim.   His
    appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Bonavero in a decision promulgated on 28 October 2019.  For the reasons
    set out in the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Gill promulgated on  15
    October 2020, that decision was set aside.  Judge Gill found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  had  given  inadequate  reasons  for  the  adverse
    credibility assessment but found that the grounds had  not  established
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in concluding that  the  appellant's
    Article 8 family and private life claims fell to  be  dismissed.   This
    appeal is therefore limited to remaking the asylum claim,  humanitarian
    protection claim and related Article 3 claim.

The Appellant's Case

 2. The appellant was born in 1992 and is a citizen of  Turkey  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity.  The appellant was born in  Sak�ag�z�,  Nurda?i,  Gaziantep.
    He graduated from Nurda?i Lise in June 2009 and then started to work as
    a farmer to help his parents.  The Turkish Gendarme came to the village
    regularly, making accusations that the villagers supported the PKK.

 3. The appellant had joined the HDP in 2013  and  helped  with  activities
    after that.  He was involved in election campaigning in 2015 and  in  a
    Constitution referendum in April 2017.

 4. On 27 July 2017 the appellant was arrested by an  antiterror  team  who
    alleged that he had participated in the PKK and that he  had  published
    PKK related propaganda.  He was detained, ill-treated  and  questioned.
    His mobile phone was taken and it  was  discovered  that  he  had  made
    social media postings relating to the HDP which led to  accusations  of
    being a participant in the PKK.  He denied that  but  was  released  on
    29 July 2017 owing to a lack of evidential information relating to the
    allegation.

 5. The appellant was arrested again on 20 March 2018 and  was  accused  of
    participating again in similar activities.  He said that  he  had  only
    participated in Newroz.  He was again tortured and  was  told  that  he
    would be released if he  supplied  the  police  with  information.   He
    accepted the offer having no alternative and he was ordered  to  report
    to  the  police  station  in  Nurdagi  every  Thursday  to  give   over
    information, it being said to him that if he did not accept their  deal
    he would be arrested.  He was forced to sign a blank paper before being
    released on 22 March 2018.

 6. The appellant's brother Ali was also released and tortured but  he  was
    not asked to  supply  information.   The  appellant's  father  obtained
    medication from the local pharmacy on his behalf to treat his  bruising
    and swellings.

 7. He decided that he would have to leave Turkey and  travelled  first  to
    Istanbul on 25 March 2018 where he stayed with close relatives.  After
    a week the police came to the house in  Nurdagi  asking  for  him,  and
    arresting his brother Ali.  They were asked for his medication  and  he
    declined to do so.  The appellant's relatives have  helped  him  escape
    from Turkey and he felt he had no alternative and he  left  on  1  June
    2018 concealed in a lorry.  He entered the United  Kingdom  on  8  June
    2018 and got in contact with his cousin.

 8. The appellant says he would  be  arrested,  detained  and  tortured  on
    suspicion of being part of the PKK if returned to Turkey and  since  he
    had left his hometown the officers had come to  his  house  five  times
    looking for him.  Although the police said he had gone  to  the  United
    Kingdom, the police did not believe it and believed that he had  joined
    the PKK.

 9. Since arriving in the United Kingdom the appellant met his partner whom
    he married in a religious ceremony.  They have since had a child.

10. The appellant continues  to  suffer  from  psychological  problems  and
    mental health problems and has been referred for psychological therapy.



11. It is of note that the appellant underwent a screening interview on  27
    June 2019.  He also underwent a substantive interview on  8  July  2019
    and a supplementary interview later that month, the  appellant  stating
    that there had been difficulties at the interview.

The Respondent's Case

12. The respondent accepted the appellant's nationality, given that he  had
    a Turkish passport but did not accept that he was Kurdish, noting  that
    he had failed to give any detail or insight indicative to his ethnicity
    but that even  were  he  Kurdish,  the  restriction  on  Kurds  and  in
    particular the Kurdish language had occurred in Turkey.  The respondent
    did not accept that he was a member of HDP,  given  inconsistencies  in
    his account and, as she rejected him being Kurdish, did not accept that
    he was arrested because he had expressed  his  opinion  in  support  of
    Kurds on Facebook.   She  considered  also  that  there  were  internal
    inconsistencies in his account as to what information  he  had  shared,
    relating also that it was no longer illegal to speak Kurdish in Turkey.



13. The respondent also noted  numerous  internal  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's account as to whether or not he had  had  problems  at  the
    protests he had attended and as to his role at the protests.  She noted
    also that the appellant's account of the injuries he had  suffered  was
    inconsistent and it lacked credibility that those who had inflicted the
    injuries on him would have taken him to a doctor.

14. The respondent did not accept that there was an arrest warrant out  for
    the appellant in Turkey considering that his explanations in  interview
    were wholly speculative to the extent that  he  did  not  know  if  the
    claimed warrant had his details on it or if it  exists.   She  did  not
    accept, in light of the background evidence, his claim that the Turkish
    authorities did not issue arrest warrants.  She did  not,  despite  the
    Rule 35 report, consider that the appellant's account of  ill-treatment
    was made out.

15. The respondent considered also that his failure to claim  asylum  until
    21 June 2019, having been  arrested  on  14  June  2019  when  detected
    working illegally, cast doubt on his credibility.

16. The respondent did not consider that the appellant had  been  compelled
    to complete his military service, noting his claim to have deferred  it
    and that he would be able to pay a fee to avoid having  to  serve.   He
    had also said that he was willing to do so.  Noting  in  any  event  he
    would be exempted owing to his mental health.




    The hearing on 9 April

17. I heard evidence from  the  appellant  who  gave  evidence  through  an
    interpreter.  I also had before me bundles prepared by both parties.

18. The appellant adopted his witness statement adding that he had obtained
    the copy of the HDP Party membership form from  his  elder  brother  in
    Turkey who had sent it to him via WhatsApp.  He said  his  brother  had
    obtained it as it was in the possession of his friend and he had  asked
    the friend to give it to his brother.  He said the friend  also  had  a
    copy of it as he too was a member of  HDP.   He  said  that  the  draft
    evasion report had been sent to his family and again had been  sent  to
    him via WhatsApp, as had the prescriptions obtained when his father got
    him medicine.

19. In  cross-examination  the  appellant  said  that  his  mother's  first
    language is Kurdish and his  father  is  Turkish.   He  said  sometimes
    Kurdish was spoken at home and sometimes Turkish and that when  he  was
    very young not only he did not recall well, his mother and  her  friend
    spoke Kurdish but he was not permitted but he was forbidden to  do  so.
    Asked why as Kurds they do not speak Kurdish if they are proud of their
    heritage, he said that he was proud  of  being  Kurdish  and  that  the
    culture, food, etc. was taught to them but because his father's Kurdish
    was not too good, his mother did not speak to them in Kurdish much  and
    it was forbidden in school even to say that you are Kurdish.   He  said
    he is proud to be Kurdish.

20. The appellant said he had not really had the chance to learn Kurdish in
    the  United  Kingdom  as  the  community  here  says  it  is   somewhat
    controversial.  It was put to him that the Home Office case is that  if
    he claims to be Kurdish it was not likely that he  would  speak  little
    Kurdish.  He said that in Turkey there is such a situation that you are
    not allowed to speak Kurdish but he wanted to learn it and to teach  it
    to his child.  He said in the context of  Turkey  it  is  difficult  to
    speak Kurdish.

21. It was put to him that in his interview he says his mother  is  Kurdish
    and his father is Kurdish and that she had taught him Kurdish.  He said
    "no" and that his father does not really speak Kurdish  and  he  got  a
    little from both of his parents.  Asked  to  explain  why  between  the
    first and second interview he had said he had  attended  two  protests,
    then three protests he said that the first was  for  the  workers  that
    came over from Syria.

22. The appellant said that he had posted material on Facebook  in  support
    of HDP.  As to why there were no printouts to show this, he  said  that
    he could have done so but because that he was arrested  because  of  it
    and, when he was arrested, his profile was deleted and he was told that
    he would not be able to post anything  again.   He  said  that  he  had
    mentioned this before.

23. The appellant confirmed he had been arrested twice in Turkey  but  said
    that there was no inconsistency between what he  had  said  as  to  the
    duration of both; he did not understand why it was said he was held for
    two days in the screening interview).

24. The appellant said that he had not left Turkey before and he  had  been
    going to continue to stand up for rights.

25. As regards the second arrest, that he had been cleared, that the  first
    arrest was for two nights and three days, same for the second.  He said
    that he had had three interviews, that the  third  interview  had  been
    caused by the interpreter's mistake, that he had been  consistent.   It
    was put to him that when spoken to by a doctor (see Rule 35 report)  he
    had been electrocuted in detention.  He said yes and he had been beaten
    and his nose is still broken.  As to why he had not mentioned this when
    questioned about his injuries he said that he had always been  subjcted
    to every sort of torture, his arms, nose and foot broken.  It  was  put
    to him he had not mentioned about the nose being broken and it was done
    in both the first and second detention.  He said that he had spoken  to
    his GP about this and this was documented.

26. The appellant said he had not had much contact with his family since he
    has left but his mother was in contact with his wife.   They  had  last
    been in contact two days ago.  The appellant was then asked  about  his
    arrests, about the arrest warrant.  (The interview 2, question 134  and
    135).  He notes a confusion about this but he said that after the first
    arrest he was let go as there was not enough evidence and that in  2018
    the house was raided even without there being an arrest warrant.

27. Asked how many times the house had been raided in Turkey he  said  that
    it had been raided twice and they arrested him and that after  he  came
    here he found he had been raided  five  times,  thus  more  than  seven
    times.  Asked as to approximate dates he said that the rest were  after
    his arrest and he did not know the exact date but he knew it  was  over
    five times.  He said that there were raids in 2020 but he was not  sure
    about 2021.  He said that there was raids in 2019 and  three  times  in
    2020 and he is in contact with his older brother.  He did not know  why
    this was not contained in his witness statement.  It  was  put  to  him
    that he had only mentioned five raids as at July 2019 and thus if there
    were three in 2020 that made a total of eight  raids,  not  seven.   He
    said he had said more than seven.

28. The appellant clarified that it was not his oldest brother who had been
    arrested and tortured and that he was not in contact with him.  He said
    that his family members did not know where he was either.

29. The appellant was asked to explain why the  draft  evader  notice  said
    that he had been captured.  He said that he  was  not  caught  and  the
    arrest was issued on 15 May 2018.  He said that the arrest warrant  was
    issued on 15 May 2018.

30. The  appellant  was  asked  about  the  second  substantive  interview,
    confirming  that  it  was  due  to  the  interpreter  not   translating
    everything that he had said during the first substantive interview.

31. The appellant said he was  not  involved  in  politics  in  the  United
    Kingdom as he did not know if there were many protests here and because
    of the pandemic he was not able to leave the house.  He says he did not
    know anyone really apart from his family.  He said he did not have time
    to conduct online protests as before  but  as  he  was  a  bit  subdued
    because of the pandemic and also because of his family looking after  a
    small child.

32. The appellant confirmed that he had not claimed asylum  until  arrested
    for working illegally and that was because he was scared that he  might
    be sent home.  He accepted he had cousins who had been granted  asylum.
    It was put to him that surely he would have discussed his problems with
    them and had asked for advice.  He acknowledged that and  said  he  was
    afraid after everything that happened that he was scared, was not ready
    and he was waiting to prepare himself.

33. The appellant confirms that he had not registered with a GP until  2019
    despite having problems when he arrived.  He also said that he  had  no
    money.

34. It was put to him that all the documents he had relied  upon  had  been
    sent via WhatsApp and were just copies.  He confirmed  that  and  could
    not explain why he had not asked for the hardcopies to be sent over.

35. In re-examination he was asked  if  there  had  ever  been  a  document
    ordering his arrest apart from on account of draft  evasion.   He  said
    there had never been a document issued but after he  was  released  and
    the second time a signature had been written on a blank piece of  paper
    and he was told that he could be arrested.

36. I then heard submissions.   Mr  Kotas  relied  on  the  refusal  letter
    submitting that it was significant that the appellant  does  not  speak
    much Kurdish and that there were discrepancies, in  that  he  had  said
    that his father does not really speak Kurdish,  yet  in  the  interview
    (Q187 to 193) that he had been taught by both.  He had only given quite
    minor details about the differences in culture and that  his  responses
    to Q76 and 77 were vague, there also being discrepancies with regard to
    questions at interview at 85 and 892, as well as 45 (third  interview).
    There was insufficient evidence of social media online but had only now
    been volunteered and that nothing in his  witness  statement  addresses
    the points raised by the Secretary of State.

37. Mr Kotas submitted further that there  were  discrepancies  as  to  the
    length of the appellant's detentions and as to how  he  had  been  ill-
    treated in Turkey.  He submitted that there had  been  exaggeration  in
    the evidence and that whilst some weight could be attached to the  Rule
    35 report  it  was  not  probative.   He  submitted  further  that  the
    appellant was changing his evidence about whether an arrest warrant had
    been issued and there was a discrepancy in the number of raids.  It was
    also of note that the appellant did  not  know  what  happened  to  his
    younger brother.

38. Mr Kotas submitted that no issue had been taken with the translation of
    the document relating to draft evasion, yet it said that  he  had  been
    captured in May 2018 which was entirely inconsistent with  the  account
    that he was in Istanbul  nor  had  this  been  mentioned  in  interview
    either.  It was submitted that little weight could be attached to  that
    or the other documents transmitted by WhatsApp.

39. Mr Kotas submitted that there was a serious delay in  this  case  which
    had not  been  properly  explained.   It  was  not  credible  that  the
    appellant's fear of being sent back  to  Turkey  explained  the  delay,
    given that his family  had  been  granted  asylum  and  he  would  have
    discussed it.

40. In response, Ms Daykin submitted that the appellant's account needed to
    be seen in the context of the CPIN Report.  She drew  my  attention  to
    the fact that the Turkish authorities the HDP and PKK as being one  and
    the same and that, following the 2016 attempted coup, there had been  a
    harsh reaction towards any perceived opposition.   She  submitted  that
    many HDP members had been detained, including the party leader and that
    counterterrorism was being used against HDP political figures, some  of
    whom had been removed from office and  replaced.   She  submitted  that
    there was a risk to HDP members and their families and that people  may
    be arrested, detained, beaten  then  released  if  the  family  members
    sought cannot be found.  She submitted further that there is a risk  of
    ill-treatment and torture after arrest and in police custody  and  that
    ordinary members come to the attention of the authorities by attendance
    at rallies or simply by being vocal.  Coming to the  attention  of  the
    authorities puts individuals at risk of persecution.

41. Ms Daykin submitted further that the  points  made  about  the  Kurdish
    language were not supported by the evidence.  She submitted further  it
    was unclear why the appellant's ethnicity was rejected and  that  there
    is still not full acceptance of Kurdish ethnicity.

42. Ms Daykin submitted further  the  appellant  had  explained  about  the
    Facebook posts and propaganda he had shared in his interview  and  that
    it had been deleted by the police.   That  was  consistent  with  known
    activities as was the assumption that because he had posted information
    about HDP, it was assumed that he had supported the PKK.  She submitted
    further that the appellant had been consistent and that note should  be
    taken of the fact that the first substantive interview had  had  to  be
    corrected  by  the  third  one,  that  he  had  effectively  been   re-
    interviewed.

43. Ms Daykin submitted that the appellant was at risk of being  identified
    even though he had acted at low level.

44. Turning to the issue of arrest warrants she  submitted  that  what  the
    appellant said today was correct and that it was not that  a  piece  of
    paper had been issued stating that he was to be arrested, but  that  he
    became aware that he was wanted when the police came to his house after
    he left for Istanbul and that there  has  appeared  to  be  significant
    confusion over language on this issue.

45. Ms Daykin  submitted  that  the  issues  taken  by  the  respondent  as
    regarding his speaking of Kurdish did not  identify  discrepancies  and
    that he had previously referred to his Facebook profile being  deleted.
    She submitted that any discrepancies as to the number of days spent  in
    detention were not sufficiently serious to undermine his  credibilities
    nor indeed were any apparent inconsistencies as  to  how  he  had  been
    treated in detention given that he had not been asked in  interview  to
    set out what injuries had happened in any detail.  She  submitted  that
    there was no real inconsistency in the number of raids  on  the  family
    house and that it was possible that the report  on  the  draft  evasion
    could mean that his details were captured.  He submitted  further  that
    it was clear that it was his fear that had prevented him from  claiming
    asylum.

The Law

46. It is for the appellant to show to the lower standard  that  he  is  at
    risk of persecution on return to Turkey.  In assessing his credibility,
    I have considered all the evidence in the round in  the  light  of  his
    diagnosed medical problems, the  Rule  35  report  indicating  possible
    torture. The letter from his GP dated 10 September 20219  indicates  he
    has been prescribed anti-depressants  and  presents  with  features  of
    depression and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder; no further  details  are
    given. I consider the appellant's account and the documentary  evidence
    in the light of the background evidence provided as part of the whole.

47. In assessing credibility,  I  note  that  UTJ  Gill  upheld  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bonavero's findings in relation to the Article 8  claim.
    Those do not, in my  view,  fall  to  be  considered  as  part  of  the
    assessment of credibility in respect of the protection claim,  not  was
    it submitted that I should do so.

48. In assessing the interview records of the appellant, I bear in mind the
    purpose of the screening interview is not for an appellant to  set  out
    the details of his claim and  I bear in mind also the dangers  inherent
    in attaching too much weight to discrepancies between what is  said  in
    the screening interview and later.  I also bear  in  mind  the  dangers
    inherent in  relying  on  apparent  discrepancies  between  substantive
    interviews, where, as here, the second substantive interview  was  held
    because of difficulties which had arisen during the  first  substantive
    interview.  In that context, I bear in mind that, the appellant did not
    say in his second substantive interview that there had been no problems
    with the interpreter. Accordingly, the answer  to  Mr  Kotas'  question
    premised on that basis, is not one to which  weight  can  be  attached.
    The appellant was asked if he had understood the questions and answered
    yes but that is not a confirmation of what he had said in  response  to
    the questions had been properly recorded.

49. Turning to the background evidence set out in the CPIN entitled "Report
    of the Home Office Fact-Finding Mission Turkey: Kurds, HDP and the PKK,
    conducted 17 June to 21 June  2019,  I  note  as  regards  the  Kurdish
    language that it is widely spoken throughout Turkey [6.3.1] and in  the
    past its use was supressed.  I accept it is not used officially [6.3.5]
    and that in some cities it is difficult to speak it in  public  without
    adverse consequences.  It is also  of  note  [6.5]  that  education  is
    conducted in Turkish and  that  would  have  been  the  case  when  the
    appellant was of school age.  I note that it is not in dispute that the
    appellant was educated to the age of 18 leaving school with  a  diploma
    from the Lise.

50.  No  evidence  was  put  before  me  that  the  appellant's   name   is
    characteristically Kurdish, either as this regards his family  name  or
    his first name.  Equally of note is the CPIN entitled Turkey: Kurds  of
    February 2020, in that, at 2.4.2 and at paragraph  4.4.3  it  indicates
    that not all those who identify as Kurdish have that  as  their  mother
    tongue.  It is evident that there is discrimination against  those  who
    speak Kurdish and that its use feeds into the suspicions of the Turkish
    authorities towards Kurds.  It is in that context not  definitive  that
    the appellant's inability to speak more than a little  Kurdish  is  not
    indicative that he is not Kurdish or does not identify as Kurdish.

51. In the screening interview, for  reasons  which  are  not  clear,  main
    language is recorded as "Kurdish" with "Turkish" crossed  out  yet  the
    interview (as were the  others)  were  carried  out  in  Turkish.    No
    submissions were made on that and I draw no inferences from that.

52. It is also evident both from the report on the Kurds at 6.2 and also  a
    fact-finding report at section 3 that the Turkish authorities do appear
    to conflate support for the HDP with support for  the  PKK  despite  as
    Amnesty International points out [3.1.6] that many HDP  supporters  and
    members are critical of the PKK  and  their  methods.   Similarly,  HDP
    members are targeted if they criticise  the  authorities  (see  section
    3.23 to 3.27). It  is  difficult  not  to  conclude  that  the  Turkish
    authorities use alleged support for the  PKK  as  a  means  to  justify
    suppression of the HDP and Kurdish identity.

53. In that context, the submission in the refusal letter at  page  9  that
    because it is no longer illegal to  speak  Kurdish  that  this  somehow
    indicates that the reason for his arrest is simplistic,  and  fails  to
    take into account the evidence that despite it no longer being  illegal
    to speak Kurdish, there  is  still  widespread  discrimination  against
    Kurds, and the assumption on the part of the authorities that those who
    identify as Kurdish or support HDP are supporters of the PKK.

54. That said, there is an inconsistency in the evidence as  to  from  whom
    the appellant learned a little  Turkish.  He  said  it  was  from  both
    parents in interview, but that his father was Turkish in evidence.

55. There are, as the respondent notes, differences between the appellant's
    account of his attending protests, but it is wrong to  state  they  are
    numerous. That said it is unclear whether or not  he  had  problems  at
    them; he does not describe any particular problems and it  is  of  note
    that he was arrested from home.

56. That said, it cannot be argued, as the respondent  seeks  to  do,  that
    being a low-level member without a specific  role,  makes  it  unlikely
    that he would be arrested;  the  background  evidence  as  noted  above
    paints a very different picture.

57. What the respondent refers to in the refusal letter as discrepancies at
    pages 8 and 9 are not. The appellant  stating  that  he  is  an  active
    member but does not have a specific duty is not an  inconsistency,  nor
    did the appellant say that he shared pro-PKK propaganda; he said he was
    accused of that. Nor is what he did say "alternative"; that necessarily
    implies either/or, and what the appellant said is cumulative.

58. I turn next to the alleged discrepancies in the appellant's account  of
    his arrests, whether there has been an arrest  warrant  issued  against
    him, and as to the number of raids on the family home.

59. In the screening interview, it is recorded that the appellant  said  he
    had been arrested twice: 27 July 2017 for 2 days;  20  March  2018  for
    three days. It is also recorded that he said an arrest warrant has been
    made for him. He also said he is a member of HDP having joined in 2013.



60. In the first substantive asylum interview, the appellant was asked  how
    many protests he had participated in. He said twice, the first being on
    7 or 8 October 2014, and that he has been arrested on 27 July  2017  at
    his house, and was released on 29 July 2017,  which  he  counted  as  2
    nights and three days. That is logical if you count inclusively and  if
    you were arrested early on day one, and released late on day three.

61. There are differences in the appellant's account of how he was  treated
    while in detention. I draw no  inferences  adverse  from  any  lack  of
    detail from what was said in his screening interview; he was not  asked
    for detail. [Q. 4.1]. Similarly, care must be taken  in  comparing  the
    substantive asylum interviews, given the problems with the first but  I
    note that he only mentions being beaten and having bruises. More detail
    is given in the second at [Q.7] but there is no  mention  of  the  nose
    being broken not in his witness statement. Nor is it said he was  given
    electric shocks/electrocuted although I do not  he  said  that  to  the
    doctor who undertook the Rule 35 report.

62. He also said that he had some injuries, and that the police took him to
    the doctor before releasing him, and that the police told him to  cover
    up, to hide bruises. Yet it is difficult to  understand  how  a  broken
    nose could have been hidden.

63. I find, however, that the appellant has embellished his account of ill-
    treatment. He has now said in oral evidence that his  nose  was  broken
    twice and that his arms and foot were broken too. There is  no  mention
    of that to the doctor, and no other relevant medical evidence. He  also
    now says he was subjected  to  every  sort  of  torture,  but  did  not
    specify. While I can accept that a victim of torture may  be  reluctant
    to discuss it, that is not said here, and does not explain  the  adding
    to the types and severity. This, I consider,  damages  his  credibility
    significantly.

64. The appellant also said he was arrested again on 20 March  2018,  again
    from his house, as was his brother Ali who was released after one  day;
    the appellant was released on 22 March 2018, on condition that  he  did
    not live there, asked him to be an informer and made him sign  a  blank
    piece of paper.  He has beaten with truncheons  and  had  bruises.   He
    also said that he first learned of the arrest warrant one week after 25
    March 2018 while he was in Istanbul when he  spoke  to  his  family  by
    phone; and, that he did  not  know  what  was  written  on  the  arrest
    warrant, and that they had  come  to  ask  for  him  while  he  was  in
    Istanbul. He then said [Q.172] he was not sure if there was  a  warrant
    or paper or not, and that all he knew  was  that  the  security  forces
    raided the family house.

65. In the second substantive interview, the appellant  gave  substantially
    more detail about what had happened on each occasion of his arrests and
    as to how he was taken to the doctor by the police.   He also explained
    that he had been posting pro-HDP material on  Facebook  under  his  own
    name. [Qs. 25 to 33] and had done so since 2013[ Q.39].  He  also  said
    [Q. 56] that he had been detained  for  2  nights,  three  days,  being
    released on 22 March 2018.

66. Asked about the arrest warrant [Q.133ff], he said it was issued when he
    was first detained, and when asked if he had seen it, said there is  no
    physical warrant, as the system in Turkey is different.

67.  The  appellant's  evidence  about  the  existence  of  a  warrant   is
    inconsistent even considering only the second substantive interview. At
    [Q.133] he confirmed that he had said in his screening  interview  that
    there was an arrest warrant out for him and [Q.134] that it  was  first
    issued on 27 July 2017. Only after being asked [Q.135] why he had  been
    released when there was an outstanding warrant, did he say that [Q 137]
    that there is not a physical warrant, and that the system in Turkey  is
    different [Q. 138].

68. At best, in the evidence before me, the appellant was in effect  saying
    that there was in place an order to arrest him rather than any specific
    arrest warrant.  I accept that his evidence before me only became clear
    after checking with the interpreter, but it does not follow that  there
    was any confusion in the second substantive interview. That  said,  his
    case is now that there is not an official warrant issued  against  him,
    but if so, that begs the question of why, when  asked,  he  said  there
    was, and the confusion over the dates.

69. This confusion indicates  to  me  that  the  appellant  had  sought  to
    strengthen his case by saying  that  an  arrest  warrant  exists,  then
    changed it when  confronted  with  the  obvious  inconsistency  in  him
    remaining in Turkey after it was issued. That, I find,  diminishes  his
    credibility.

70. With regard to the documentary evidence now provided, I note  that  the
    document entitled "Official Report on a Draft  Evader/Absentee  Capture
    Report 15 May 2018" is that

         "The   obligor   with    below    details    wanted    for    draft
         evading/absenteeism as per the records of the Ministry of  National
         Defence was captured on 15.5.2018 during an  investigation  carried
         out  by  the   Nurdagi   District   Gendarmerie   Command/Sakcagozu
         Gendarmerie Station Command Personnel".

71. As Mr Kotas submitted there is simply no explanation for this  although
    I do note that whilst  the  deliverer  and  person  present  (a  master
    sergeant) and a private in the gendarmerie bear signatures, there is no
    signature for the draft evader.  Nonetheless absent any  submission  to
    the contrary I conclude that this document indicates that the appellant
    has been captured when that is not part of his claim and indeed on  his
    evidence he  was  in  Istanbul  on  the  date  of  this  document.   No
    explanation has been put forward as to why an attempt has been made  to
    rely on a document which is inconsistent with the appellant's case  and
    I consider that reliance  on  it  damages  his  claim  and  credibility
    significantly.

72. I consider that the appellant's credibility is seriously damaged by his
    failure to claim asylum until over a year after he entered  the  United
    Kingdom.  Whilst I can accept  that  somebody  may  be  afraid  of  the
    consequences of claiming asylum, in this case  the  appellant  had  the
    positive example of the cousins whom he accepts applied for asylum  and
    were granted.  When this was put to him the appellant's answer was that
    he was preparing to claim yet that is not something he has said before.
     On the contrary,  in  his  written  statement  he  said  that  he  was
    psychologically in fear, was scared to speak and had no  idea  how  the
    claim was to be made as he was not guided at the time [11].  It is also
    of note that the appellant in this period in the United Kingdom entered
    into  a  serious  relationship  with  his  partner  and  also  obtained
    employment.  He was also able, as he accepts, to obtain a passport from
    the Turkish Consulate in London. These are not the actions of a  person
    in fear to such an extent that he would not claim asylum.

73. I  do,  however,  accept  that  the  appellant  has  demonstrated  some
    knowledge of HDP and how the party has done in elections.  He  is  also
    aware of demonstrations, but much if not all of what he has said is  in
    the public domain. Following the fortunes of HDP and what has  happened
    in Turkey to Kurds is consistent with the appellant  having  a  Kurdish
    ethnicity, but it does not follow  that  he  was  a  member  or  active
    supporter of the party to the extent that it brought him to the adverse
    attention of the authorities.

74. I accept that the appellant has scars as  documented  in  his  rule  35
    report, but it is not a detailed forensic analysis.  There may be  many
    reasons why someone has scars on knees, back of the head and  a  broken
    nose, and it does not  necessarily  follow  that  these  injuries  were
    inflicted by the Turkish Authorities.

75. Taking all of these factors into account,  and  in  the  light  of  the
    background evidence, I conclude that  the  appellant's  credibility  is
    diminished to such an extent that I cannot accept his account of  being
    detained and ill-treated by the Turkish authorities; or,  that  he  was
    asked to be an informer or to sign a blank sheet of  paper.  I  am  not
    satisfied that he or his family have come to the adverse  attention  of
    the authorities, or that the family home has been raided, or  that  any
    of them are politically active.  Nor am I satisfied that he left Turkey
    illegally.  I am not satisfied either that he is a draft evader.

76. I accept that the appellant is Kurdish and is from Nurda?i,  Gaziantep.
    That is, to an extent, confirmed by his  passport,  and  his  place  of
    birth does not appear to be in dispute.

77. Having made these findings, I must consider what is likely to happen to
    the appellant on return to Turkey. The most recent Country Guidance  is
    IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312. While I am
    duty bound to apply it, it is of concern that it is of such vintage and
    in the light of the huge changes that have taken place in Turkey  since
    2004; the material on  which  it  is  based  is  now  of  perhaps  only
    historical interest.

78. That said, I bear in mind that the  appellant  has  a  properly  issued
    Turkish passport. He has  not  satisfied  me  that  he  is  of  adverse
    attention to the Turkish authorities and at worst it would  be  evident
    that he is a Kurd who is being removed from the United  Kingdom  having
    either had no leave or whose leave had expired, and had claimed asylum.
     There is insufficient evidence in the material provided to me to  show
    that, as a result, he would be at risk on return  of  ill-treatment  of
    sufficient  severity  to  amount  to  persecution  or  entitle  him  to
    humanitarian protection  or  breach  article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

79. Accordingly, for these reasons, I  dismiss  his  appeal  on  protection
    grounds.

80. As the remaking of this appeal does not extend to article 8, I  do  not
    consider that aspect of his  claim  although  I  do  observe  that  the
    appellant is now the father of a British citizen child.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the appeal by dismissing it on all grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 17 May 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08347/2019_P


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision sent on:                    |
|hearing                              |.....................................|
|on 6 October 2020                    |..                                   |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|            |K T                                               |Appellant   |
|            |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |            |
|            |And                                               |            |
|            |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent  |


                                  Anonymity
I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
I make this order because this appeal relates to the appellant's  protection
claim.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

This is a decision on the papers without a hearing. No  written  submissions
were received from either party. A face-to-face hearing or a remote  hearing
was not held for the reasons given at paras 6-14 below. The  order  made  is
set out at para 53 below. (Administrative Instruction No. 2 from the  Senior
President of Tribunals).

Representation (by written submissions):
For the appellant:     [No written submissions received]
For the respondent:    [No written submissions received]


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Turkey born on 1 May 1992, appeals against
    a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bonavero (hereafter  the
    "Judge") who, in a decision promulgated on 28 October 2019 following  a
    hearing on 1 October 2019, dismissed his appeal on asylum, humanitarian
    protection  and  human  rights  grounds  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent of 21 August 2019 to refuse his claim for protection made on
    21 June 2020.

 2. The appellant's application to the Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith in a  decision
    dated 2 April 2020, sent to the parties on 17 July 2020 together with a
    "Note and Directions" issued by Judge Smith.

 3. In his "Note and Directions", Judge Smith stated that, in light of  the
    need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, he had reached
    the provisional view, having reviewed the file in this  case,  that  it
    would be appropriate to determine questions (a) and (b) set out at para
    1 of his "Note & Directions", reproduced at my  para  5(i)(a)  and  (b)
    below, without a hearing. Judge Smith then gave directions which set  a
    timescale for the appellant to make written  submissions  on  questions
    (a) and (b), for the respondent to lodge submissions in reply  and  for
    the appellant to lodge further submissions in response.  He  also  gave
    directions which provided for any party who considered that despite the
    foregoing directions a hearing was necessary to consider questions  (a)
    and/or (b) to submit reasons for that view within a certain  timescale.



 4. Neither party has responded to the "Note and Directions".

The issues

 5. I have to decide the following issues (hereafter the "Issues"):

    (i)  whether it  is  appropriate  to  decide  the  following  questions
    without a hearing:

         (a)  whether the decision of the Judge involved the  making  of  an
         error on a point of law; and

         (b)  if yes, whether the Judge's decision should be set aside.

    (ii) If yes, whether the decision on the appellant's appeal against the
    respondent's decision should  be  re-made  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
    whether the appeal should be remitted to the FtT.

Whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

 6. I do not rely upon the mere fact that the parties  have  not  made  any
    submissions as factors that justify proceeding  without  a  hearing.  I
    have considered the circumstances for myself.

 7. I am aware of, and take into account, the force of the points  made  in
    the dicta of the late Laws LJ at para 38 of Sengupta  v  Holmes  [2002]
    EWCA Civ 1104 concerning the power of oral argument; and the  dicta  in
    the decision in R v Sussex Justices, ex parte McCarthy [1924] 1 KB  256
    to the effect that justice must be done and be  seen  to  be  done,  to
    mention just two of the cases in which we have received  guidance  from
    judges in the higher  courts  concerning  the  importance  of  an  oral
    hearing. I am aware of and have applied the  guidance  of  the  Supreme
    Court at para 2 of its judgment in Osborn and  others  v  Parole  Board
    [2013] UKSC 61.

 8. Given that my decision is limited to the Issues, there is  no  question
    of my making findings of fact or hearing oral evidence  or  considering
    any evidence  at  this  stage.  The  appeal  in  the  instant  case  is
    straightforward.

 9. In addition, I take into account the seriousness of the issues  in  the
    instant appeal for the appellant. This appeal relates to his protection
    claim which is a serious matter. It also relates to his Article 8 claim
    human rights claim based, in part, on his alleged relationship with his
    partner. This is also a matter of some seriousness.

10. I have considered  all  the  circumstances  very  carefully  and  taken
    everything into account, including the overriding objective.

11. I considered the Judge's decision,  the  grounds  and  the  submissions
    before me. I was of the view, taken provisionally at this  stage,  that
    there was nothing complicated at all in the assessment of the Issues in
    the instant case, given that the grounds are simple and straightforward
    and the Judge's decision  straightforward.  I  kept  the  matter  under
    review throughout my deliberations. However, at the  conclusion  of  my
    deliberations, I was affirmed in the view I had taken on a  preliminary
    basis.

12. Whilst the Tribunal is now listing some cases for face-to-face hearings
    and using technology to hold hearings remotely in other cases where  it
    is appropriate to do so, the  fact  is  that  it  is  not  possible  to
    accommodate all cases in one of these ways without undue delay  to  all
    cases. Of course, the need to be fair  cannot  be  sacrificed  even  if
    there would be a lengthy delay in order to hold a hearing  face-to-face
    or remotely or even if there is a consequent delay on other cases being
    heard.

13. Nevertheless, there are cases that can  fairly  be  decided  without  a
    hearing notwithstanding that the outcome of the decision may not be  in
    favour of the party who is the appellant. In the present  unprecedented
    circumstances brought about by the coronavirus pandemic, it is my  duty
    to identify those cases that can fairly be decided without a hearing.

14. Having considered the matter with anxious scrutiny, taken into  account
    the overriding  objective  and  the  guidance  in  the  relevant  cases
    including in particular Osborn and others v Parole Board,  I  concluded
    that it is appropriate, fair and just for me to exercise my  discretion
    and proceed to decide the Issues without a  hearing,  for  the  reasons
    given in this decision.

Questions (a) and (b) - whether the Judge  erred  in  law  and  whether  his
decision should be set aside

The basis of the appellant's asylum claim and Article 8 claim

15. In her decision  letter,  the  respondent  summarised  the  appellant's
    account of the basis of his asylum claim as follows:

16. The appellant claimed that he was a Kurd by ethnic origin.  He  claimed
    to have been an active member of the HDP party in Turkey, having joined
    in 2013. He claimed to have expressed his opinion in support  of  Kurds
    on Facebook as a result  of  which  he  was  arrested  by  the  Turkish
    authorities. He also said that he had written propaganda  post  of  the
    PKK on social media. He claimed to have attended protests in support of
    the HDP.

17. In his witness statement, the appellant gave a detailed account of  the
    basis of his asylum claim. In summary, he said that he said that he was
    from the Gaziantep province. His father and extended family members had
    helped the PKK organisation. He himself joined the HDP in 2013. He  was
    arrested on 27 July 2017  at  which  time  he  was  accused  by  police
    officers of  having  participated  in  the  PKK  organisation.  He  was
    arrested again on 20 March 2018, tortured and released after he  agreed
    to provide information about who was helping  the  PKK.  He  then  left
    Gazianetp and went to Istanbul. A week later, the police  went  to  his
    house asking for him. They arrested and tortured his brother.  He  (the
    appellant) then left Turkey.

18. The appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom  illegally  in
    June 2018.

19. The appellant's Article 8 claim was based on private  life  established
    since his arrival and family life developed with his partner,  MK,  who
    was a Turkish national said to have indefinite leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. They entered into a religious marriage  on  26  January
    2019.

The respondent's decision

20. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was a Kurd or that  he
    was a member of the HDP or that he had participated in  activities  for
    the HDP or that he had been arrested and detained.  She  gave  detailed
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's evidence.

21. The respondent also stated that she did not accept that  the  appellant
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with MK.

The Judge's decision

22. The Judge summarised the basis of the appellant's asylum claim  in  one
    brief paragraph (para 3).

23. At para 12, the Judge said that, in reaching his conclusions  "set  out
    below", he had considered all of the evidence in the round and that the
    fact that he had not referred to a specific piece  of  evidence  should
    not be taken to mean that it had not been considered.

24. At para 13, the Judge reminded himself that the applicable standard  of
    proof was the lower  standard.  He  then  said  "I  cannot  accept  the
    appellant's account" for reasons "set out below".

25. The Judge then set  out  his  reasons  at  paras  14-22  which  may  be
    summarised as follows:

         (i)  The appellant had  delayed  in  claiming  asylum.  He  claimed
         asylum only after having been apprehended working illegally in  the
         United Kingdom and after  removal  directions  had  been  set.  His
         explanation for his failure to claim  asylum  on  arrival  was  not
         persuasive. The delay in claiming asylum  damaged  the  appellant's
         credibility (para 14).

         (ii) The appellant had not  told  the  truth  about  his  partner's
         pregnancy, saying that the baby was lost in  2017  or  (on  another
         version) in 2019, whereas the medical  record  indicated  that  the
         pregnancy was terminated in May 2019. Whilst the  untruth  was  not
         directly related to the appellant's protection claim, his  evidence
         damaged his credibility generally (paras 15-19).

         (iii)    The Rule 35 report was of little probative value (paras 20-
         21).

         (iv) The appellant's failure to provide the originals  of  evidence
         said to have come from BDP in Turkey in the form of a "Member Form"
         affected the weight that  he  (the  Judge)  could  attach  to  this
         evidence. The Judge said that he approached the  evidence  in  line
         with the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed "by assessing it in  the  round,
         alongside all of the other aspects of the appellant's  credibility"
         (para 22).

         (v)  The Judge then said that: "Taking all of the  evidence  before
         me into account, and applying the lower standard of proof, I reject
         the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been  detained  by  the  Turkish
         authorities on account of his political activities...".

26. The Judge then considered the appellant's Article 8 claim, at paras 24-
    31 which read:

         "Article 8

         24.  As for the appellant's Article 8 claim, I must first  consider
             whether  he  and  [MK]  are  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
             relationship.  I  make  these  findings  to  the  balance   of
             probabilities.

         25.  I have set  out  above  my  findings  in  relation  to  [MK's]
             pregnancy,  together  with  the  difference  in  the  couple's
             account as to whether they had ever separated. This  tends  to
             suggest that the  couple  have  not  been  truthful  in  their
             evidence.

         26.  I note that the appellant initially gave an incorrect date  of
             birth  for  [MK]  to  the  Home  Office  when  he  was   first
             encountered.

         27.  I was surprised that the appellant did not call any  witnesses
             other than his wife to give evidence as to the nature of their
             relationship. This is  in  the  context  of  the  relationship
             having been cast  into  question  by  the  respondent  in  his
             refusal letter. The appellant's account is that he lives  with
             [MK] and her family, and that he is close to  her  father.  In
             those circumstances I find this omission to be problematic. It
             is not cured by the fact that  there  are  written  statements
             apparently drafted by family members, to which I can give only
             limited weight.

         28.  I also  note  that  the  appellant  was  arrested  working  in
             Colchester, whereas [MK] lives in Edgware, some 70 miles away.

         29.  On the other hand, I note that the  appellant  and  [MK]  were
             able to answer some  questions  consistently  in  relation  to
             their daily routine, and that there are some photos  appearing
             to show them together. I also note  that  there  is  a  single
             utility bill addressed to the appellant at what is said to  be
             [MK] address. I also give some weight to the letters  said  to
             emanate from family members attesting to the relationship.

         30.  On balance, taking all of these factors into account,  I  find
             it more likely than  not  that  the  appellant  is  not  in  a
             relationship with [MK] as claimed. It follows that I find that
             he does not enjoy family life in the UK within the meaning  of
             Article 8.

         31.  As for his private life, the appellant has only lived  in  the
             UK, on his account, for a short period of time.  He  does  not
             meet the requirements of the immigration rules, and there  are
             no other compelling reasons for which his removal would amount
             to a disproportionate breach of his private life rights."

The grounds

27. In relation to the appellant's protection claim,  the  grounds  contend
    that the Judge erred in his assessment of credibility. It is said  that
    his assessment of credibility was brief. His  starting  point  was  the
    delay  in  claiming  asylum  and  his  rejection  of  the   appellant's
    explanation for the delay formed the basis  of  his  rejection  of  the
    asylum claim. The Judge then considered inconsistencies in the evidence
    between the appellant and his  partner  concerning  the  pregnancy  and
    documentary evidence in relation to the appellant's membership  of  his
    political party  but  rejected  the  entire  protection  claim  without
    reference to any other evidence. He failed to assess credibility in the
    round.

28. The Judge erred in refusing the appellant's family life claim solely on
    credibility grounds. The Judge set out the factors for and against  the
    appellant but failed to explain why those factors which weighed against
    the appellant were more persuasive.

29. The Judge's consideration of the appellant's  private  life  claim  was
    limited to para 31. He considered only that the appellant had lived  in
    the  United  Kingdom  for  a  short  period  of  time.  There  was   no
    consideration of the  extent  of  the  appellant's  relationships  with
    extended family members and the part that these  play  in  his  private
    life.

Assessment

(i)  The Judge's decision on the appellant's protection claim

30. In relation to the appellant's protection claim, it is  plain  from  my
    summary at para 25 above of the  Judge's  reasoning  that  he  did  not
    engage at all with any aspect of the  appellant's  evidence  concerning
    his alleged political activities in Turkey or that he had been arrested
    and detained twice or that his brother had been arrested and detained.

31. I acknowledge that judges are not obliged to deal with every aspect  of
    the evidence before  them  in  terms.  I  acknowledge  that  the  Judge
    specifically said at para 12 that, in reaching his conclusions "set out
    below", he had considered all of the evidence in the round and that the
    fact that he had not referred to a specific piece  of  evidence  should
    not be taken to mean that it had not been considered.

32. Nevertheless, the fact is that he failed to  engage  at  all  with  the
    respondent's detailed reasons for rejecting the  entire  basis  of  the
    appellant's asylum claim, including  that  he  was  a  Kurd  by  ethnic
    origin, and he failed to  engage  at  all  with  the  appellant's  very
    detailed witness statement. It is entirely unknown what the Judge  made
    of the credibility issues raised by  the  respondent  in  the  decision
    letter, both as to the appellant's claim that he was a Kurd and  as  to
    his claimed political activities.

33. Whilst the Judge was entitled to  take  into  account  the  appellant's
    delay in claiming asylum, he  himself  recognised  that  this  was  not
    determinative.  It  is  difficult  to  see   the   relevance   of   the
    discrepancies in the evidence between the appellant and  MK  concerning
    MK's alleged pregnancy to his asylum claim.

34. As a consequence, the Judge's reasoning concerning the rule  35  report
    and the documentary evidence concerning the appellant's membership of a
    political party stands in a vacuum.

35. As a result, I am driven to conclude that  the  Judge  gave  inadequate
    reasons for his adverse credibility assessment, in the sense  explained
    in R (Iran) & others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982. I  am  satisfied  that
    the Judge failed to give reasons  in  sufficient  detail  to  show  the
    reasons that led to  his  conclusion  that  the  entire  basis  of  the
    appellant's asylum claim was incredible.

36. Plainly, the Judge's adverse credibility assessment was material to his
    decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  asylum   claim,   humanitarian
    protection claim and related Article 3 claim.

(ii) The Judge's decision on the appellant's Article 8 claim

37. Turning to the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence  concerning  the
    appellant's relationship with MK, it is  clear  from  para  25  of  the
    Judge's decision  that  he  relied  upon  his  earlier  assessment,  in
    connection with  the  appellant's  protection  claim  of  the  evidence
    concerning MK's pregnancy. He said that this tended to suggest that the
    couple had not been truthful in their evidence.  He  then  went  on  to
    assess other  aspects  of  the  evidence  concerning  the  relationship
    between the appellant and MK at paras 26-29 before stating, at para 30,
    that "on balance, taking all of these factors into account" he found it
    more likely than not that the appellant was not in a relationship  with
    MK as claimed and that he did not  enjoy  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

38. Para 9 of the grounds contends that, in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    family life claim, the Judge set out the factors for  and  against  the
    appellant but failed to explain why those factors which weighed against
    the appellant were more persuasive.

39. There is no substance in this ground. The Judge  did  not  need  to  go
    further than he did in giving his reasons for reaching his finding that
    the appellant was not in a relationship  with  MK  and  did  not  enjoy
    family life in the United Kingdom. It is self-evident that the  factors
    that went against the appellant were weightier than  the  factors  that
    were in his favour.

40. Para 10 of the grounds contends that the Judge erred  in  refusing  the
    appellant's Article 8  family  life  claim  solely  on  the  ground  of
    credibility. There is no substance  in  this  ground,  given  that  the
    appellant's family life claim was based  on  his  alleged  relationship
    with MK and that the credibility of his evidence that he had a  genuine
    relationship with MK was in issue.

41. In relation to the Judge's consideration  of  the  appellant's  private
    life claim, para 12 of the grounds contends that the  Judge  considered
    only that the appellant had lived in the United  Kingdom  for  a  short
    period of time and that there was no consideration of the extent of the
    appellant's relationships with extended family  members  and  the  part
    that these play in his private life.

42. I have noted that the only  evidence  about  the  appellant's  extended
    family in the United Kingdom was as follows:

         (i)  At para 11 of his witness statement, the appellant made a bare
         reference to "extended families"  when  he  said  that  he  claimed
         asylum "with the help of my partner and extended families".

         (ii) The Judge's record of the proceedings shows that the appellant
         said in cross-examination at the hearing that  his  family  in  the
         United Kingdom were his wife and cousins.

43. Given the very brief evidence the appellant gave, as  described  above,
    of having "extended families" and cousins in the United Kingdom,  there
    is simply no substance in the suggestion at para 12 of the grounds that
    the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the   extent   of   the   appellant's
    relationships with extended family members. The simple answer  to  this
    ground is that, in the absence of any evidence before the Judge of  the
    extent of the appellant's relationships with extended  family  members,
    there could be no such assessment.

44. I have therefore concluded that the grounds fail to establish that  the
    Judge erred in law in his consideration of the appellant's family  life
    and private life claims under Article 8.

(iii)    Summary of conclusions on grounds

45. For the reasons given at paras 30-36 above, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Judge did materially err in  law  in  making  his  adverse  credibility
    assessment of the appellant's evidence  concerning  the  basis  of  his
    asylum claim, humanitarian protection claim and his related  Article  3
    claim. However, for the reasons given at paras 37-44 above, he did  not
    err in  law  in  making  the  findings  he  made  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim.

46. I therefore set aside the Judge's decision and limit the ambit  of  the
    re-making to the  appellant's  asylum  claim,  humanitarian  protection
    claim and related Article 3 claim. The credibility of  the  appellant's
    evidence about the basis of his protection claim will need  to  be  re-
    assessed on the  merits.  The  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's family  life  claim  and  his  private  life  claim  stand,
    including  his  finding  that  the  appellant  is  not  in  a   genuine
    relationship with MK.

(iv) Re-making the decision

47. The next question is whether the decision  should  be  re-made  in  the
    Upper Tribunal or whether the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

48. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

49. I have decided that this case does not fall within either  para  7.2(a)
    or (b), given that I have decided that the Judge's finding in  relation
    to the appellant's Article 8 claim shall stand and that  the  re-making
    of the decision on the appellant's appeal  is  limited  to  his  asylum
    claim, humanitarian protection claim and the related Article  3  claim.
    In view of the limited ambit of the re-making of the decision,  I  have
    concluded that it is fair and appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to re-
    make the decision on the appeal.

50. In addition, I have concluded  that  there  should  be  a  face-to-face
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal as and when it is possible to hold such a
    hearing, given that credibility is in issue and that the appellant gave
    evidence in the First-tier Tribunal through an interpreter.

51. An interpreter will be provided in the Turkish  language.  If  this  is
    incorrect, the appellant must notify the Upper Tribunal  in  accordance
    with Direction 1 below.

52. Documents which have already been filed and served do not  need  to  be
    filed and served again. The parties should take  note  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal has on file the following documents:

         (i)  a 227-page bundle of documents, submitted on  the  appellant's
         behalf under cover of a letter dated 20 September 2019 from Kilic &
         Kilic Solicitors; and

         (ii) the respondent's bundle.



Notice of Decision

53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  errors
    on points of law such that  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
    protection grounds (asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  the  related
    Article 3 claim) is set aside. The re-making of the decision is limited
    to the appellant's asylum  claim,  humanitarian  protection  claim  and
    related Article 3 claim. The decision will  be  re-made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Directions to the parties

1.   Within 5 calendar days after the  date  on  which  this  "Decision  and
    Directions" is sent to the parties, the appellant to notify  the  Upper
    Tribunal in writing (copied to the respondent at the same time) whether
    or not he intends to call oral evidence at the resumed hearing and,  if
    so, confirm the number of witnesses who  will  give  evidence.  If  the
    language in which  he  requires  an  interpreter  is  not  the  Turkish
    language, then he must at the same time notify the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    writing of the language of interpretation.

2.   If the appellant wishes to rely upon  any  further  evidence,  he  must
    comply with rule 15(2A) and submit such evidence in support,  no  later
    than 28 days before the hearing date. Any such further evidence must be
    contained in a paginated and indexed bundle, together with  a  skeleton
    argument dealing with the relevant issues  in  the  re-making  of  this
    appeal.


Signed   Date: 6 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
