








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08510/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Manchester                         |                                   |
|On 13th May 2019                   |On 03rd June 2019                  |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                            Mr Salam Aziz Hassan

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Wood of IAS Liverpool

For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A Parker promulgated on the 24th August 2018 whereby the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection, Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR and Article 8  of
    the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Canavan on 17th December 2018. Thus the case appeared  before  me
    to determine whether or not there was a material error of  law  in  the
    decision.

    Factual summary

 4. The appellant, a national of Iraq, had come to the United Kingdom in or
    about September 2006. He claimed asylum on the basis  of  a  fear  from
    terrorist groups. As part of his claim the appellant alleged  that  his
    father had been killed by the terrorists and that he had  been  working
    for the Americans and was therefore a target. At several  points,  e.g.
    within his  screening  interview,  within  his  substantive  interview,
    within his statement and evidence, the appellant  had  maintained  that
    his father had been killed.

 5. The appellant's application had been refused. There had been an  appeal
    against the  decision  by  the  appellant  but  that  appeal  had  been
    dismissed in a decision issued in January 2007.

 6. It does not appear that the appellant left the United Kingdom.

 7. In 2018 the appellant made a fresh claim to protection based  upon  his
    claim to have converted to Christianity. That application  was  refused
    on 20 June 2018 and the appellant appealed against  that  refusal.  The
    appeal against the refusal was heard by Judge Parker on 15 August  2018
    and by decision dated 24 August 2018 the application was refused.

 8. As part of the decision by Judge Parker  the  following  was  noted  at
    paragraph 11: -

          Mr Iqbal indicated he was not relying on the appellant's  role  in
         the military which was discredited in the previous determination by
         Immigration  Judge  Pooler.  He  is  not  relying  on  problems  of
         returnability due to documentation and is  solely  relying  on  the
         appellant's conversion to Christianity.

 9. In order to support his claim to have converted from the  Muslim  faith
    to Christianity the appellant called Rev Peter Wynne. During the course
    of giving evidence Rev Wynne indicated that the appellant's father  was
    an Imam, that the father was extremely upset  that  the  appellant  had
    converted and by reason thereof the appellant was at risk  if  returned
    to Iraq. According to the decision it was pointed out to Rev  Wynne  in
    the hearing that the appellant had stated  that  his  father  had  been
    killed. Rev Wynne's response to that was not recorded in the decision.

10. Before me issue was taken as to whether or not there was  a  record  of
    the response of Rev Wynne in the Record of Proceedings  of  the  judge.
    The representative for the respondent was seeking  to  refer  to  notes
    that had been completed by the Presenting  Officer  subsequent  to  the
    hearing.  Mr Wood on behalf of the appellant indicated that he was at a
    disadvantage as he did not have the notes of evidence  from  Mr  Iqbal,
    who had been the representative t the First-tier hearing.

11. I checked the notes of Judge Parker. It appears that it was put to  the
    Rev Wynne that the appellant had stated that his father had been killed
    and Rev Wynne had replied that that was not what he had been told.

12. The issue being taken with regard to the matter was  that  this  was  a
    material issue which had arisen during the hearing  and  the  appellant
    had not had the opportunity of dealing with it. There was no record  of
    Mr Iqbal, the legal representative present at the  First-tier  hearing,
    making any submissions on the matter or seeking to apply  to  have  the
    appellant recall to deal with it.  There  is  no  record  of  Mr  Iqbal
    seeking to re-examine Rev Wynne to check what exactly Rev  Wynne  meant
    and the context.

13. It was being submitted that  the  appellant  had  not  been  given  the
    opportunity of dealing with the issue. It was being submitted that  the
    appellant had always maintained  that  his  father  was  dead  and  the
    appellant should have been afforded an  opportunity  of  answering  the
    evidence given by a witness that he called.

14. Mr Iqbal, the representative at the First-tier hearing clearly had  the
    evidence before him and had the opportunity of asking questions  either
    of Rev Wynne or seeking to apply to have the appellant recalled to deal
    with the issue. It was clearly evidence that was before the  judge  and
    upon which the judge was entitled to make findings of fact.  The  judge
    has made findings of fact on the evidence that was before him  and  was
    entitled in the circumstances to conclude that the  appellant  had  not
    been telling the truth.

15. There were other factors which led  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant had not been telling the truth. Again the judge has  properly
    analysed the evidence of the appellant  and  given  valid  reasons  for
    finding the appellant was not a witness of truth and that therefore the
    appellant's claim to have converted to Christianity was not made out.

16. Other issues were taken in the grounds of appeal. Whilst the  appellant
    had claimed that he had converted some time ago, he had delayed  making
    a claim based upon his conversion until late 2017.  The  appellant  had
    had his previous appeal in 2007. The appellant had stated that  he  was
    interested in Christianity in 2013 and had converted in  May  2017.  It
    suggested that the judge in taking against the appellant  that  he  had
    delayed in making a claim to asylum for a significant  period  of  time
    delayed otherwise in pursuing his claim for asylum since  leaving  Iraq
    was not applying Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Act  2004
    correctly.

17. The judge has dealt with a number of issues in coming to the conclusion
    that the appellant was not a credible witness and has not converted  to
    Christianity.  The  judge  has   properly   considered   the   previous
    determination and examined carefully the evidence presented  on  behalf
    of the appellant in the present appeal. The judge has  fully  justified
    the findings of fact made.

18. Mr Wood did during the hearing point out that the judge  was  wrong  in
    paragraph 45 to suggest that Kirkuk was in the KRG controlled area.  He
    submitted  that  Kirkuk  was  in  the  area  controlled  by  the  Iraqi
    government. However he accepted having regard to the matters set out in
    paragraph 11 of the decision and in the decision otherwise dealing with
    the appellant having family in Iraq, including  family  who  appear  to
    have  found  his  CSID  card,  such  made  little  difference  to   the
    conclusions reached by the judge.

19. With regard to whether the appellant could obtain a CSID card,  whether
    he had family members who could assist him  or  whether  otherwise  the
    appellant could return to Iraq. As  pointed  out  within  the  decision
    itself that was a matter that had been conceded by  Mr  Iqbal.  At  the
    outset Mr Iqbal had accepted that the sole basis for the claim  by  the
    appellant was his claim to have converted to Christianity.  The  issues
    with regard to the returnability of the  appellant  and  other  factors
    arising from the existing country guidance  case  law  were  not  being
    pursued by the appellant. It was accepted that the appellant if he were
    not a Christian convert could be returned to Iraq.

20. In those circumstances the judge has concentrated upon the  issue  that
    was being presented as  the  sole  basis  for  the  appellant  claiming
    protection. The judge has given valid  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    appellant was not entitled to protection.

21. There is therefore no error of law in the original decision

    Notice of Decision

22. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

23. I make no anonymity direction.



Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 13 May 2019

