
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08249/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2021                    |On 2 September 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                SAMAN HOSENI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Iran.  He claimed asylum on the basis of
    his conversion to Christianity  whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Secretary of State did not believe that he had converted.  In addition,
    the appellant was sentenced to fifteen  months  imprisonment  following
    his conviction for being concerned in the production of cannabis.   The
    Secretary of  State  noted  that  he  was  a  foreign  criminal,  whose
    deportation was conducive to the public good.  The Secretary  of  State
    refused his claim.

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  on  protection  grounds  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Judge Saffer allowed his appeal.

 3. On appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  decision  and  substituted  a   decision   dismissing   the
    appellant's appeal.  The  appellant  then  appealed  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal, and, by consent, the Court of Appeal ordered  on  14  September
    2020 that the appeal be allowed, Judge Lane's decision be set aside and
    the Secretary of State's appeal be re-determined by the Upper Tribunal.

 4. Directions were sent out on 14 May 2021 with a view to a hearing of the
    appeal. Subsequent correspondence and efforts by the Tribunal  and  the
    Secretary of State reveal that the appellant's nominated representative
    had not had any contact with the appellant for many months and were  no
    longer instructed.  The appellant himself had not kept  in  touch  with
    the Tribunal and had not responded to directions or  to  correspondence
    sent to him at any address known to his previous  representatives,  the
    Secretary of State or the Tribunal.  He did not appear at  the  hearing
    on 7 July, before the Vice President and Judge  O'Callaghan,  of  which
    notice had been sent out in accordance with the rules.  At that hearing
    the  respondent  was  represented  by  Mr  Tufan,  who   reviewed   the
    respondent's file in order to see whether there was any untried  method
    of contacting the appellant.

 5. It appeared that one telephone number might not  have  been  previously
    tried. During the course of the hearing we arranged for a  call  to  be
    made to that mobile number.  There was a recorded response  giving  the
    appellant's name, but no other  details.   Although  the  Tribunal  was
    aware that a response of  that  sort  is  sometimes  obtained  from  an
    account that has been suspended or is not in use, an oral  message  was
    left  as  the  only  remaining  known  possibility  of  contacting  the
    appellant.  It was translated into Sorani by the  Court's  interpreter.
    The message was as follows:


         "This is the Immigration Tribunal in Field House.
         You must write to us within seven days about your appeal  otherwise
         you will find it has been dismissed.  You must give us the  address
         at which we can contact you."

    The Tribunal's address at Field House was then given.

 6. The appellant does not appear to be pursuing his  appeal.   It  is  not
    even known whether he  is  still  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In  these
    circumstances the appropriate course is to dismiss his  appeal  without
    any further hearing.  I accordingly dismiss it.







                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 25 August 2021

