
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08825/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                            |On 15 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                  DABAN [K]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 22 August 2018  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC which  refused  a  protection  and
    Article 8 ECHR appeal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Iraq, born on 6 September 1989.

 3. The appellant's claim was that he was at risk from [MS], an influential
    individual in Iraq. The appellant worked as an immigration officer  and
    Mr [S] had directed him to let through a person on a "watch" list.  The
    appellant did not do so and the individual was detained.  Mr  [S]  then
    threatened the appellant and used his  influence  to  arrange  for  the
    authorities to seek to arrest the appellant.

 4. The appellant challenged the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal on the
    basis of a number of material  errors  of  fact.  The  errors  of  fact
    included the decision failing to take account of specific evidence from
    the appellant as to how he knew the identity of someone who called  his
    mobile telephone and threatened him and the appellant not following  Mr
    [S]'s request to let an individual pass through immigration unhindered.
    The appellant maintained that the decision was also in error in failing
    to recognise that certain events had occurred after he came to  the  UK
    and so after his screening  interview  so  he  could  not  have  raised
    additional reasons for needing protection earlier.

 5.  It  was  conceded  for  the  respondent  at  the  hearing  before  me,
    notwithstanding that the appellant did  not  have  a  good  immigration
    history, admitting that he  had  previously  made  a  false  claim  for
    protection, that the adverse findings of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  on
    these points were not sustainable. Further, as these errors went to the
    core of the credibility findings, the  decision  should  be  set  aside
    entirely to be re-made de novo in the First-Tier Tribunal.

 6. That concession was in line with my own  view  of  the  merits  of  the
    grounds and correct disposal of the appeal on re-making.

 7. The Upper Tribunal finds that the decision of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    discloses a material error on a point of law and sets it aside to be re-
    made de novo in the First-Tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be remade de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed: [pic]                                Date: 8 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

