
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/08736/2018 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 March 2021                    |On 12 March 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     HF

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant: Mr K Wood, instructed by IAS (Liverpool)

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This has been a remote resumed  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype  (V).  At  the
conclusion of the hearing,  I  outlined  in  brief  terms  my  decision  and
reasons, which I now set out. The order made is described at  the  end  of
these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity  and  Sunni
   Muslim faith, born in Debz, Kirkuk, with date of birth given  as  1.1.77,
   has appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission against  the  decision
   of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated   10.6.20   (Judge   McClure),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 22.6.18, to refuse his claim for  international
   protection based on a well-founded fear of persecution arising  from  his
   imputed political opinion.




2.  The  previous  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  decision  (Judge   Siddiqi)
   promulgated 25.3.19, dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.
   However, that decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal (Deputy  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Chapman) and remitted  to  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, limited to the issues of internal relocation  to  the  IKR  and
   whether the appellant had the required identity documentation  to  enable
   him to travel to the IKR. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal on  the
   appellant's  core  factual  account  were  preserved.  Complicating   the
   remaking exercise was that subsequent to both the First-tier Tribunal and
   Upper Tribunal decisions, new country guidance was issued in SMO,  KSP  &
   IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 004100  (IAC),
   which was considered by the First-tier  Tribunal  (Designated  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge McClure) in remaking the decision.



3. Judge McClure dismissed the appeal, finding  no  reason  to  depart  from
   Judge Siddiqi's finding that the appellant and his family would not be at
   risk in their home area of Kirkuk for any Convention reason.  However  in
   considering the issue of relocation, Judge McClure  found  there  was  no
   longer an Article 15(c) risk risk to the appellant in his  home  area  of
   Kirkuk, whereas Judge Siddiqi considered herself  bound  by  the  Country
   Guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)  that  there
   was a state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in  certain  parts  of  Iraq,
   including Kirkuk, so that there were substantial  grounds  for  believing
   that any civilian return there, would solely on account of their presence
   face a real risk  indiscriminate  violence  reaching  the  Article  15(c)
   threshold.



4. Noting that the appellant has a valid INC (as well  as  other  documents)
   and that SMO found that Iraqis can  be  expected  to  know  the  relevant
   volume, page number and details in the Registry, Judge McClure found that
   there was no reason why the appellant would not be  able  to  obtain  his
   CSID from the local registry. It follows that there was a means  open  to
   the  appellant  to  obtain  the  required  identity  documentation.  That
   included providing the information to an attorney in Iraq to  obtain  the
   CSIDs enabling the appellant and his family members to  travel  to  their
   home area of Kirkuk. In consequence, the protection claim was  dismissed.
   The judge also dismissed the human rights claim based on article 8 ECHR.



5. In summary, the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal argued that:



     a. The judge  made  a  material  misdirection  in  law  and  permitted
        procedural unfairness by ignoring the finding of the Upper Tribunal
        that the appellant could not safely return to Kirkuk and  that  the
        appeal was  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  issue  of
        reasonable relocation to the IKR. It is  asserted  that  the  judge
        erred by concluding that  the  appellant  could  safely  return  to
        Kirkuk and in failing to consider internal relocation to the IKR;

     b. The judge erred in law by  failing  to  take  account  of  material
        matters and/or failing to provide adequate reasons on a finding  of
        fact material to the outcome of the appeal, with reference  to  the
        finding that there is no article 15(c) risk  to  the  appellant  on
        return to Kirkuk. It is argued that the judge failed to make a fact-
        sensitive assessment  and  to  take  account  of  the  factors  and
        evidence identified in SMO as to the risks present in Kirkuk;

     c. The judge erred in relation to the  use  of  proxies  in  obtaining
        replacement CSID cards when at paragraph [425] SMO found  that  the
        likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by the  use
        of a proxy had reduced due to the introduction of the INID  system,
        where an  individual  has  to  attend  in  person  to  enrol  their
        biometric details and that CSA offices which  INID  terminals  have
        been installed  are  unlikely  to  issue  a  CSID,  whether  to  an
        individual in person or to a proxy. It is argued Kirkuk is  one  of
        the areas in which INID terminals have been installed;

     d. The judge erred by materially misdirecting himself in law as to the
        consideration of the appellant's attempts to obtain  a  replacement
        CSID care in the UK.

6. In my error of law decision promulgated 28.9.20, I  carefully  considered
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the  light  of  the  oral  and
   written submissions and the grounds  of  application  for  permission  to
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal. At [30] of my decision,  I  concluded  that
   there was an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  but
   only to the limited extent of the issue of  the  appellant's  ability  to
   obtain identity documentation which would enable him  to  return  to  his
   home area  of  Kirkuk.  The  remaining  findings  from  the  decision  of
   Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McClure were all  preserved  in  the
   directions within my error of law decision. The remaking of the decision,
   limited to the narrow issue identified above, was reserved to  the  Upper
   Tribunal. The matter was then relisted before me on 3.3.21.

7. In compliance with the directions issued,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  now
   received the respondent's response to directions drafted by  Mr  Tan  and
   dated  22.10.20;  the  expert  report  of  Dr  Fatah,   dated   11.12.20,
   accompanied by the summary set out in  the  email  from  the  appellant's
   representative, dated 31.12.20.

Error of Law Findings in Summary

8. For the reasons set out between [8] and [15] of my  earlier  decision,  I
   concluded at [15]  that  Judge  McClure  was  entitled  to  consider  the
   viability of the appellant's return to his home area in the light of SMO.
   I was satisfied that what Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman intended to
   preserve were the findings of fact  up  to  and  including  [41]  of  the
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Siddiqi promulgated 25.3.19. I  was
   further satisfied that there was no specific finding by either the First-
   tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal that the appellant could  not  safely
   return to Kirkuk. I also considered that it would be entirely  artificial
   not to permit the  First-tier  Tribunal  whether  the  required  identity
   documentation could be obtained by or on behalf of the appellant  in  his
   home area.

9. At [16] of  my  decision,  I  concluded  that  there  was  no  procedural
   unfairness in refusing an adjournment to enable the appellant to  address
   the issue raised by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  of  the  appellant
   returning to Kirkuk. Judge McClure offered the appellant the  opportunity
   to make further written submissions, which were taken into account before
   the First-tier Tribunal made its decision.

10. At [17] of my decision, I was satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   did not err by addressing the remitted issue of relocation  to  the  IKR.
   Given that the judge found the appellant could return to his home area of
   Kirkuk, relocation elsewhere did not  arise,  and  that  matter  did  not
   require resolving.

11. At [24] of my decision, I was satisfied for the  reasons  given  in  the
   preceding paragraphs, that Judge McClure made an  appropriate  assessment
   of the risk on return  to  Kirkuk,  taking  into  account  the  preserved
   findings and the criteria referenced at headnotes [3] and [5] of SMO.

12. However, for the reasons set out between [25] and [30] of  my  error  of
   law decision, I concluded that Judge McClure erred  in  failing  to  deal
   with  the  specific  difficulties  for  a  person  in   the   appellant's
   circumstances in obtaining a CSID to enable him to return to Kirkuk.

13. In summary, the appellant had an INC but his CSID card was  regarded  by
   the respondent as a forgery. Judge McClure concluded that  with  his  INC
   the appellant would be able to obtain a CSID from  the  Kirkuk  Registry,
   using a proxy or an attorney and that he had failed to  demonstrate  that
   he did not know the page and volume reference of the family registration.



14. In the light of SMO, the appellant could be returned to Baghdad  Airport
   on a laissez-passer without any risk of harm at that point.  However,  in
   order to travel from the airport to  Kirkuk,  the  appellant  would  need
   either a CSID or the new INID. He would not be able to obtain a  CSID  in
   Baghdad. The difficulty is that the Kirkuk CSA office has  introduced  an
   INID terminal and Mr Wood asserted in the error of law  hearing  that  in
   those circumstances a CSID would not be issued, and the  appellant  would
   need to  attend  in  person  to  provide  his  biometric  details.  These
   difficulties were highlighted at [431] of SMO. It was this issue which  I
   reserved to a continuation hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

Remaking the Appeal Decision on the  Limited  Issue  of  Obtaining  Identity
Documentation

15. At the outset of the hearing before me, I queried with Mr  McVeety  what
   the respondent's position now is on redocumentation in the light  of  the
   respondent's own views and the very recent expert evidence of  Dr  Fatah.
   Mr Tan's written submission was made before and therefore  without  sight
   of Dr Fatah's report.

16. Mr McVeety conceded that the evidence now is that Kirkuk was  the  first
   Governorate to introduce an INID terminal and  no  longer  issues  CSIDs,
   whether in person or by proxy. It is accepted that a person has to attend
   the CSA office in person for their biometric details to be  taken  before
   an INID can be issued which Dr Fatah explains  at  [179]  of  the  report
   includes photograph, iris scan, and thumb and  fingerprints.  Mr  McVeety
   accepted the expert evidence as  consistent  with  the  respondent's  own
   understanding that where INID terminals are in operation a CSID will  not
   be obtainable from the Iraqi embassy or a consulate  in  the  UK  at  the
   present time.

17. It follows  from  the  unchallenged  expert  evidence  that  whilst  the
   appellant could be returned to Baghdad Airport,  he  does  not  have  and
   cannot presently obtain identity documentation to travel onwards  to  his
   home area of Kirkuk. A CSID or INID is necessary to pass through security
   checkpoints. Neither assistance by a family member, nor a proxy,  nor  an
   attorney, can assist the appellant to  redocument  himself,  particularly
   where the CSA office in Kirkuk has apparently been  issuing  INIDs  since
   2019 and no longer issues CSIDs. Dr Fatah states  at  [188]  that  if  an
   individual was able to relocate to Iraq without  the  necessary  identity
   documents, they may not be able  to  move  freely  within  Iraq.  At  the
   present time, there is no formal  process  for  obtaining  an  INID  from
   outside Iraq. Neither would the appellant be assisted by  a  Registration
   Document, for which he would need his CSID  details,  and  which  in  any
   event is not able to be used to  pass  through  security  checkpoints  in
   Iraq.

18. In the premises, Mr McVeety considered that he was unable to oppose  the
   appeal being allowed on humanitarian protection article 3 grounds, on the
   basis that if returned to Iraq there was a real risk that  the  appellant
   would become destitute in Baghdad, unable to return safely  to  his  home
   area. Mr Wood agreed with Mr McVeety's assessment. In the  circumstances,
   it was not necessary to take any evidence from the appellant or hear  any
   further submissions.

19. At headnote [9] of SMO, the Upper Tribunal held that,

    "In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and Others
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1276,  an
    international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by reference to
    any alleged risk of harm arising  from  an  absence  of  a  current  or
    expired Iraqi passport or a Laissez passer, if the Tribunal finds  that
    P's return is not currently feasible on account of a  lack  of  any  of
    those documents."


20. It follows from the preserved findings that there is no valid asylum  or
   subsidiary  protection  under  article  15(c)  claim.   The   claim   for
   international protection cannot succeed on the basis of a  risk  of  harm
   arising from absence of identity documentation. However, I find that  the
   appellant is entitled to succeed on humanitarian protection grounds only,
   on the basis that he would face destitution and  circumstances  breaching
   article  3  ECHR  if  returned  to   Iraq   without   adequate   identity
   documentation to enable him to return to his home area of Kirkuk.



Decision

      The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

      The appeal is  allowed  on  humanitarian  protection  article  3  ECHR
      grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       3 March 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       3 March 2021

