
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08912/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 2 September 2020                 |On 9 September 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MD
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Foot, instructed by Tower Hamlets Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing to which there  has  been  no  objection
    from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A
    face to face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and
    all issues could be determined in a remote hearing. In addition to  the
    above-mentioned parties, the appellant was present, remotely.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  MD's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  his  human  rights
    claim following the making of a deportation order against him.

 3. For the purposes of this decision, I shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
    Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent  and  MD  as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 20 April 1985. He claims to
    have arrived in the United Kingdom with  his  father  and  siblings  in
    1997, aged 12 years. Following his arrest on 19 May 2003 for  attempted
    deception and on  suspicion  of  being  an  immigration  offender,  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds, on  22  May
    2003. His application was refused and an appeal against  that  decision
    dismissed on 1 April 2006.

 5. The appellant was convicted on 16 November 2010 of possessing a  listed
    false instrument and possession  of  articles  for  use  in  fraud  and
    possession of an improperly obtained ID card and was sentenced to  four
    20-month custodial sentences, to run concurrently. He was released from
    prison on 9 May 2011 but was arrested again  on  9  November  2011  and
    convicted of further offences of fraud and false representations on  22
    December 2011. He was served with a notice of liability to  deportation
    and a deportation order was signed on 15 May 2013 under  section  32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007. The appellant appealed against the decision
    to deport him, but his appeal was dismissed on 18 October 2013  and  he
    became appeal rights exhausted on 20 November 2013.

 6. On 21 December 2013  the  appellant  submitted  an  application  for  a
    derivative residence card under the EEA Regulations which  was  refused
    on 22 January 2014 and a further application  as  the  extended  family
    member of a British partner was refused on 20 February 2014  and  then,
    following an appeal, was reconsidered and refused  again  on  11  April
    2014.

 7. The appellant made an asylum claim on 26 February 2014 on  the  grounds
    of religion and sexuality, but that was refused on 2 September 2014 and
    certified under section 96 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002. Following a judicial review  challenge  the  certificate  was
    withdrawn and a new refusal decision was made on  5  August  2015.  The
    appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was allowed  on
    asylum grounds on 5 November 2016. However, that decision was set aside
    following a grant of permission to the respondent and  the  appeal  was
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh. The  respondent
    appears to have agreed to reconsider  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
    decision of 5 August 2015 was withdrawn. A new decision was made  on  2
    July 2018 refusing the appellant's protection and human rights claim.

 8. In that decision the respondent considered the appellant's claim to  be
    at risk on return to Ghana on the grounds of being an  openly  bisexual
    man who could not live discreetly and of being a Rastafarian,  and  his
    claim that he was HIV positive, that he  had  PTSD  and  suffered  from
    depression and had been suicidal and that  he  could  not  receive  the
    required healthcare and medication in Ghana. The respondent  took  note
    of the appellant's claim to have left Ghana at the age of  4,  to  have
    moved to Nigeria and then the Ivory Coast and to have come  to  the  UK
    with his father and siblings at the age of 12. The respondent noted the
    appellant's claim that he and his  siblings  were  abandoned  by  their
    father in the UK, were then in informal foster care  and  then  in  the
    care of his father's girlfriend who abandoned them, leaving him to care
    for his younger siblings until social  services  became  involved,  and
    that he was left homeless when his siblings were taken into  care  when
    he was 16 years of age. The appellant claimed to have been picked up by
    a man called T who, in exchange  for  accommodation,  involved  him  in
    criminal activities and expected him to  steal.  He  was  arrested  and
    detained in 2003 after being caught stealing and when  released  became
    involved again with T who provided him with false documents  to  enable
    him to find employment. At that time his sexuality became known in  his
    community and by his siblings and he was violently attacked on  several
    occasions. He continued to be assisted by T  with  false  documents  in
    various identities and, to clear his debt with T, he agreed to transfer
    money in a false name in a bank, but he was caught and  apprehended  by
    the police, convicted and sentenced to 20  months'  imprisonment  in  a
    different identity, DC. Following his release, his false  identity  was
    discovered and he  was  arrested  again  and  given  another  custodial
    sentence. He was attacked and abused whilst in detention because of his
    sexuality and was raped in his cell, and he attempted suicide.  He  was
    committed to a mental institute in May 2016 after being diagnosed  with
    PTSD and was diagnosed as HIV positive in June 2017.

 9. The respondent accepted that the  appellant  was  living  openly  as  a
    bisexual man and that he was a Rastafarian but did not accept  that  he
    would be at  risk  on  either  basis.  The  respondent  considered  the
    appellant to be excluded from humanitarian protection  because  he  had
    committed a serious crime and did not  accept  that  he  met  the  high
    threshold to establish an Article 3 claim on the basis of his health or
    the risk of suicide. The respondent considered that the appellant could
    not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)  of   the
    immigration rules as he had no children or current family life  with  a
    partner and that he could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  399A
    as he had not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life, it
    was not accepted that he was socially and culturally integrated in  the
    UK and it was considered that there were no very significant  obstacles
    to his integration in Ghana. The respondent did not consider  there  to
    be very compelling circumstances outweighing  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.

10. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    in the First-tier Tribunal on 5 July 2019 by Judge Neville.  The  judge
    confirmed that there  was  no  issue  with  credibility  and  the  only
    relevant matter was risk on return  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's
    sexuality. The judge rejected the submission that gay or  bisexual  men
    who lived openly as such in  Ghana  would  generally  face  a  risk  of
    persecution,  but  he  accepted   that   the   appellant's   particular
    circumstances and sexual identity would put him at risk and he  allowed
    the appeal on that basis. The judge also accepted that the  appellant's
    removal to Ghana would be in breach of Article 3 owing  to  his  mental
    health issues and the high risk of suicide and furthermore  that  there
    would be a breach of Article 8 owing to very  compelling  circumstances
    outweighing  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  The  appeal   was
    accordingly allowed on protection and human rights grounds.

11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the respondent
    on the grounds that the judge had  made  a  material  misdirection  and
    given inadequate reasons for finding that the appellant was at risk  of
    persecution on the basis of his sexuality; that the decision  to  allow
    the appeal on the basis of the appellant's mental  health  and  suicide
    risk was inconsistent with binding authorities; and that the judge  had
    failed to consider relevant factors when  concluding  that  there  were
    very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Ghana.

12. Permission to appeal was refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  was
    subsequently granted by the Upper Tribunal on 2 March 2020. The  matter
    then came before me for a remote hearing by way of skype for business.

Hearing and Submissions

13. Mr Melvin submitted that the judge's  conclusion,  that  the  appellant
    would  be  at  risk  of  persecution,  lacked  adequate  reasoning.  He
    submitted that the judge's reasoning at [54] to [56]  was  insufficient
    to warrant a departure from his finding at [52] that  gay  or  bisexual
    men who lived openly as such in Ghana were not  generally  at  risk  of
    persecution. Mr Melvin submitted that the judge erred  by  speculating,
    at [55], that the lack of evidence of reports of violence  was  due  to
    the fact that people  avoided  expressing  their  sexuality  openly  in
    Ghana. The fact that the appellant had joined a number  of  groups  and
    was actively involved in the UK in LGBTQ activities was not part of his
    sexuality and was not sufficient to show that he would be  at  risk  in
    Ghana. Neither was there evidence that the appellant  was  at  risk  of
    exploitation amounting to persecution. Mr Melvin relied on the  grounds
    of appeal in relation to the judge's findings on Article 3 and 8.

14. Ms Foot submitted that the judge's decision  was  noticeably  carefully
    reasoned and the grounds of challenge  were  simply  an  expression  of
    disagreement. The high threshold for making out a reasons challenge was
    not met. Even if a material error of  law  was  found  in  the  judge's
    decision, it did not have to be set aside, and it was relevant that the
    more recent CPIN report of May  2020  showed  a  deterioration  in  the
    attitude to the LGBTQ community in Ghana. Ms Foot submitted that it was
    not irrational or unreasonable to conclude that the lack  of  incidents
    of violence against the LGBTQ community was due to a lack of an ability
    openly to demonstrate sexuality. The judge was not speculating, but  he
    based his findings on the expert report and background information. The
    judge directed himself properly in relation to the case of BF (Albania)
    v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ  1781,
    which was relevant to the  appellant's  circumstances,  and  considered
    various reasons which, when taken together,  were  sufficient  to  show
    that the appellant was at risk in Ghana. The issue of state  protection
    was not an issue because the  appellant's  fear  was  partly  from  the
    authorities. Ms  Foot  submitted  that  the  grounds  of  challenge  in
    relation to Article 3 were not clear and simply consisted of a citation
    of various cases. The judge was entitled  to  conclude  as  he  did  in
    regard to Article 3 and 8.

Discussion and Findings

15. As Ms Foot submitted, the judge's  decision  is  a  particularly  well-
    written  and  comprehensive  one.  The  judge  undertook   a   detailed
    assessment of the country and medical expert reports  and  the  country
    information and assessed the appellant's claim in the  context  of  the
    information in those reports.

16. The respondent challenges the judge's  conclusion  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk on the basis  of  his  sexuality,  asserting  that  he
    materially misdirected himself when making his  findings  and  provided
    inadequate reasoning. However, and on the contrary, it seems to me that
    the judge gave detailed reasons for finding that, despite the fact that
    there was no generalised risk of treatment amounting to persecution for
    those living openly bisexual lives in Ghana, the appellant's particular
    circumstances and situation meant that he would be at risk.  The  judge
    gave three such reasons, at [54] to [59], the first  being  the  nature
    and the extent of the appellant's public display of his  sexuality.  It
    is the respondent's case that  the  judge's  findings  in  that  regard
    involved speculating that the limited evidence of incidents of violence
    was due to the fear of open displays of sexuality, but I agree with  Ms
    Foot that it was not irrational of the judge, having regard to all  the
    evidence including the country expert evidence, to make such a finding.
    That is the threshold the respondent has to meet in a reasons challenge
    and it seems to me that the threshold is not met. In any event,  as  Ms
    Foot submitted, the judge gave further reasons for  distinguishing  the
    appellant's circumstances from those of the general group  referred  to
    at [52], namely the fact that he is accepted as  being  a  genuine  and
    committed activist for the LGBTQ community and would continue to be  so
    on return to Ghana, such that he has a profile elevating him above  the
    general group, and that he is accepted  as  having  vulnerabilities  in
    terms of his mental health and his past experiences which would put him
    at an enhanced risk of exploitation. The grounds assert that the  judge
    failed to give proper reasons for concluding that the  appellant  could
    not access state protection, but that was plainly a  matter  the  judge
    considered and properly addressed, at [44], [45], [50] [51] and [59].

17. I am therefore satisfied, contrary to Mr Melvin's submission, that  the
    judge provided sufficient reasons  to  warrant  a  departure  from  the
    finding on generalised risk on return at [52], drawing  assistance,  as
    he said, from the judgment in BF (Albania) in which similar issues  and
    considerations arose and noting the exceptional and unusual  nature  of
    the appellant's particular case. Whilst it may be  that  another  judge
    could have reached a different decision, it was, in my  view,  entirely
    open to Judge Neville to reach the decision that he did,  having  given
    detailed consideration to all relevant matters and  having  given  full
    and cogent reasons for concluding as he did. The  respondent's  grounds
    are essentially a disagreement with the judge's decision, but the judge
    cannot be criticised as a matter of law, given his careful analysis  of
    the evidence and the appellant's particular  background,  circumstances
    and past experiences and his detailed and  comprehensive  reasoning.  I
    therefore uphold the judge's findings on protection.

18. As Mr Melvin properly submitted, the second and third grounds fall away
    given that I am against him on the first ground. However, I  would  add
    that the respondent's challenge in those  grounds  is  again  a  simple
    disagreement. The second ground is largely a reference  to  authorities
    which it is said the judge failed to follow, but that  is  plainly  not
    the case. The judge had full regard to the  relevant  authorities  when
    making his findings and, having carefully  analysed  and  assessed  the
    medical evidence and had regard to the background information  relating
    to access to treatment  and  medication  in  Ghana,  provided  detailed
    reasons for concluding that the evidence met  the  high  threshold  for
    making out an Article 3 claim. Likewise the judge provided  a  detailed
    assessment of the appellant's circumstances in the context of Article 8
    and applied  the  correct  test  in  considering  the  factors  in  the
    appellant's favour and those against him when reaching  his  conclusion
    as to the existence of "very compelling circumstances".

19. For all of these reasons I find that the respondent has  not  made  out
    her grounds of appeal and  that  the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  as
    asserted. I uphold the judge's decision.



DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal stands.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 2 September 2020
