
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08325/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 August 2017                       |On 10 August 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     NA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to her asylum claim and the circumstances of her child.

Summary of asylum claim

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  She contends that  she  has  a
         well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  Iraq  because  her  family
         consider that she has dishonoured them by having a relationship and
         a child with a man (referred to in the First-tier Tribunal decision
         as 'H'), whom they disapproved of.

Procedural history

      3. In a decision dated 21  February  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Sharkett dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal
         considered  the  main  issue  in  the  appeal  to  relate  to   the
         appellant's credibility [64].   Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         accepted that the appellant may have been subjected to a  level  of
         abuse by her father and may have lived in  a  refugee  camp  before
         leaving Iraq [66], the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  accept  the
         appellant to be a 'witness of truth' more generally, and identified
         inconsistencies in her evidence from [67].

      4. In brief handwritten grounds the appellant applied  for  permission
         to appeal.  These grounds  appear  to  have  been  drafted  by  the
         appellant herself, although at the time she had  solicitors  acting
         on her behalf.

      5. In a decision dated 20 March 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio
         granted permission to  appeal  observing  inter  alia  that  it  is
         arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  applying  a
         higher standard of proof.  This was not identified as a  ground  of
         appeal by the appellant.

      6. The respondent submitted a rule 24 notice dated 30  March  2017  in
         which she submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal's  references  to
         the balance of probabilities are not fatal to the overall  findings
         and the issue was not in any event raised in the grounds of appeal.

Hearing

      7. At the beginning of the hearing Mr McVeety accepted that the appeal
         was unopposed and the decision needs to be remade in its  entirety.
         He was entirely correct to do so for the reasons set out below.

      8. Both representatives agreed that the error of law is such that  the
         decision needs to be remade completely.  I have had regard to  para
         7.2 of the relevant Senior President's Practice Statement  and  the
         nature and extent of the factual findings required in remaking  the
         decision, and I have decided that this is an  appropriate  case  to
         remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of law discussion

      9. The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  direct  itself  to  the  correct
         standard of proof when determining asylum claims at  the  point  in
         the decision in which the legal framework is set out (see  [15]  to
         [21])  or  when  directing  itself  to  the  correct  approach   to
         credibility (see [62] to [67]).

     10. The  First-tier  Tribunal  undoubtedly  made  wide-ranging  adverse
         credibility findings  at  [68]  to  [89]  but  there  are  numerous
         findings that have been made on the balance of probabilities -  see
         [69], [71], [85] and [88].  In the conclusion at  [90]  the  First-
         tier Tribunal correctly referred to the lower  standard  of  proof.
         This simply  comes  too  late  and  does  not  remedy  the  earlier
         misdirections in law.

     11. The correct application of the standard of proof is  a  fundamental
         requirement in the  determination  of  an  asylum  appeal.   In  my
         judgment, the respondent was entirely correct to concede  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal has erred in law in applying the incorrect  and
         higher balance of probabilities standard.

     12. Although this issue was not raised in the  grounds  of  appeal,  Mr
         McVeety accepted that it is an 'obvious' error of law in the  sense
         described in Robinson v SSHD [1997] Imm AR 568, CA.

Disposal

     13. It follows, as agreed by both representatives, that the  conclusion
         on credibility is vitiated  by  error  of  laws  and  unsafe.   The
         decision must be remade entirely and de novo.

Decision

     14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.



     15. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
9 August 2017


