
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/08445/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |              Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |promulgated                            |
|On 6 April 2018                       |              On 11 April 2018         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     MAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:        Mr Aslam instructed by Sohaib Fatimi Solicitors



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision
        of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hetherington  who,  in  a  decision
        promulgated on  3  October  2017,  allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum
        grounds.






Background


     2. MAS is a national of Afghanistan, born in Pakistan on 27 June 1995,
        who arrived in the United Kingdom on 19 May 2016 and claimed asylum
        shortly thereafter. The application was refused by the Secretary of
        State on 18 August 2017.
     3. The Judge sets out a direction in relation to  the  issues  he  was
        required to decide at [9 - 10] of the  decision  in  the  following
        terms:

             "9.  The appellant claims his uncle was killed by the Taliban.


             10.  My task is to identify whether the appellant has a  well-
                  founded fear of persecution from the Taliban, on return to
                  Afghanistan,  whether  there   are   other   reasons   for
                  concluding that he faces a real risk of serious harm."

     4. MAS claimed his paternal uncle was shot dead in Pakistan  and  that
        he believed the Taliban were responsible.  MAS stated his father is
        a member of the Taliban and that his father wanted MAS to join this
        group. MAS feels the Taliban will kill him.
     5. The Judge sets out the core findings from 11.6 to 11.20  which  can
        be summarised in the following terms (reference to 'the  appellant'
        is to MAS as this is the capacity in which he appeared  before  the
        Judge):

               a. The appellant's statement  provides  detailed  and  cogent
                  explanation of the claimed inconsistencies in  his  asylum
                  interview [11.6].


               b. The appellant has described growing up in  Pakistan  where
                  he was educated to year 12.  The Judge did not  find  this
                  statement inconsistent for although the appellant asserted
                  his father was against education his father respected  the
                  dominance of his older brother as head of the  family  who
                  wanted the appellant to be educated [11.7].


               c. The Judge accepted  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and
                  witness that photographs provided depicted the appellant's
                  uncle [11.8] but finds that other photographs depicting  a
                  shroud  do  not  and  cannot  prove  the  death   of   the
                  appellant's uncle, the Hizb-e-Islami  commander  allegedly
                  killed by the Taliban [11.9].


               d. When considering credibility, the Judge took into  account
                  the fact the appellant's witness, another uncle  based  in
                  the UK, was granted asylum by  the  Home  Office  in  2001
                  because he feared he would be killed by  the  Taliban  and
                  accordingly attached weight  to  his  evidence  which  the
                  Judge  found   had   been   given   in   an   honest   and
                  straightforward  manner  and   was   unshaken   in   cross
                  examination [11.10].


               e. The Judge did not accept discrepancies identified  by  the
                  respondent   are   either   discrepancies   at   all    or
                  discrepancies  'of  such  moment  as  to   undermine   the
                  appellant's credibility' [11.11].


               f. The appellant was sixteen or seventeen when his uncle  was
                  killed. The Judge did not find the appellant  had  changed
                  his account. The appellant's uncle in the UK believes  his
                  brother was killed by the Taliban which is the  basis  for
                  the appellant's belief [11.12].


               g. The Judge accepted it was plausible no  death  certificate
                  would have been issued by the authorities in  Pakistan  as
                  at the time citizens of Afghanistan were in a camp with no
                  legal status in Pakistan [11.13].


               h. The Judge noted the appellant's parents live  in  an  area
                  controlled by the Taliban and that it was plausible out of
                  fear and motivation to remain  safe  that  the  appellants
                  father joined this group. Members of the appellants  tribe
                  would know the appellant and will bring  pressure  on  the
                  appellants father to  force  the  appellant  to  join  the
                  Taliban [11.14].


               i. The Judge was satisfied the appellant  had  given  a  good
                  reason for  not  claiming  asylum  in  either  Croatia  or
                  Germany [11.15].


               j. The Judge found the appellant's uncle in the UK "generally
                  credible" as he is a man  who  has  been  granted  refugee
                  status by the Home Office based on his fear of the Taliban
                  [11.16].


               k. The Judge finds that the appellant should be  regarded  as
                  having given a truthful account  about  what  happened  in
                  Pakistan and  Afghanistan  for  the  reasons  set  out  at
                  [11.17].


               l. The Judge finds  documents  at  pages  C1  to  C7  in  the
                  appellants bundle reliable [11.18].


               m. At [11.19] the Judge finds:


                      "I  accept  that  the  Taliban  are  a   quasi-shadow
                      government who will know who comes into  Afghanistan.
                      I find that relocation  is  not  an  option  for  the
                      appellant. The reach of the Taliban is widespread and
                      includes Kabul."


               n. The Judge finds the appellant has a well-founded  fear  of
                  persecution and is therefore a refugee [11.20].

     6. The Secretary State sought permission to appeal  on  three  grounds
        asserting: (a) that the Presenting Officer identified and submitted
        several major inconsistencies that go to the core of  MAS  account,
        notably the claim his uncle was killed by the Taliban yet that  the
        Taliban want MAS to join them. The grounds assert the Judge has not
        recorded  any  of  the  submissions  from  either  party   in   the
        determination. The Grounds refer to  two  issues  recorded  in  the
        Presenting Officers post hearing minute being:

             "At Q102 AI he says he doesn't know who killed his uncle.


             His initial screening interview at Q 4.1 he says  it  was  the
             Taliban who killed his uncle in Peshwar.


             Later in his AI at Q144 he says his Uncle was  killed  by  the
             government."






             "The Appellant maintains his family wanted  him  to  join  the
             Taliban in revenge for the death of his  uncle.  Yet,  if  the
             uncle was killed by the Taliban, which is what  the  Appellant
             originally said, - it isn't clear why the family want  him  to
             join the Organisation/terrorist group  that  were  responsible
             for killing the uncle".

         The grounds assert the Judge failed to adequately address the first
         point and has failed entirely to consider the second submission.
     7. (b) that  the  inconsistencies  identified  and  submitted  by  the
        Presenting Officer were not of a minor or  peripheral  nature.  The
        grounds argue the Judge failed  to  actually  address  any  of  the
        inconsistencies  raised,  claiming  instead  that  there  were   no
        inconsistencies or if there were they did not undermine the appeal.
        The grounds assert the question of whether the Taliban killed MAS's
        uncle was central to the appeal. MAS claimed that he  believed  his
        uncle was killed by the Taliban  but  did  not  address  the  issue
        submitted upon, in other words  inconsistencies  in  MAS's  account
        that he refers to the government, then the Taliban,  then  he  does
        not know who killed his uncle. The grounds submit that even if  MAS
        believes the Taliban killed the uncle this does not explain why MAS
        gave three different answers to what should be simple question.
     8. (c) the Judge  has  failed  to  adequately  address  the  issue  of
        internal relocation at 11.19. The grounds submit the  Judge  failed
        to refer to any background evidence to support the  view  that  the
        Taliban are a "quasi shadow government" and refers to  no  evidence
        of any description to demonstrate the Taliban are able  to  monitor
        those entering or leaving Afghanistan. The Judge fails  to  provide
        adequate reasons for how he was able to reach this conclusion.
     9. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on the basis that all grounds are arguable.



Error of law


    10. The Tribunal reminders itself that an appellate court  or  tribunal
        should not lightly interfere with the findings of a judicial  fact-
        finder, who has had the benefit of hearing and seeing  the  parties
        and witnesses give evidence, as the Judge did in this case, without
        good reason which will ordinarily only arise if  the  findings  are
        irrational or the Judge  had  made  legal  error  material  to  the
        decision under challenge sufficient to warrant the appellate  court
        having any such involvement.
    11. The finding by the Judge at [11.11] is that he did not  accept  the
        discrepancies identified  by  the  Presenting  Officer  are  either
        discrepancies  at  all  or  are  not  discrepancies  sufficient  to
        undermine  MAS's  credibility.  The  first  of  these  findings  is
        irrational. If one looks at the evidence from all sources available
        to the Judge it is clear that MAS gave evidence of a  contradictory
        nature as identified in the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal.
        In  relation  to  whether   those   discrepancies   undermine   the
        appellant's credibility would  depend  upon  whether  there  was  a
        satisfactory explanation or that there was other evidence to  which
        the  Judge  was  entitled  to  give  weight  which  supported   the
        conclusion of the Judge, even though discrepancies may have  arisen
        elsewhere.
    12. The Reasons for Refusal letter noted the core of MAS's claim, which
        was that MAS's uncle was shot dead in Pakistan, but then refers  at
        [31] to  the  discrepancies  in  the  evidence  which  are  in  the
        Secretary of States view such significant inconsistencies that  the
        MAS failed to establish the perpetrators  of  his  uncle's  passing
        after providing three different responses. MAS was therefore  fully
        aware that this was an issue since receipt of the refusal letter in
        August 2017. The decision-maker also noted MAS has not provided any
        documentary evidence to support his claim or to confirm his uncle's
        death. The decision-maker also noted MAS claimed that he was from a
        family who are members of the Taliban, although MAS himself is  not
        a member and has no active role in this organisation, and  that  he
        claimed his deceased maternal uncle is a commander of  the  Taliban
        in his reply to the asylum interview question 14 or, alternatively,
        that his uncle was a  member  of  Hezb-i-Islami,  asylum  interview
        question 100-101. It was also noted at [39] of the  refusal  letter
        that MAS claimed asylum because family and  relatives  are  Taliban
        members or alternatively that his uncle was killed by  the  Taliban
        and his father lost a leg because of the Taliban, although  it  was
        noted MAS failed to mention such family ties to the Taliban in  his
        screening interview.
    13. It is also noted at [44] of the Reasons for Refusal letter that MAS
        claimed in his asylum interview that his father  left  Pakistan  in
        fear after his uncle's death and  after  returning  to  Afghanistan
        from Pakistan experienced no problems from the  Afghan  government.
        It was also recorded at this stage that MAS provided two  different
        accounts regarding his uncle's killer, as noted above. It was found
        however that given the family had experienced no problems from  the
        Afghan government since returning  and  since  MAS  had  failed  to
        establish the perpetrators of his uncle's death  it  is  considered
        significantly inconsistent that  the  family  would  want  to  take
        revenge against the Afghan government which was said  to  undermine
        the appellant's account.
    14. The removal direction in this matter  is  set  to  Afghanistan  not
        Pakistan.
    15. At its highest, considering MAS's evidence on its  own,  the  Judge
        may have been able to make a finding that MAS subjectively believed
        that his uncle had been killed as alleged which  then  led  to  the
        necessity to consider whether such a subjective assessment had been
        objectively made out.
    16. The Judge accepted MAS's account because he accepted the account of
        the uncle based in the United Kingdom. It appears to  have  been  a
        major element in assessing the credibility of the witness that  the
        uncle was granted asylum by the Home  Office  in  2001  because  he
        feared that he would be killed by the Taliban [11.10 and 11.16].
    17. The information referred to by the Judge in MAS's bundle, Section B
        - B12 - B 32, relates to the uncle's earlier claim. These include a
        letter of the 17 August 2001, a copy of the  uncle's  statement  of
        evidence  form,  SEF  (self  completion)  in  which  the  applicant
        provides details of  family  composition  and  in  which  there  is
        reference to a statement in which the core of the claim giving rise
        to a real risk on return is allegedly set out. Two issues arise  in
        relation to this documentation. The first  is  that  the  statement
        referred to in that form was not provided to the Judge and does not
        appear in the section of MAS's bundle relied on by the  Judge.  The
        second issue is that the Judge in the determination under challenge
        refers to the fact the uncle has been granted asylum yet the  Judge
        did not have before him the letter from the Home Office setting out
        the basis on which asylum had been granted.  The  letter  dated  17
        August 2001 at page B12 of MAS's appeal bundle is a letter from the
        Home Office,  Immigration  and  Nationality  Directorate  National,
        Asylum  Support  Service,  informing  the  uncle   that   following
        confirmation that his application for asylum  had  been  determined
        and confirmation he has been granted leave to remain in the  United
        Kingdom, he was being advised  that  he  no  longer  qualified  for
        support under section 95 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.
        There was therefore no evidence before the Judge  setting  out  the
        full extent of the claim made in 2001, the basis on which the uncle
        was recognised as a refugee (if this was the case),  or  how  those
        facts related to the current situation. It  appears  the  best  the
        Judge had was a witness statement dated 22 September 2017 in  which
        the uncle claimed he arrived in the United Kingdom  on  22  January
        2001 as a result of fleeing the Taliban as he faced a real risk  as
        a member of the Hizb-i-Islami party from the Taliban once they took
        over control in Afghanistan.
    18. The Judge fails to factor into the  assessment  of  this  evidence,
        particularly  in  light  of  the  absence  of  adequate  reasoning,
        relevant authorities applicable to assessing the weight to be given
        to a grant of refugee status to a person in  the  position  of  the
        appellant's uncle. In AB (Witness corroboration in asylum  appeals)
        Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00125  the  Tribunal  said  "We  would  add  a
        comment  on  the  growing  practice  of  appellants  and/or   their
        representatives adducing letters granting refugee status to someone
        who is (or is said to be) a relative or colleague. All too often it
        is assumed such letters magically prove that the  person  concerned
        was granted refugee status on the basis he says  he  was.  All  too
        rarely are such letters accompanied by documents confirming on what
        basis the person concerned actually claimed asylum or, if an appeal
        was involved, on what basis the Adjudicator allowed  that  person's
        appeal. Since such additional documentation should often  be  still
        available to the person concerned or to that  person's  solicitors,
        Adjudicators should consider what weight they can attach to refugee
        grant  letters  when  they  are  not  accompanied  by  confirmatory
        documents of this kind ".
    19. In AC (Somalia) 2005 UKAIT 124 the Tribunal said the  fact  that  a
        witness  has  been  granted  refugee  status  does  not  compel  an
        Immigration Judge to believe her evidence about the basis on  which
        she was granted that status.  Whereas  evidence  at  a  hearing  is
        tested by the adversarial procedure and the Judge must give reasons
        for his findings, the grant of status  by  the  Home  Office  is  a
        purely administrative decision, taken on the  papers  and  with  no
        reasons given.
    20. The Judge does say this witness gave his evidence in an honest  and
        straightforward manner and was unshaken in cross  examination,  but
        it is clear that this  was  a  factor  that  the  Judge  considered
        together with the grant of refugee status and  it  is  not  certain
        that the Judge would have concluded as he did in the absence of the
        weight given to the grant of refugee status. The  respondent  makes
        out arguable legal error material to the decision on this ground.
    21.  The  second  ground  of  challenge,  relating  to  the  issue   of
        relocation, is by far the strongest ground. Even if MAS's uncle was
        killed as he alleged, there is still the fact MAS's  father  return
        to Afghanistan  where  he  experienced  no  difficulties  from  the
        government.  The  Judge  makes  no  findings  at  all  within   the
        determination that either the appellant  or  family  members  would
        face persecution on return at the hands of the Afghan government.
    22. The Judge was required to consider the point to which MAS would  be
        returned in Afghanistan and to ascertain whether  he  will  face  a
        credible real risk of persecution in that area. If such  real  risk
        was found, the Judge was required to consider whether  there  is  a
        sufficiency protection in that area or, if not,  whether  there  is
        another area of Afghanistan to which  it  would  be  reasonable  to
        expect MAS to relocate in which he will face no such real  risk  of
        persecution or ill-treatment or, is such a risk may arise, that  he
        has available to him a sufficiency protection.
    23. The finding by the Judge that  the  Taliban  are  a  'quasi-shadow'
        government is arguably irrational. The Judge gives no  reasons  for
        such a finding and fails to refer to any country guidance or  other
        relevant authorities or country material to support such a finding.
        The finding that as a result of this status the Taliban  will  know
        who comes into Afghanistan is irrational as,  again,  there  is  no
        reference in the determination to any country material  to  support
        such an assertion.  It  is  not  made  out  the  Taliban  have  the
        resources or desire to sit at the airport and log  the  details  of
        those flying in and out through the International airport in Kabul,
        or elsewhere, or have access to immigration  documentation  created
        by the Afghan government of manifests to enable them to be aware of
        who is entering or leaving the country or being returned  from  the
        United Kingdom, even assuming the Taliban are aware  that  MAS  has
        left Pakistan.
    24. The finding  by  the  Judge  that  the  reach  of  the  Taliban  is
        widespread and includes Kabul  lacks  clarity.  If  the  Judge  was
        saying that the Taliban have a presence in all parts of Afghanistan
        this is not arguably  disputed  although  their  presence  in  some
        parts, including Kabul, does not appear to  be  in  a  position  of
        power of authority and is only reflected by terrorists acts such as
        assassinations, shootings, and bombings. If the Judge was inferring
        that such a presence was in the quasi-governmental  capacity,  such
        as indicating control of institutions and individuals,  such  claim
        is not made out.
    25. The Judge  has  not  properly  considered  the  issue  of  internal
        relocation. Although not yet reported by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr
        Tufan did have in  his  possession  a  copy  of  the  determination
        relating to return to Afghanistan which  is  before  the  Reporting
        Committee with a view to its publication as a country guidance case
        which confirms the position as was clearly understood from existing
        case law that a person who is of low-level interest to the Taliban,
        i.e. not a senior government or security  service  official,  or  a
        spy, is not at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in  Kabul,
        and that it will not in general be unreasonable or unduly harsh for
        a single adult male in good health to relocate to Kabul, even if he
        does not have specific connections or a  support  network  in  that
        city. Whilst fact specific issues must be taken into account it was
        not  found  the  current  security   situation   renders   internal
        relocation unreasonable or unduly harsh. The Judge fails to analyse
        any of the existing case law relating to returns and, as a  result,
        his approach to the issue is flawed.
    26.  In  light  of  the  nature  of  the  errors  identified,  and  the
        determination considered as a whole, I find it is not possible  for
        there to be any preserved findings. I set the determination of  the
        First-tier Tribunal  Judge  aside.  As  extensive  fact-finding  is
        required in  relation  to  every  aspect  of  this  claim,  and  in
        accordance with the practice  direction  relating  to  remittal  of
        appeals, I consider the only just and fair option is for the appeal
        to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at North  Shields
        to be heard by another judge of  that  Tribunal  nominated  by  the
        Assistant Resident Judge, or another on his  behalf,  according  to
        the operational requirements of that hearing Centre.

Decision

    27. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remit the  appeal  to
        the First-tier Tribunal sitting at North Shields  to  be  heard  by
        another judge of that centre nominated by  the  Assistant  Resident
        Judge, other than Judge Hetherington.


   Anonymity.


    28. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9 April 2018












