
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/08411/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 February 2018                         | On 12 February 2018             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                     JOJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia. His date of birth is  1  January
    1996. He has refugee status in South Africa. He arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom on 20 September 2014 on a fake Tanzanian passport  and  claimed
    asylum the same day. The procedural history is set out in paragraphs 12
    to 15 but a final decision to refuse his claim was made  on  11  August
    2017. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.
    Judge Coll refused the appeal in a decision promulgated on  17  October
    2017.

 2. The appellant's claim is  set  out  in  paragraphs  16  to  22  of  the
    decision. Briefly after arriving in South Africa the appellant went  to
    live in Makhibidunga, Limbobo. He went to work in his maternal  uncle's
    shop. On three occasions on 11 June, 4 July  and  29  July  2014  armed
    gangs entered the shop and robbed it. On the first occasion one of  the
    appellant's colleagues was struck on the head with a bottle  and  died.
    The police arrived.  The  first  question  they  asked  was  about  the
    appellant's status in South Africa. On the second occasion  they  tried
    to shoot the appellant's uncle and grazed  the  top  of  his  arm.  The
    public gathered outside shouting abuse that it was a good thing because
    they were foreigners. The police arrived three  hours  after  the  shop
    closed. On the third occasion the police  did  not  attend.  After  the
    third occasion the uncle decided that it was no longer safe to work  in
    the shop. The appellant left and went to Johannesburg. After a month he
    left South Africa.

 3. The respondent accepted that these events  had  happened  but  did  not
    accept  that  they  were  racially  motivated   or   that   there   was
    insufficiency of protection in South Africa. The appellant  produced  a
    volume  of  objective  evidence  about   conditions   for   foreigners,
    particularly refugees living in South Africa together  with  an  expert
    report from Professor Aguilar.

 4. At paragraph 38 Judge Coll said this, "I accept that the uncle owned  a
    shop in which the appellant worked and that the shop  was  attacked  by
    gangs or criminals on three separate occasions.  I  find  that  neither
    these gangs or criminals ... or any hostile members of the  public  who
    were onlookers were  acting  on  behalf  of  the  state  officially  or
    unofficially; the appellant has never said that these gangs, criminals,
    or onlookers were in any way connected to the authorities. I  therefore
    find that the appellant does not have a Convention reason."

 5.  It  appears  from  that  passage  that  Judge  Coll  was   under   the
    misapprehension that in order to claim protection under the  Convention
    the risk of harm must  be  at  the  hands  of  state  actors  or  those
    connected to the state. As Mr Duffy conceded that is an error  of  law;
    Hovarth v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 1  AC  489.
    The question is whether it is material.

 6. Mr Duffy submitted that such an error would  only  be  material  if  it
    could be shown that Judge Coll had erred in finding that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection or  of  internal  relocation.  On  the  first
    matter he pointed to paragraph 63 where he submitted  that  Judge  Coll
    had found that the appellant was not the subject of attack motivated by
    his nationality or refugee status. It  followed  that  he  was  not  of
    interest to gangs and criminals and the point had never been made  that
    he was of interest to the authorities. As such he was not  in  need  of
    international protection. She accordingly did not consider  the  matter
    of sufficiency of protection or internal relocation  further  than  she
    had done already.

 7. The issue  of  whether  or  not  the  attacks  were  motivated  by  the
    appellant's ethnicity or status as a refugee in South Africa raises the
    issue of the  appellant's  credibility.  Judge  Coll  made  an  adverse
    finding on the appellant's credibility. However there was no doubt that
    the attacks occurred in the manner described  by  the  appellant.  With
    respect  to  Judge  Coll  it  appears  that  the  adverse  findings  on
    credibility pertain to matters which are peripheral to the question  as
    to whether or not the attacks were  motivated  by  nationality  or  his
    refugee status.

 8. At paragraph 41 Judge Coll says that the appellant  has  been  able  to
    offer little evidence that these attacks were racially motivated  apart
    from a) his opinion, b) some documents and c) some objective  evidence.
    She accepts that there have been racially motivated  attacks  on  shops
    owned by the Somali community in South Africa but goes on to say,  that
    this does not mean to say that the attacks on the uncle's  shop  fitted
    into that category.

 9. Mr Nicholson took me to a number of  reports  that  were  before  Judge
    Coll. These included the United  States  Department  of  State  report,
    UNHCR, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty  International,  amongst  others.
    These vouch the problem of  attacks  on  foreigners  in  South  Africa,
    perceived  difficulties  in  enforcing  the  law  and  calls   on   the
    authorities to do more to protect foreigners and refugees.

10. There was also an expert report  from  Professor  Aguilar.  Judge  Coll
    considers that report in some detail but rejects it.  As  Mr  Nicholson
    pointed  out  Professor  Aguilar's  opinion  is  consistent  with   the
    objective evidence. He referred me to CM (Kenya) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department EWCA Civ 312 in which Buxton LJ observed,  "But
    if Dr Aguilar's evidence was to be rejected it was in my view incumbent
    on the tribunal to identify the conflict between Dr Aguilar's  evidence
    and the objective evidence and state at least in  outline  why  it  was
    that the tribunal was rejecting those assertions."  In  fact  as  Judge
    Coll herself noted the  Amnesty  International  Report  2016/2017  also
    repeats  the  kind  of  objective  evidence  already  before  Professor
    Aguilar.

11. For these reasons I find Judge Coll's rejection of a racial or  refugee
    motive for the attacks on  the  appellant  to  be  at  the  very  least
    problematic. It appears that she has sought  direct  evidence  of  such
    motivation on the part of those entering the shop, the perpetrators, as
    she puts it. That pitches the test too  high.  There  was,  of  course,
    evidence of the mob outside on one occasion. There was direct  evidence
    that shops owned by foreigners were targeted by mobs. If the  shop  was
    targeted because it was owned  by  a  foreigner,  whether  it  was  for
    economic gain or purely racist, then it is still an attack motivated by
    racial hatred.

12. The issue then is whether there  it  can  be  shown  that  there  is  a
    sufficiency of protection. In my opinion Judge Coll's finding  on  this
    issue is infected by her error in considering that in  order  to  claim
    protection under the Convention the risk of harm  must  be  from  state
    actors or those connected to the state.  To  that  extent  I  find  her
    error to be material.

13. The issue of internal relocation I find to be more nuanced. Judge  Coll
    deals with this at paragraph 43 and paragraphs 54 to 56.  In  part  her
    conclusions on this matter rest on her rejection of Professor Aguilar's
    report. But I also note that in paragraph 63,  having  found  that  the
    appellant is not in need  of  international  protection  she  does  not
    require to consider internal relocation any further. On that  basis  it
    appears to me  that  it  would  at  least  be  open  to  another  judge
    considering this evidence to reach a different conclusion.

14. For these reasons I find that the error of law is material.  I  advised
    parties of my decision at the hearing and it was agreed that  the  case
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                             Date 8 February 2018


Lord Boyd of Duncansby
