

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08562/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 July 2017                       |On 25 August 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DH

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Frantzis    (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Aziz "hereinafter  the Judge")
whereupon he had allowed the claimant's appeal against  a  decision  of  the
Secretary  of  State  made  on  28 July 2016  refusing  her  claim   for
international  protection.   I  have  decided  to  continue   an   anonymity
direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.   Nothing  was  said  about  the
continuance or otherwise  of  the  direction  at  the  hearing  and  nothing
specifically relating  to  that  had  been  received  in  writing  from  the
claimant's solicitors but, nevertheless, I have  considered  it  appropriate
to maintain the status quo.

2.    I have decided to dismiss the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  for  the
relatively brief reasons which follow.  They are brief because  Mr Diwnycz,
whilst not formally conceding anything, did  not  see  fit  to  support  the
grounds of appeal which had secured a grant of permission.  He told  me,  as
he put it, he was not seeking to "strenuously pursue the grounds".

3.    The claimant is a national of Namibia and it was her  assertion  that,
if returned to that country, she would be at risk of persecution or  serious
harm at the hands of an ex-partner and his family.  In  pursuing  her  claim
she detailed a history of previous  violence  of  considerable  significance
and which included elements of what might be termed sexual violence.   Those
incidents had occurred in the UK and her ex-partner had been  arrested  and,
because he was in the United Kingdom illegally, returned to  Namibia.   She
asserted that he continued to  make  threats  from  that  country  including
threats made to harm her son who had been in Namibia for a period after  the
ex-partner's return prior to himself arriving in the UK. She  said  she  had
sometimes sent her ex-partner money in order to placate him  but  that  when
she stopped doing that he  had  kidnapped  her  son  prior  to  subsequently
releasing him.  The claimant, in addition to claiming she would be  at  risk
in her home area upon return, had also argued that  there  would  not  be  a
sufficiency of protection for her and that she could not take  advantage  of
an internal flight alternative because her ex-partner and his  family  would
be able to track her down.

4.    The respondent had accepted some important elements of the  claimant's
account.  It was accepted that she is a national of  Namibia  and  that  she
had been a victim of domestic violence in the United Kingdom as claimed. It
was  also  accepted  that  her  account,  if  true,  did  engage  the   1951
Refugee Convention on the basis that women subjected to  domestic  violence
in Namibia form a "particular social group".   It  was  agreed,  in  general
terms, that there was a high prevalence of violence directed  towards  women
in Namibia.  Nevertheless,  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  the
contention that threats had continued since the partner  had  been  returned
to Namibia nor that the son had been kidnapped nor that she would now be  at
risk of harm if returned.  The Secretary of State also  contended  that  she
would  have  a  sufficiency  of  protection  available  and  that   internal
relocation was a viable option for her.  So, the claim was refused  and  she
appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

5.    The appeal was heard on 3 January 2017.  The Judge went on to produce
a most thorough and careful determination which contained clear findings  of
fact and a careful  evaluation  of  relevant  background  country  material.
The Judge felt able to accept certain though not all of what  the  claimant
had put forward in her account.  The Judge made these findings of fact:

      "     58.  Looking at all of the evidence in the  round,  I  make  the
following findings:

                  (i)    The  appellant  entered  the  United   Kingdom   in
                 October 2004 on a working holiday visa.  After her arrival,
                 she was able  to  extend  her  leave  as  a  student  until
                 31 December 2007.  Se did not seek to regularise her leave
                 after it expired.   The  appellant  has  not  provided  any
                 satisfactory explanation as to why she overstayed after her
                 visa expired.

                 (ii)  After her arrival, she entered  into  a  relationship
                 with Karuhe Kaizemi.  There is a lack of  evidence  before
                 the  Tribunal  as  to  when  this  relationship  commenced.
                 However,  I  note  that  the  appellant  states  that  when
                 Karuhe Kaizemi was arrested in 2011 that they had been in a
                 relationship for about six years.  This would suggest  that
                 they began seeing each other from around 2005.

                 (iii) Karuhe Kaizemi was a very  controlling  and  violent
                 individual.  The appellant was in an  abusive  and  violent
                 relationship.

                 (iv)  On 5 July 2011, Karuhe Kaizemi  was  convicted  at
                 Edinburgh Sheriff Court of an offence of violence  against
                 the appellant.  In her interview, the appellant states that
                 the incident took place on 5 February 2011.  She goes into
                 some length in  her  interview  (which  I  have  summarised
                 above) about the awful acts of violence  (including  sexual
                 violence) which she was subjected to on that day.   I  take
                 no issue with her evidence.

                  (v)    Following  the  conviction,  Karuhe Kaizemi   was
                 deported to Namibia later that same year.

                 (vi)  Even after Karuhe Kaizemi was deported  to  Namibia,
                 he continued to exert a  controlling  influenced  over  the
                 appellant.  He used modern means of communication including
                 text messaging and the internet to contact  the  appellant.
                 When he contacted her he aired his grievances  against  her
                 and blamed her for the fact that  the  life  which  he  had
                 established in the United Kingdom had come to an end after
                 he was deported.  He blamed her for this.  Furthermore,  he
                 threatened to exact revenge on her and  her  son  (who  was
                 living Namibia), unless she sent him money.

                 (vii) Fearful of what may happen  to  her  son,  from  2011
                 until the end of 2013 the  appellant  sent  Karuhe Kaizemi
                 money through a money transfer agency on a regular basis.

                 (viii)      In 2012, Karuhe Kaizemi was able to track down
                 her son.  More than this, he was able to take a  photograph
                 of him standing next to her son which he then sent  to  the
                 appellant.  A copy  of  that  photograph  is  contained  at
                 section D1 of the respondent bundle.  However, having heard
                 from her I am not persuaded that he then assaulted her  son
                 with a belt when he saw on him in 2012.

                 (ix)  I also do not accept that  Karuhe Kaizemi  kidnapped
                 her son in 2014 and he was only released after the  payment
                 of ransom money.  I do not accept the appellant's  evidence
                 that the reason she not only omitted mentioning the  kidnap
                 during her asylum  interview,  but  positively  denied  the
                 assertion when it  was  put  to  her  by  the  interviewing
                 officer, was because she feared that further questions  may
                 follow and has her mind had gone blank she would  have  had
                 much difficulty in answering them.  I did not find this  to
                 be a particularly  convincing  answer.   I  find  that  the
                 appellant has embellished this very significant part of her
                 case.

                 (x)   The appellant's son came to  the  United Kingdom  in
                 2014.

                 (xi)  The appellant has continued  to  receive  threatening
                 messages from both the appellant and individuals associated
                 with the appellant (I do not go as far as to say that these
                 individuals are his sisters).  The appellant  was  able  to
                 show a number of messages sent to her Facebook  account  in
                 which highly threatening  and  abusive  language  was  used
                 against her.  The threats made  against  her  included  her
                 being  raped  and  killed.   Although  I  accept  that  the
                 appellant does not recognise the name  of  the  individuals
                 who purportedly sent these messages, she believes  that  it
                 is the appellant and his family members who are using these
                 online identities to send her threatening messages.   Given
                 that  I  accept  that  she  has  genuinely  received  these
                 messages, I find that applying the lower standard of  proof
                 that it is reasonable to conclude that it would have to  be
                 either her ex-partner or someone associated with  him,  who
                 was sending such threatening  messages.   On  the  evidence
                 before the Tribunal, she has no grievance against any other
                 individual who believes that the appellant has ruined their
                 life."

6.    On the basis of those findings the Judge did accept  that  there  was
risk in the home  area  within  Namibia.   The Judge  then  turned  to  the
question of internal flight and said this:

      "     65.  The way in which the appellant's former  partner  has  been
      able  to  coerce  and  control  the  appellant  (who  I  find  to   be
      vulnerable), leads me to an overall impression that I am  prepared  to
      accept that there is a real risk that the appellant's  former  partner
      may be able to track her down whichever part of Namibia she  moved  to
      and that if he did track her down, that she would be at real  risk  of
      harm from him  (he  has,  after  all,  a  track  record  of  violently
      assaulting her).   Internal  relocation  is  therefore  not  a  viable
      option."

7.    That left the matter of sufficiency of protection.  The Judge, as  to
that, reviewed certain of the information contained  within  the  background
country material which had been provided for the purposes of the appeal  and
then said this:

      "     71.  Contained within the supplementary bundle  is  the  Amnesty
      International Report for Namibia 2015-2016.  The  relevant  parts  of
      this report have been helpfully  highlighted  for  the  tribunal.   In
      particular, I note at page 1 of the report it  states  that  violence
      against women remains a concern.  On page 2 of the report  it  states
      that in 2014 a UN programme on HIV/Aids  concluded  that  the  gender
      based violence ought to be declared  a  national  disaster  given  its
      prevalence.  Section 2.1 of the report (page 3) highlights that  the
      police are not always very effective in either preventing or detecting
      such crime.

            72.  Looking at all of the country information in the round  and
      applying the lower standard  of  proof  in  asylum  cases,  I  am  not
      persuaded that sufficiency of protection would  be  available  to  the
      appellant if she were returned to Namibia.  Whilst I note the  country
      information  relied  upon   by   the   respondent,   the   appellant's
      representative has submitted several pieces of  cogent  evidence  from
      credible sources which I have found  carry  greater  probative  force.
      Her  appeal  therefore  succeeds   under   the   Refugee   Convention,
      Humanitarian Protection Provisions of Article 3 ECHR."

8.    Pausing there, whilst this is a small point, given that the Judge had
decided that the appeal should succeed under the Refugee Convention it  was
inappropriate and/or unnecessary to address humanitarian protection.  But  I
say that at the risk of being overly pedantic.

9.    The Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal  arguing,  in
summary, that the Judge had failed to adequately consider the  question  of
internal relocation; that the Judge had  not  properly  explained  how  the
claimant might be tracked down in  Namibia;  and  that  the Judge  had  not
adequately considered the question of sufficiency of protection.

10.   Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the first tribunal  on
all grounds.

11.   As I have already touched upon though, Mr Diwnycz, who  is  a  senior
and a very experienced representative for the Secretary of  State,  did  not
seek to pursue the grounds with any vigour at all.  That was, of  course,  a
matter for him and it is something which I have accorded  importance  in  my
consideration of this appeal.  I am satisfied it is proper for me to do  so.


12.   There is no challenge to the Judge's  conclusion  that  the  claimant
would be at risk in her home area.  The Judge's reasoning  as  to  the  ex-
partner and his family's ability to track her down might, on  one  view,  be
regarded as relatively thin.  Nevertheless, it is clear that the Judge  has
considered the issue and bearing in mind that  the  ground  addressing  this
received no conspicuous support  before  me,  I  have  concluded  that  that
reasoning was  adequate  if  no  more  than  that.   As  to  sufficiency  of
protection, the Judge properly reviewed  the  relevant  evidence  including
background country material and I  am  satisfied  that,  in  light  of  that
evidence which demonstrated in general terms a reluctance  on  the  part  of
the authorities to intervene in cases of domestic violence, it was  open  to
the Judge to conclude that protection would not  be  available  even  if  a
different judge might have looked at matters in a different way.

13.   In these  circumstances,  and  again  bearing  in  mind  the  way  the
Secretary of State put the case to me at the hearing, I have concluded  that
the findings and conclusions reached  were  properly  open  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal on the  material  before  it.   So,  I  have  concluded  that
the decision did not involve the making of an error of law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  That decision shall, therefore, stand.

Unless and until  a  Tribunal Court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted an anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction,  which
is  made  under  rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008, applies to both  the  claimant  and  the  Secretary  of  State.
Failure to comply could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                           Date:  24 August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:                           Date:  24 August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


