
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/08199/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision Promulgated            |
|On 23 May 2017                         |    On 31 May 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                               Jerome Francis
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms C Proudman, instructed by Biruntha Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Povey promulgated 9.3.17, dismissing on all grounds  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  22.7.16,
    to refuse his protection claim.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 22.2.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro granted permission to appeal on 4.4.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 23.5.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Povey should be set aside.

 6. Inter alia, the grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made
    a material error of law in consideration of the appellant's documentary
    evidence and in  particular  as  to  the  date  the  documentation  was
    received by the appellant in the UK, sent from Sri Lanka, so  that  the
    judge's credibility findings are tainted.

 7. The documents in question  were  a  declaration  from  the  appellant's
    father and a letter  from  the  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka,  dated  1.7.16.
    However, Judge Povey noted that the DHL envelope has a date stamp which
    the judge interpreted as being 7.4.16. Given the discrepancy in  dates,
    the judge concluded that the dates on the documents  contained  in  the
    envelope cannot be correct. This is addressed at [33] of the  decision,
    where the judge noted that the appellant  confirmed  in  oral  evidence
    that he received the documents in  April  2016.  The  only  explanation
    offered at the hearing was that the documents were misdated.

 8. The first difficulty with Ms Proudman's submissions is that  whilst  it
    is asserted that the correct date on the DHL envelope  is  4.7.16,  and
    not 7.4.16, no evidence has  been  adduced  either  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or before me that the date on the envelope should be  read  in
    the USA format of setting the month before the day  of  the  month.  It
    would have been an easy matter to resolve by  evidence  from  DHL,  but
    that was not done. In effect, I was left with simply the  assertion  by
    Ms Proudman on the appellant's behalf.

 9. The second difficulty, is that no such explanation was  proffered  when
    this issue was canvassed at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing,  as
    the judge noted in  the  decision.  I  have  looked  at  Judge  Povey's
    handwritten record of proceedings. The appellant was  asked  in  cross-
    examination whether he received the DHL envelope on 7.4.16. In reply to
    the question, he said 'I  think  so.'  When  the  apparent  discrepancy
    between the dates of the documents inside the envelope and the envelope
    itself were put to him, he said, "I received  them  sometime  in  April
    2016." Asked how he explained the difference  in  dates,  he  said,  "I
    don't know. Didn't take much notice." There was no  re-examination.  On
    the basis that the  appellant  clearly  stated  that  he  received  the
    documents in April 2016, there can be no error in the way in which  the
    judge dealt with this issue. As stated above, if  the  date  should  be
    read as 4.7.16, which would make the dates on the documents consistent,
    then it was incumbent on the appellant to demonstrate that. This he has
    failed to do. I reject the submission that the judge committed a "grave
    error."

10. A further ground of appeal is that  at  [37]  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge made a credibility finding against the  appellant  on  the  basis
    that he stated in interview on 24.6.16  that  he  had  no  evidence  or
    documents to submit in support of his claim, but on his  oral  evidence
    he had those documents in April 2016. In  effect,  this  ground  is  an
    extension of the first ground, as it turns on when  the  appellant  had
    the documents. However, once again, the judge had the appellant's clear
    evidence that he had received the documents in April 2016,  before  the
    interview. As a result, the judge decided at [38] that no weight  could
    be placed on the two documents  from  Sri  Lanka.  At  [39]  the  judge
    considered the appellant's credibility "fatally  undermined"  by  these
    factors.

11. I note the grounds contend that the appellant faxed  the  documents  to
    the Home Office on 5.7.16 and posted them before his claim was  decided
    on 22.7.16 and  thus  the  observation  at  [37]  that  they  were  not
    disclosed until the service of the appellant's appeal bundle  filed  on
    17.2.17 is inaccurate. However,  the  appellant  did  not  provide  the
    evidence referred to at [22] of the grounds to the First-tier Tribunal.
    In the circumstances, there is no merit in this ground of appeal.

12. There is no merit in the final ground that  the  judge  misapplied  the
    standard of proof in consideration of the documents. On the findings as
    to the dates the documents were received in the DHL envelope there  can
    be no criticism of the judge for the conclusion reached that no  weight
    can be placed on the documents.

13. It may be that the in fact the DHL envelope was dated  4.7.16,  as  now
    alleged, but that was  not  the  appellant's  case  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing. No such explanation was offered at the  appeal
    hearing and  with  the  appellant's  assertion  that  he  received  the
    documents in April 2016, the judge's conclusions are  unassailable.  As
    pointed out, even now the appellant has adduced no evidence to  support
    the belated claim that the DHL envelope has been misread.

14. In the circumstances, there is no merit in this appeal and it  must  be
    dismissed.

Conclusions:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup




Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did  not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



