
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/08538/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14th February 2018                     | On 20th March 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                   Miss KN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by Lova Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 2nd  August
    2016 to refuse to grant her asylum and humanitarian protection.  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lucas  dismissed  the  appeal  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 9th  May  2017.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Pickup
    on 19th December 2017.

 2. The main thrust of the Grounds of Appeal, as identified by Deputy Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pickup in his grant of permission to appeal, is that  it
    is argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material mistake of
    fact at  paragraphs  43  and  44  of  the  decision.  There  the  judge
    considered that the Appellant had claimed  that  she  was  detained  in
    February 2014 whereas, as identified by the judge himself at  paragraph
    13, in  her  witness  statement  and  asylum  interview  the  Appellant
    asserted that she had been arrested on 24th January 2014.

 3. At paragraph 43 the judge said;

    "The problem for the  Appellant  is  that  her  presence  in  India  in
         February 2014 throws the  credibility  of  her  entire  claim  into
         disarray.  Her presence in India in 2014 is inconsistent  with  her
         assertion that she was stopped at the airport in Sri Lanka on  28th
         February 2014, kept  for  ten  days  by  the  security  forces  and
         subjected to rape and torture."

 4. It is clear from this extract that the judge's understanding  that  the
    Appellant's claim was that she  had  been  detained  in  February  2014
    undermined the Appellant's entire claim. However it  is  not  clear  on
    what evidence this conclusion was based. In fact the  evidence  in  the
    asylum interview and witness statement is that the Appellant claimed to
    have been detained on 24th January 2014 and to have left Sri  Lanka  on
    11th March 2014 (Q30 Asylum Interview).

 5. In the Rule 24 response the  Secretary  of  State  indicated  that  the
    Appellant's application for permission to appeal  was  not  opposed  on
    this issue.  At the hearing before me Mr Wilding accepted that this was
    the Secretary of State's position.

 6. In my view it is clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a
    mistake of fact as to a material  matter.   In  these  circumstances  I
    consider it appropriate to set the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    aside.

 7. In considering remaking the decision Mr Gajjar suggested  that  it  was
    appropriate to remit the appeal given that no findings of fact had been
    preserved in light of the fundamental  mistake  of  fact.   Mr  Wilding
    agreed with this approach.

 8. In these circumstances, in light of the view  of  the  parties  and  in
    light of the fact that I was unable to preserve any findings of fact, I
    consider it appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for the appeal to be heard afresh.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material mistake  as  to
fact which amounts to a material error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date: 6th March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or is payable, therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date: 6th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
