
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08010/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 June 2021                               |On 22 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     KD

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1985  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Russia. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 8  August  2019  refusing  his  claim  for
    international  protection.  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 October 2019, allowed his appeal. Secretary of  State
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Senior  Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Bates,  appeared  by  video.  The
    appellant, who was  not  professionally  represented,  was  present  in
    court. I was careful to explain the proceedings to the  appellant,  who
    had the assistance of an interpreter in  the  Russian  language.  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant understood the proceedings and  had  every
    opportunity to participate in the appeal.

 3. The judge found that the appellant had attended  three  anti-government
    demonstrations in Russia [81]. The  judge  also  found  that,  'if  the
    appellant had been identified as a participant [in the demonstrations]'
    then it was reasonably likely that he would, as he claimed, be at  risk
    of threats and physical violence at the hands of the state authorities.

 4. There are problems with  the  judge's  reasoning  of  that  conclusion.
    First, the appellant himself told me that 'I can only guess  that  [the
    Russian authorities] tracked me - but there is no  logic  to  it.'  The
    appellant claimed to have been attacked 'by men who hunt the people who
    take part in the demonstrations' [interview,  Q44]  which  he  accepted
    must mean that he had been subject to some form of surveillance at  the
    demonstration. There was, however, no background material  or  evidence
    that such surveillance occurs or, if it does, what form it might  take.
    At the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the Secretary of State's submission
    had been that the appellant, who was not, even by his own admission,  a
    high-profile activist but rather, along with many hundreds  of  others,
    no more than a mere participant was only a 'face  in  the  crowd.'  The
    judge acknowledged [85] that it was  'somewhat  implausible'  that  the
    appellant should have been identified but observed  that  it  'was  not
    incredible that there would have been some method of  face  recognition
    or some electronic  means  of  identification'  although  he  does  not
    indicate what means. The judge went on  to  say  (with  little  obvious
    certainty) that the appellant's limited presence on social  media  'may
    have provided a means by which  he  could  be  identified.'  It  is  by
    lapsing here into speculation that the judge has, in my opinion, fallen
    into legal error. There was no evidence before the judge to support his
    conjectures; it may be possible to create facial recognition systems to
    enable the tracking of participants at the demonstrations but there  is
    no reason to find that it reasonably likely that such systems  were  in
    use in Russia in 2018.

 5. In the circumstances, I find that the decision  should  be  set  aside.
    None of the findings of fact shall stand. There will need to be a fresh
    fact-finding exercise which  is  better  conducted  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo.

    LISTING DIRECTIONS: Return to First-tier Tribunal; not Judge Turnock; 2
    hours; Russian interpreter; first available date.



Signed                              Date 12 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
