
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08174/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 23 January 2019             |On 04 March 2019                     |
|Prepared on 27 February 2019         |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                  MANOJ [K]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  12  April  1986.  He
    appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Lawrence sitting at Hatton Cross on 27 July 2018  in  which  the  Judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Respondent
    dated 20 June  2018.  That  decision  was  to  refuse  the  Appellant's
    application for international protection.

 2. On 21 December 2010 the Appellant applied for leave to enter the United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) student which was granted valid until  28
    June 2014. He entered the United Kingdom on 18 April 2011.  On  28  May
    2014 the Respondent revoked the licence of the Appellant's  educational
    institution and the Appellant was given 60 days to find an  alternative
    institution. On 25 March 2015 the Appellant  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 student which was refused and  he  made  no
    further applications until he claimed asylum on 21  December  2017  the
    same day he was served with form IS96 ENF as an overstayer. It was  the
    refusal of that  application  which  has  given  rise  to  the  present
    proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The Appellant's case  was  summarised  by  the  Judge  at  [9]  of  his
    determination. The Appellant is  Sinhalese  and  was  friends  with  an
    individual who was a Tamil but whom the authorities suspected of  being
    involved with the LTTE. The Appellant was suspected by association.  On
    10 February 2009 the two men were walking home when four armed men in a
    white van arrested them, blindfolded them and took  them  to  a  police
    station in Kandy where the Appellant was ill-treated  and  interrogated
    about his association with the LTTE through his friend. The Appellant's
    father paid a bribe of 300,000 Sri Lankan Rupees in order to secure the
    Appellant's release. The Appellant was made to sign on  at  the  police
    station every two weeks as a condition of his release.

 4. The parents of the  other  man  visited  the  Appellant  twice  seeking
    information about their son's whereabouts, but nothing has  been  heard
    of that man since the date of the arrest. The Appellant states that  he
    made a statement to the Sri Lankan Human Rights  Commission  (HRC)  and
    following the making of this statement police threatened him not pursue
    the matter any further. In June 2010 he gave evidence  to  the  Lessons
    Learnt and Reconciliation Commission (LLRC). In August 2010 he  started
    receiving threats to withdraw his evidence to the Commission and men in
    a white van came to his neighbourhood asking questions about  him.  The
    Appellant then fled to the United Kingdom.

The Decision at First Instance

 5. The Judge did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness. At  [16]
    the Judge found no evidence that the Appellant's statement  purportedly
    made to the HRC was ever sent  to  that  organisation.  The  Judge  was
    concerned at [17] that the document said to be a response from the  HRC
    was incomplete and the Appellant was unable  to  provide  the  original
    which was said to be still with the Appellant's mother  in  Sri  Lanka.
    The document produced was a template and  parts  of  the  wording  were
    missing. The Judge invited  the  Appellant's  counsel  to  clarify  the
    matter with the Appellant in oral testimony, but the  Appellant  merely
    repeated what had already been said. The Appellant did not  know  where
    his mother obtained the document from.

 6. The problem which the Judge identified on the document was that it  was
    dated 27 May 2009, yet the Appellant did  not  leave  Sri  Lanka  until
    April 2011 and therefore the person receiving the  document  must  have
    been the Appellant not his mother and he could reasonably  be  expected
    to have the  original  to  produce.  The  explanation  offered  by  the
    Appellant's counsel for the poor condition of the document was that  it
    had been badly photocopied, but the Judge did not accept that argument.
    At [21] he indicated that that explanation was inconsistent  with  what
    parts of the document had and had not apparently been  copied.  Overall
    the document was in the Judge's view a bad and careless "cut and paste"
    effort.

 7. This was not the only credibility point taken against the Appellant. At
    [22] the Judge found an inconsistency in the length of time  which  the
    Appellant claimed to have been detained,  17  days  (according  to  the
    Appellant's employer) against 8 (the  Appellant's  statement).  It  was
    implausible  (the  Judge  used  the  word  "inconceivable")  that   the
    defendant could have been released without charge if a further document
    which indicated  that  the  Appellant  had  given  information  to  the
    authorities was correct.

 8. The Appellant told the Respondent in interview that he had learnt about
    the  warrant  for  his  arrest  (which  confirmed  there  had  been  an
    application by the police to the Magistrates'  court)  in  April  2015.
    This implied that the warrant was issued before that date, yet  it  was
    not referred to in the statement of the Appellant's father.  The  Judge
    found the Appellant to be evasive when asked why that was not the case.
    At that point at [25] the Judge referred to the date of the warrant  as
    29 June 2018 indicating it could not have  existed  in  April  2015.  I
    return to that passage later in this decision.

 9. The Judge did not find it credible that the police would seek a warrant
    after 9 years without there being at least  some  fresh  evidence.  The
    Appellant said in cross-examination that he had not  instructed  anyone
    in Sri Lanka to look into or deal with the warrant. It was put  to  the
    Appellant that that answer was inconsistent with a letter  said  to  be
    from a Sri Lankan lawyer. At  [27]  and  [28]  the  Judge  was  clearly
    unimpressed by the Appellant's answers in cross examination. The letter
    purporting to be from the lawyer, should not have  been  addressed  "To
    whom it may concern", it was self-serving.

10. At [30]  and  [31]  the  Judge  found  against  the  Appellant  on  the
    Appellant's claim that the police  were  regularly  visiting  his  home
    every 4 months. This contradicted a letter written by  the  Appellant's
    father which referred to the authorities visiting at least  once  in  2
    months. The Appellant told the Judge that  in  those  circumstances  he
    relied on his father's letter and that his parents  kept  some  of  the
    visits from him. The problem with that answer  was  that  it  indicated
    that the Appellant had not read his father's letter before  putting  it
    forward as supporting evidence. Someone  in  the  Appellant's  position
    could reasonably be expected to read documents with great  care  before
    putting them forward as evidence  as  they  concerned  the  Appellant's
    life.

11. It was plausible that the Appellant could be friendly with  someone  of
    Tamil ethnicity, but the Appellant's oral account did not sit well with
    the  documents  he  produced.  The  Appellant's  account  was  a  total
    fabrication and did  not  stand  up  to  scrutiny  even  to  the  lower
    standard. The Appellant was cross examined during the  hearing  on  the
    Respondent's allegation that  the  Appellant  had  obtained  his  TOEIC
    English-language certificate fraudulently. The Judge correctly directed
    himself that that of itself would not mean that the Appellant had  lied
    in his separate asylum claim but that did not assist the  Appellant  as
    the Judge did not accept the Appellant's credibility. He dismissed  the
    appeal against the refusal of asylum.

12. The Judge then went on to dismiss the Article 8 claim at [37] to  [42].
    He found that the Respondent's decision did not  breach  Article  8  in
    respect of the Appellant's claim to a private life. The Appellant would
    not face very significant obstacles to reintegration in Sri Lanka. This
    part of the decision (relating to Article 8) has not been appealed.

The Onward Appeal

13. The Appellant appealed against the decision to refuse his asylum appeal
    in grounds settled by counsel who had  appeared  before  the  Judge  at
    first instance. The grounds alleged that the  Judge  had  misunderstood
    the Appellant's case. He had not revealed a lot of information  to  the
    authorities since he had no information to reveal. The allegations made
    to the Magistrates Court were a mere pretext to enable the issue of  an
    arrest  warrant  which  was  actually  inspired  by   the   Appellant's
    complaints to the HRC not to any knowledge of or involvement  with  the
    LTTE.

14. The finding that it was inconceivable that the police would release the
    Appellant on reporting conditions was speculative and  unreasoned.  The
    Judge had misdirected himself as to the evidence about  the  timing  of
    the arrest warrant which was issued on 28 April 2011. The dates in June
    (not August) 2018 which appeared on the document  were  the  dates  the
    copies were obtained  from  and  certified  by  the  Registrar  at  the
    Magistrates Court in Kandy rather than the dates of  the  warrant.  The
    Appellant's  evidence  was  not  that  there  had  been  a  sudden  and
    unexplained desire to detain him after 9 years. The warrant was in fact
    issued shortly after he left Sri Lanka or, from the perspective of  the
    police, disappeared.

15. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parkes on 9 October 2018. In  refusing
    permission to appeal, Judge Parkes noted that Judge Lawrence had  found
    that if the Appellant was not  of  interest  when  first  detained  and
    released the security forces would not be interested in him years later
    and that remained a valid observation. There were other  objections  to
    the Appellant's account and the reliance  on  unreliable  documentation
    and his inconsistencies  in  that  regard  undermined  the  Appellant's
    general credibility. The grounds  were  a  disagreement  with  findings
    which were open to the Judge for the reasons given.

16. The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  on  the
    same grounds as before and the matter came before Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Kekic on 12 December 2018. Granting permission  to  appeal  she  wrote:
    "Arguably,  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds,  the   Judge
    misunderstood parts of the Appellant's  claim  and  therefore  arguably
    reached unsustainable findings on material matters".

The Hearing Before Me

17. For the Appellant counsel  indicated  that  this  was  a  reasons-based
    challenge to the  determination  and  permission  to  appeal  had  been
    granted on relatively narrow grounds relating to paragraphs 8 and 9  of
    the grounds of appeal. Paragraph 9 was the most  straightforward  point
    which argued that the Judge had misdirected  himself  at  [26]  of  the
    determination in relation to the  dates  on  the  arrest  warrant.  The
    warrant itself appeared at page 39 of the Appellant's  bundle  and  the
    English language translation thereof appeared at page 40.  The  warrant
    was dated  28th  of  April  2011  and  that  was  consistent  with  the
    Appellant's claim. The rubber stamp on the document dated 25 June  2018
    indicated that something had happened on that day, the  inference  must
    be that it was obtained then from Kandy Magistrates Court.

18. The Judge erroneously referred at [26] to a date of 29 August 2018,  it
    was not clear where that came from. The Judge had found the Appellant's
    credibility  was  harmed  but  that  finding  came  from  the   Judge's
    misunderstanding of the dates on the warrant. That mistake had impugned
    the Appellant's credibility  in  the  Judge's  eyes  to  a  significant
    degree. The Judge  considered  that  if  the  Appellant's  account  was
    correct he would not have been released but  that  missed  the  obvious
    point that the arrest of the Appellant was based on a pretext. The real
    reason for the arrest was because the Appellant had made statements  to
    the HRC. That put the Appellant within the risk categories set  out  in
    the country guidance case of GJ.

19. It was no argument for the Respondent to say that even if those  points
    were misguided the Judge had nevertheless found against  the  Appellant
    on other credibility points. The Tribunal had to  consider  credibility
    as a whole  and  the  Judge's  mistakes  had  infected  the  Tribunal's
    decision. Counsel accepted there was no expert evidence to confirm  the
    validity of the  warrant,  but  the  copy  had  been  produced  in  the
    Appellant's bundle at page 39. It was written in Tamil,  Sinhalese  and
    English. The reason why the Tribunal had not accepted  the  credibility
    of the arrest warrant was because it was mistakenly thought it had been
    issued in 2018.

20. There were other matters counsel  would  have  wished  to  say  but  he
    accepted that he had to confine his arguments to those two points  (the
    dates on the warrant and the reason why the  Appellant  was  released).
    However, these two points were the most significant. The appeal  should
    be remitted back to the First-tier to be reheard.

21. For the Respondent it was argued that it remained unexplained  how  the
    arrest warrant had come to  have  the  date  stamp  of  25  June  2018.
    Although the Judge's  reference  to  the  dates  on  the  warrant  were
    unhelpful to say the least, there were nevertheless problems  with  the
    warrant which the Judge had pointed  out  at  [25].  There  were  still
    problems with the Appellant's evidence about the documents, for example
    the document given to the HRC did not look genuine. Elements  had  been
    cut and pasted into it. The error  with  the  arrest  warrant  was  not
    material partly because the document itself was equivocal about when it
    was issued. The main thrust of  the  Judge's  conclusion  was  correct,
    having released the Appellant in 2011, it made no sense  that  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities would suddenly develop an interest in the Appellant.
    The determination was sustainable.

22. In conclusion, counsel argued that this was  not  a  case  of  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities suddenly taking an interest in the Appellant, it was
    a case of taking an interest in him after he gave  information  to  the
    HRC in 2009. Even if there was some discrepancy in the evidence to  the
    commission (see paragraph 6 above) the Appellant's  problems  began  in
    earnest after that. There was no inconsistency or implausibility in the
    Appellant's evidence.

Findings

23. This was a reasons-based challenge to the Judge's  determination  which
    made two main points. The first was that the Judge had misunderstood an
    arrest warrant produced by the Appellant and the 2nd point was that the
    Judge had misunderstood the reason why the Appellant had been  arrested
    by the authorities and consequently came to a wrong view about the fact
    of the Appellant's release from detention. The Judge made a  number  of
    credibility  criticisms  of  the  Appellant's  account  which  I   have
    summarised above. The Appellant does  not  argue  directly  with  those
    findings (see paragraph 20 above) but states that because the Judge  is
    said to have made two errors, one about  the  arrest  warrant  and  the
    other about the reason for the arrest, none of his other  findings  can
    be relied upon.

24. Dealing with the  warrant  first  of  all,  it  is  apparent  from  the
    determination that the Appellant himself  was  inconsistent  about  the
    dates on the warrant. A date of 28 April 2011 appears on  the  warrant,
    but the Appellant told the Judge that it was issued in 2015  which  was
    also when he learnt about it. If  the  date  of  2011  is  correct  the
    Appellant's misunderstanding remained unexplained. If the document  was
    correctly dated 28 April 2011 the stamp at the top of the document,  25
    June 2018, is quite inexplicable. It is  speculation  to  suggest  that
    that date was put there to indicate when the copy was obtained from the
    Magistrates court there being a marked lack of  evidence  to  establish
    that.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's  account   of   the
    circumstances in which the warrant was obtained.

25. The Judge pointed out at [25] that the Appellant's father's letter  was
    dated after the warrant was purportedly obtained on 25 June  2018.  The
    father did not refer to having the  warrant,  quite  the  contrary  the
    father's letter specifically states that the authorities would not hand
    over the warrant because it was addressed to the Appellant.  The  Judge
    found against  the  Appellant  that  if  the  warrant  was  already  in
    existence by the time of the father's letter (which is  dated  28  June
    2018) three days after the date stamp on the warrant) it was reasonable
    to have expected the father to have referred to the  existence  of  the
    warrant in his letter of support, but he did not  do  that.  It  was  a
    matter for the Judge as to  whether  he  considered  that  was  a  mere
    omission  or  whether  it  indicated  a  lack  of  credibility  in  the
    supporting  evidence.  The  Judge  evidently  thought  the  latter,   a
    conclusion that was open to him.

26. It is correct  that  the  Judge  in  the  following  paragraph  of  his
    determination at [26] referred to the warrant  being  dated  29  August
    2018. It is not clear where August came from but the reference  to  the
    29th on the date comes from the English translation which refers to the
    rubber stamp from the Magistrates court at Kandy being  dated  29  June
    2018, contrary to the Roman numerals which in fact appear on  the  copy
    warrant itself  and  which  state  26  June  2018.  There  was  thus  a
    considerable amount of confusion surrounding the  warrant  and  neither
    the Appellant nor his father  were  able  to  shed  any  light  on  the
    document.

27. The burden of proof rested on the Appellant. If he chose to put forward
    an ambiguous document that was so inconsistent it did not  support  his
    case, it was not surprising  that  the  Judge  would  take  an  adverse
    credibility point against the Appellant. Whilst therefore the Judge may
    have misstated certain points on the document, the document on its face
    was so unreliable that it undermined the Appellant's case and the Judge
    was entitled to draw that conclusion at [25] and [26]. In short  whilst
    the Judge may have committed an error, it was not a material one. There
    were a number of other cogent points which the Judge took  against  the
    Appellant and overall, he was  entitled  to  form  the  view  that  the
    Appellant was not a credible witness and the  documents  the  Appellant
    put forward lacked credibility.

28. In those circumstances the second ground argued by the Appellant  falls
    away. The grounds of appeal argue that this  was  not  a  case  of  the
    authorities reviving their interest in  the  Appellant  9  years  after
    arresting him when on that earlier occasion they had released him after
    only 8 days. The problem for the Appellant was  that  his  account  was
    internally inconsistent. The Appellant's case was that the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities were lying on the warrant when they said that the Appellant
    had already given them information and  they  wished  to  question  him
    further to elicit more information. The real reason why they wished  to
    arrest the Appellant, he claims, was because he had  given  information
    to the HRC.

29. The problem was that the Appellant's claim was  that  he  was  abducted
    initially by four men in a white van because of his association with  a
    Tamil suspected of involvement with the LTTE. If  that  was  the  case,
    then there might be a reason why the Sri Lankan authorities would  wish
    to re-question the Appellant. At the time the Appellant was  originally
    detained there was no issue surrounding the HRC  but  that  raises  the
    problem for the Appellant as to why he would  be  released  so  quickly
    after only 8 days on reporting conditions. It was then a matter for the
    Judge whether he accepted the Appellant's account that he was  released
    after a short period of  time  because  he  had  nothing  to  tell  the
    authorities or whether the Judge came to the view that the  Appellant's
    account was a fabrication and  the  Appellant  had  not  been  released
    either after 8 or 17 days (the two different periods being mentioned at
    various stages during the appeal).

30. The grounds of onward appeal amount to no more than a disagreement with
    the Judge's conclusion that the entire account  was  a  fabrication.  A
    disagreement does not of itself indicate a material error of  law.  The
    Judge had ample evidence before him to indicate that the Appellant  was
    an  unreliable  witness  and  it  was  open  to  the  Judge  in   those
    circumstances to dismiss the appeal and find that the Appellant was  of
    no adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities. I  do  not  consider
    there was any material error of law in the determination such  that  it
    should fall to be set aside. I dismissed the onward appeal against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 27 February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 27 February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
