
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08604/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th May 2021                     |On 29th July 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     OHA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Jagadesham, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

An anonymity direction was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT").   As
this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.  Unless
and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, OHA is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  This direction  applies  amongst  others  to  all
parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


    1. The hearing before me on 18th May 2021 took the form of a remote
       hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  The
       appellant joined the hearing remotely.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil
       Justice Centre. I was addressed by the representatives in exactly the
       same way as I would have been if the parties had attended the hearing
       together.  I am satisfied: that no party has been prejudiced; and
       that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a right or
       interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I am
       satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
       with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing
       because of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-
       19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would
       ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is
       proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity of the
       issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and resources of the
       parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that both parties
       had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


    2. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision. I informed
       the parties that my decision will follow in writing, with reasons.
       This I now do.


Background


    3. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He is of Kurdish ethnicity  and
       was born in Qaladze, a town in the Sulaymaniyah  Governorate  in  the
       IKR.  He arrived in the United Kingdom  in  April  2016  and  claimed
       asylum. His claim was refused by the respondent for reasons  set  out
       in a decision dated  23rd  September  2016.  The  appellant's  appeal
       against that decision was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       O'Hanlon for reasons set  out  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  22nd
       February 2017.  The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the
       Upper Tribunal. His appeal was dismissed  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Alis on 3rd October 2017, who found there was no error  of  law
       in the decision  of  Judge  O'Hanlon.   The  appellant  made  further
       submissions to the  respondent  in  July  2018,  but  the  respondent
       refused to treat the further submissions as a fresh claim for reasons
       set out in a decision dated 26th October 2018.  The  appellant  again
       made further submissions on 3rd July 2019.  Although  the  respondent
       refused  the  claim  for  international   protection,   the   further
       submissions were accepted as a fresh claim giving rise to a right  of
       appeal. The appellant's appeal was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Lewis for reasons set out in his decision promulgated  on  28th
       September 2019.


    4. The matters leading to the claim for international protection made by
       the appellant were summarised in paragraph [13] of  the  decision  of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon.  The appellant claims that whilst
       his wife was pregnant with their second child, he had an affair  with
       a lady who I shall refer to as S.  He  claims  that  on  14th  August
       2015, whilst his wife was staying overnight  with  her  parents,  the
       appellant had met S.  When his wife was returning home, she  saw  the
       appellant  leave  S's  house.   That  led  to  an  argument  and  the
       appellant's wife called her  family.  The  appellant  claims  he  was
       beaten so badly that he believed that if neighbours had not  come  to
       his assistance, he  would  have  been  killed.  They  then  took  the
       appellant's wife and children away with them. On 29th September 2015,
       the appellant's sister-in-law helped his wife and children flee  from
       her parents home, to travel with the appellant to  Erbil,  where  the
       appellant's friend had rented a property for them.  On  8th  November
       2015 the  appellant's  brother-in-law  and  three  men  came  to  the
       property in Erbil and beat the appellant causing a stab wound to  his
       face and breaking his right hand.  Neighbours heard the screaming and
       shouting and came to the assistance of the appellant.  The  following
       day the appellant decided to flee Iraq.   The  appellant  claims  his
       father-in-law and brother-in-law are PUK Members and if he returns to
       Iraq, we will be subjected to an honour killing by his wife's family.


    5. First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Hanlon  did  not  find  the  appellant's
       account of his relationship with S to be credible. He also found  the
       appellant's account of the circumstances surrounding  the  events  of
       14th August 2015  when  his  wife  discovered  his  affair,  to  lack
       credibility. He rejected the appellant's claim of the beating that he
       had received from his wife's father and brother on 14th August  2015.
       He also found the evidence of the appellant and  his  wife  regarding
       the incident on 8th November 2015 in Erbil,  lacks  credibility.   At
       paragraphs [21] and [24] of his decision, Judge O'Hanlon said:


         "21. On consideration of all of the evidence before  me  I  am  not
         satisfied that the Appellant's account of his relationship with [S]
         and events which he stated followed his wife's  discovery  of  that
         relationship are reasonably likely to be true for the  reasons  set
         out. In the circumstances, the appellant has failed to show me that
         he has a well-founded fear of persecution on that basis."


         ...


         24.  The Appellant's claim to be at risk upon  return  to  Iraq  is
         based in part upon his claim that his wife's brother and father are
         members of the PUK.  In his asylum interview the appellant was only
         able to give information about the  PUK  in  the  vaguest  possible
         terms. Although in his witness statement  he  has  now  given  more
         details of this. Given that the alleged members of the PUK are  his
         wife's brother and father I would have expected  the  appellant  to
         have more  details  about  the  PUK  to  be  given  in  his  asylum
         interview. Given the evidence of the appellant as to the extent  of
         the influence of the PUK that he subsequently given in his evidence
         to the Tribunal and in his witness statement, I  did  not  find  it
         credible that the Appellant would risk incurring the  attention  of
         PUK members who were close relatives of his wife by embarking  upon
         the affair with [S].


    6. In support of the appellant's further submissions of 3rd  July  2019,
       the appellant maintained his previous claim and submitted a number of
       documents.  At paragraph [5] of his decision, Judge Lewis  summarised
       the appellant's claim as set out in counsel's skeleton argument:


         "The appellant's wife and  three  children  are  dependent  on  his
         claim. In summary the A(ppellant) faces a real risk of serious harm
         due to being at risk of an 'honour crime'  from  his  father-in-law
         who is  a  member  of  the  PUK.  Further,  or  alternatively,  the
         A(ppellant) would face a real risk of conditions/treatment contrary
         to Article 3 ECHR on account of his being an 'undocumented' Kurd"


    7. At paragraph [7] of his decision, Judge Lewis  refers  to  the  claim
       made by the appellant  that  the  Tribunal  should  depart  from  the
       previous decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hanlon, and that  he
       relies on documentation which he claims establishes that is father-in-
       law was a member of the PUK, and that the appellant is at  risk  from
       him. At paragraph [8], Judge Lewis noted the second limb of the claim
       made by the appellant that he cannot internally relocate to the  IKR,
       or elsewhere, because he is without a CSID and  could  not  secure  a
       replacement within a reasonable timeframe.


    8. Judge Lewis sets out his findings and conclusions and paragraphs [16]
       to [31] of his decision.


    9. At paragraph [16] of his  decision,  Judge  Lewis  confirms  that  he
       applies the Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702 guidelines.   The  decision
       of Judge O'Hanlon stood as  an  assessment  of  the  claim  that  the
       appellant was making at the time of the first decision.  He noted the
       appellant's claim had been fully set out at  paragraph  [13]  of  the
       decision of Judge O'Hanlon, and at paragraph [20], Judge Lewis  noted
       that Judge O'Hanlon rejected the claims made by  the  appellant.   He
       noted however, at [21], that in support of  the  further  submissions
       the appellant has provided a number of documents,  including  letters
       that he claims were written by his father-in-law and dropped  off  at
       his home in Iraq. He noted the appellant's claim that his mother  had
       found the letters and the  content  had  been  read  to  her  by  the
       appellant's sister. At  paragraph  [22],  Judge  Lewis  set  out  his
       reasons for finding that the letters are not credible.  At paragraphs
       [23] to [30], Judge Lewis addressed the  appellant's  claim  that  he
       cannot return to the IKR because he will be found by  his  father-in-
       law and that he could not internally  relocate  to  another  part  of
       Iraq.


   10. Judge Lewis considered the photocopy ID cards and photographs  relied
       upon by the appellant.  He was satisfied the appellant  does  have  a
       relationship with the person in the photographs and that  the  person
       is the appellant's father-in-law. At paragraph [25] he said:


         "Notwithstanding my finding about the identity of the person in the
         card, the appellant has not discharged the burden on  him  to  show
         that he is at risk of persecution for a Convention  reason.  Having
         made findings on the evidence out (sic)  forward  as  part  of  the
         appellant's asylum claim, I also find that the  appellant  has  not
         demonstrated that he is at  real  risk  of  treatment  which  would
         engage Article 2 ECHR or Article 3 ECHR."


   11. At paragraphs [26] to [30], Judge Lewis  considered  the  appellant's
       claim that he has no passport or ID card.  At paragraphs  [27],  [28]
       and [30], he said:


         "27. I do not find that the appellant  has  made  every  effort  to
         redocument himself. The letter produced by the appellant  from  his
         friend states that he has  visited  the  Appellant's  parents.  The
         Appellant  has  been  in  regular  contact  with  his  mother.  The
         Appellant's parents and siblings  could  assist  him  in  obtaining
         replacement documentation. He has failed to demonstrate that he has
         enlisted their help or that  they  would  be  either  unwilling  or
         unable to assist him in obtaining replacement documents.


         28.  Mr Jagadesham on behalf of the appellant submitted  that  even
         if the respondent were correct  and  the  appellant  did  have  the
         support of family members from whom he could obtain  a  replacement
         CSID card or other documentation, this would take 'some time'.   Mr
         Jagadesham could not say with any degree  of  confidence  how  long
         this will be, but submitted that the effect of the return  of  this
         appellant and his family would be to leave them in Baghdad  for  an
         unreasonable period of time in which they would suffer hardship per
         article 3 ECHR.  Mr Jagadesham relied on AAH, headnote paragraph 5,
         and [111-116].


         ...


         30.  For the reasons set out above, I find that the appellant could
         obtain a replacement card within a reasonable period of  time  upon
         his return, such that that (sic) Article 3 is not engaged  in  this
         case."


The appeal before me


   12. The appellant claims Judge Lewis failed to address, adequately or  at
       all, the relevant  country  guidance  as  to  whether  the  appellant
       (accompanied by his family, including  children)  would  be  able  to
       secure a CSID within a reasonable period of time.  It is  said  Judge
       Lewis failed to address the reasons why the appellant  would  not  be
       able to secure a CSID within a reasonable period of  time  that  were
       set out in the skeleton argument relied upon.  He claims Judge  Lewis
       simply summarised, at [28], the appellant's arguments,  but  did  not
       address any of them with adequate reasons. He  did  not  address  the
       circumstances the appellant and his family would face in  Baghdad  as
       non-Arab  speaking  Kurds  without  connections  to  Baghdad  or  the
       difficulties in securing a CSID as set out in AAH (Iraq).


   13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan  on
       10th February 2020.


   14. The appellant has filed and  served  further  written  submission  in
       support of the claim that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       vitiated by a material error of law.   Mr  Jagadesham  submits  Judge
       Lewis erred in finding that  the  appellant's  parents  and  siblings
       could assist the appellant in obtaining documentation.  He refers  to
       the  Country  Guidance  set  out  in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
       relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212  ("AAH  (Iraq)")  and  submits  it  is
       common ground that the appellant is not in possession of a CSID.  The
       appellant's evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that  he  was
       in contact with his mother only, and it cannot be inferred  that  his
       evidence was rejected.  In the circumstances, the  finding  that  the
       appellant's family could assist the appellant in documenting  herself
       within a reasonable time is unsafe.  He submits that  in  the  recent
       country guidance set out in SMO, KSP & IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
       documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400  (IAC)  ("SMO  &  Others"),  the
       Tribunal highlighted the importance of an individual having a CSID or
       INID in order to live and travel  within  Iraq  without  encountering
       treatment or  conditions  which  are  contrary  to  Article  3.   The
       redocumentation of the appellant and his  family  remains  a  central
       issue that was not adequately addressed by the First-tier Tribunal.


   15. Before me, Mr Jagadesham submits Judge Lewis failed  to  address  the
       particular circumstances  of  the  appellant  and  his  family.   The
       appellant and his family will be returned  to  Baghdad  because  they
       will not return to the IKR voluntarily. The appellant will not have a
       CSID during any "waiting period", and as  a  non-Arab  speaking  Kurd
       with a young family, and no connections to Baghdad, the appellant and
       his family would face highly  deleterious  circumstances  during  the
       "waiting period".  The  appellant  also  refers  to  the  significant
       difficulties that were  referred  to  in  AAH  (Iraq)  regarding  the
       securing of a CSID, and that in any  case,  it  is  unclear  how  any
       family could assist the appellant obtain a CSID whilst he is  waiting
       in Baghdad.  He submits that what  is  reasonable  depends  upon  the
       particular facts. In AAH (Iraq), at  paragraph  [116],  the  Tribunal
       gave an example of someone that has contacts in  Baghdad  as  against
       someone who has no contacts in Baghdad.


   16. Mr  Jagadesham  submits  Judge  Lewis  failed  to  consider  how  the
       appellant could practically obtain a CSID.  At paragraph [27],  Judge
       Lewis states: ".. The letter  produced  by  the  appellant  from  his
       friend states that he has visited the Appellant's parents..", however
       the appellant's case was that he was only in contact with his mother.
        That does not address the material question of whether the appellant
       can obtain a CSID within a  reasonable  time  in  Iraq.   Finally  he
       submits Judge Lewis  makes  a  very  short  statement  regarding  the
       children's bests interests.  He submits Judge Lewis did  not  address
       the particular characteristics of the appellants, the delay, and  the
       practical difficulties they would encounter.


   17. In reply, Mr Tan submits the appellant is from the IKR.  He refers to
       paragraph [106] of the decision in AAH  (Iraq)  in  which  the  Upper
       Tribunal held that whilst it remains  possible  for  an  undocumented
       returnee to obtain a new CSID, whether he is able to do so, or do  so
       within a  reasonable  time  frame,  will  depend  on  his  individual
       circumstances. The Tribunal set out the relevant factors and referred
       to the presence of male family members who would be able and  willing
       to attend the
       civil registry with the returnee.  Mr Tan submits that  although  the
       appellant's evidence was that he was only in contact with his  mother
       and that in his witness statement, the appellant had claimed that his
       mother had not told his father about  the  letters  received  as  his
       father had already disowned the appellant, the appellant's account of
       the letters was rejected by Judge Lewis.  He submits  Judge  O'Hanlon
       noted at [13(a)] of  his  decision,  that  the  appellant  has  three
       brothers and  five  sisters  who  continue  to  live  in  Iraq.   The
       appellant also has at least one friend in Qaladze  who  has  assisted
       the appellant and was able to visit the appellant's family home.   Mr
       Tan submits the finding in paragraph [27] of the  decision  of  Judge
       Lewis to the appellant's parents and siblings being  able  to  assist
       him in obtaining replacement  documentation  must  be  considered  in
       context, and was one that was open  to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence
       before the Tribunal.   Mr Tan submits the finding that the  appellant
       could obtain a replacement card within a reasonable  period  of  time
       upon his return such that he  would  not  be  at  risk  of  treatment
       contrary to Article 3, was open to Judge Lewis on  the  evidence  and
       the country guidance.


Discussion


   18. The applicant's account of the events that caused him and his  family
       to leave Iraq have been rejected by the Tribunal  on  two  occasions.
       The  appellant  does  not  challenge  the  findings  of  Judge  Lewis
       rejecting  the  core  of   the   appellant's   account   of   events.
       Nevertheless, a critical part of the enquiry  is  the  documents  the
       appellant has or might reasonably be expected to get.   At  paragraph
       [26] of his decision, Judge Lewis notes the appellant's claim that he
       has no passport or CSID.  In her decision of 16th  August  2019,  the
       respondent noted the appellant had previously  stated  that  he  held
       both an Iraqi ID card and a passport, but the documents were lost  at
       sea whilst travelling to Greece. The question therefore  was  whether
       it is reasonably likely he  will  be  able  to  obtain  the  required
       documents.


   19. In AAH (Iraq), at paragraph [101], the Upper Tribunal  noted  that  a
       returnee's ability to obtain a new CSID was a matter considered in AA
       (Iraq) at paragraphs 173 to 187.  In AA (Iraq,  at  paragraph  [177],
       the Tribunal said:


         177.          In summary, we conclude that it is  possible  for  an
         Iraqi national living in the  UK  to  obtain  a  CSID  through  the
         consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in London,
         if such a person is able to produce a current or  expired  passport
         and/or the book
         and page number for their family registration details. For  persons
         without such a
         passport,  or  who  are  unable  to  produce  the  relevant  family
         registration details, a
         power of attorney can be  provided  to  someone  in  Iraq  who  can
         thereafter undertake
         the process of obtaining the CSID for such person  from  the  Civil
         Status Affairs Office
         in their home governorate. For reasons identified  in  the  section
         that follows below,
         at the present time the process of obtaining a CSID  from  Iraq  is
         likely to be severely
         hampered if the person wishing to obtain the CSID is from  an  area
         where Article
         15(c) serious harm is occurring".


   20. Although SMO & others was not promulgated until after the decision of
       Judge Lewis, at paragraph [383] of its decision, the  Upper  Tribunal
       said:

         "383.         We have not been asked to revisit the extant  country
         guidance  on  the  way  in  which  an  individual  might  obtain  a
         replacement CSID from within the UK, for which see  [173]-[177]  of
         AA (Iraq) and [26] of AAH (Iraq).  We add  only  this:  whilst  the
         INID is clearly replacing the CSID in Iraq, consulates do not  have
         the electronic terminals necessary to issue the INID  and  continue
         to issue the CSID instead, as confirmed in a  Canadian  Immigration
         and  Refugee  Board  report  which  is  quoted  at  5.6.9  of   the
         respondent's CPIN entitled Internal Relocation, civil documentation
         and returns, dated February 2019.  An  Iraqi  national  in  the  UK
         would be able to apply for a CSID in the way explained in AA (Iraq)
         and, if one was successfully obtained, we find  that  it  would  be
         acceptable evidence of the individual's identity  throughout  Iraq.
         Notwithstanding the plan to replace the old CSID  system  with  the
         INID by the end of 2019, we  accept  what  was  said  by  EASO  (in
         February 2019) and the Danish Immigration Service and Landinfo  (in
         November 2018), that implementation was delayed and that  the  CSID
         was still being used in Iraq, and that it continues to be issued in
         those parts of the country in which the  INID  terminals  have  not
         been rolled out.  Given this evidence, and the fact that  the  CSID
         has been a feature of Iraqi society for so long, we do  not  accept
         that there will come a time at the end of this year when  the  CSID
         suddenly ceases to be acceptable as proof of identity.

   21. In my judgment, the  difficulty  with  the  submissions  made  by  Mr
       Jagadesham is that they are premised entirely upon the position  that
       the appellant and his family would find themselves in upon return  to
       Baghdad without a CSID, whereas here, Judge Lewis found the appellant
       has not made every effort to redocument himself. At  paragraph  [26],
       Judge Lewis referred to the appellant's evidence that he has been  to
       the Iraqi Embassy in London and his claim  that  he  has  made  every
       effort to redocument himself but has been unsuccessful.  Judge  Lewis
       noted, at [27], that the appellant has been in regular  contact  with
       his mother. He noted  the  appellant's  parents  and  siblings  could
       assist him in  obtaining  replacement  documentation.  He  noted  the
       appellant has failed to demonstrate that he has enlisted  their  help
       or that they would be either unwilling or unable  to  assist  him  in
       obtaining replacement documents.


   22. I reject the claim that  it  cannot  be  inferred  that  Judge  Lewis
       rejected the appellant's claim that he  only  has  contact  with  his
       mother.  Judge O'Hanlon previously noted in his decision the evidence
       of the appellant that his parents, three brothers  and  five  sisters
       continue to live in Iraq.   The  appellant  claimed  in  his  witness
       statement dated 3rd October 2019, at paragraph [2], that he does  not
       have any contact with family in Iraq.  At paragraph  [3]  he  claimed
       that letters written by his father-in-law were  dropped  off  at  his
       parents home in Iraq, and were found by his  mother.  He  claims  his
       mother did not tell his father about the letters as  his  father  had
       disowned  him.   At  paragraph  [9]  of  his  witness  statement  the
       appellant claims he does  not  have  contact  with  any  male  family
       members as they have disowned him and he  is  unable  to  obtain  any
       documents from Iraq to assist  with  his  application  to  redocument
       himself.  The appellant's claim that has been disowned by his  family
       is linked to his underlying claim of his affair with  [S].   However,
       the Tribunal has now rejected his account of  his  relationship  with
       [S] and the events which he claims followed his wife's  discovery  of
       that relationship, on two occasions. It follows that in  my  judgment
       it was open to Judge Lewis to find that the appellant's  parents  and
       siblings could assist him in obtaining replacement documentation.


   23.  The  appellant's  father  remains  in  Iraq,  as  do  three  of  the
       appellant's brothers.  The appellant's father and his  brothers  will
       be able to assist the appellant with the book  and  page  number  for
       their family registration  details.   I  am  satisfied  that  on  the
       evidence before the judge at the hearing, and  the  country  guidance
       set out in AAH (Iraq) that it was still possible  to  obtain  a  CSID
       card from the Iraqi Embassy in  the  UK  by  contacting  male  family
       members in Iraq to send any documents required as well  as  providing
       the family book and page reference number.   It  was  open  to  Judge
       Lewis to find that  the  appellant  has  not  made  every  effort  to
       redocument himself. There is no reason why a power of attorney cannot
       be provided to the appellant's father or brothers  in  Iraq  who  can
       thereafter undertake the process of obtaining the CSID for  him  from
       the Civil Status Affairs Office in their home governorate.  There was
       no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  appellant  had
       made a meaningful attempt to secure a CSID or that one would  not  be
       issued, even if  the  proper  steps  were  taken.   Once  a  CSID  is
       obtained, it is clear that the  appellant  will  be  able  to  travel
       within Iraq without encountering treatment or  conditions  which  are
       contrary to Article 3 ECHR, so that he can  return  to  his  home  in
       Qaladze, a town in the Sulaymaniyah Governorate in the IKR.


   24. I turn then to the assessment by Judge Lewis of the best interests of
       the appellant's children.  At paragraph [31] of his  decision,  Judge
       O'Hanlon previously found that the children are not British  citizens
       and the best interests of the  children  are  to  remain  with  their
       parents to be raised in the country of  their  nationality.   In  the
       further submissions made to the respondent under cover  of  a  letter
       dated 26th June 2019 (which erroneously refers to  the  appellant  as
       being from Kirkuk and having never lived in the IKR), the appellant's
       representatives made no attempt to  suggest  that  there  is  further
       evidence now  relied  upon  capable  of  undermining  the  assessment
       previously made regarding the best interests of the children. In  her
       decision of 16th August 2019,  the  respondent  considered  the  best
       interests of the children, noting in  particular  that  the  children
       have close family in Iraq,  including  their  grandparents  and  they
       would be able to access education in the IKR with valid CSID's, which
       could be obtained with the help of the appellant's  family  in  Iraq.
       The appellant did not advance any further evidence regarding the best
       interests of the children in his witness  statement.   It  formed  no
       part of the appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal that  the
       appellant's youngest child who was born in the UK, would be unable to
       secure a CSID.   The  judge  cannot  be  criticised  for  failing  to
       consider a claim that was not advanced before him.  At paragraph [29]
       of his decision, Judge Lewis confirmed that  he  has  considered  the
       best interests of the children, and it is perhaps  unsurprising  that
       nothing further was said, when there was no further evidence for  the
       Judge to engage with.


   25. It follows that in my judgement it was open to Judge Lewis to dismiss
       the appeal for the reasons set out  in  the  decision.  An  appellate
       court should resist the temptation to subvert the principle that they
       should not substitute their own analysis of the evidence for that  of
       the Judge by a narrow textual analysis which enables it to claim that
       the Judge below misdirected themselves.   It  is  not  a  counsel  of
       perfection. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal is not an opportunity  to
       undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to see if they  are
       wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits.


   26. Having carefully considered the decision of Judge Lewis  I  am  quite
       satisfied that the appeal was dismissed after the judge had carefully
       considered all the evidence before him and upon a proper  application
       of the country guidance then in force.  In my judgement, the findings
       made by Judge Lewis were findings that were properly open to  him  on
       the evidence before the FtT. The  findings  and  conclusions  reached
       cannot be said to be perverse, irrational or findings that  were  not
       supported by the evidence.  There is  in  my  judgement  no  material
       error of law capable of affecting the outcome.


   27. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


   28. The appeal is dismissed.


      V. Mandalia


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia                   20th July 2021



