
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08921/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 14th August 2019                  |On 20th August 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     EM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Dunne   OICS Level 3 representative from the
IAS.
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Upper Tribunal found the First-Tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
       a decision promulgated on 10 June 2019 which set  aside  the  earlier
       decision and gave  directions  for  the  future  management  of  this
       appeal.

    2. Re-listing was delayed pending the hearing of a  forthcoming  country
       guidance case relating to Sudan and  listed  for  a  Case  Management
       Review Hearing today at which it  was  anticipated  the  new  country
       guidance decision  would  have  been  available.  It  is  now  known,
       however, that the cases originally  designated  as  country  guidance
       cases have being reclassified in light of the  Secretary  of  State's
       position  which  accepted  that  for  non-Arab  Darfuri  the  country
       situation in  Sudan  is  so  uncertain  that  there  is  insufficient
       information to amend the existing Sudan  CG  cases  of  AA  (non-Arab
       relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and  MM  (Darfuri)  Sudan  CG
       [2015] UKUT 00010. The respondent agreed  that  the  cases  initially
       listed for country guidance would be determined on the basis  of  the
       existing country guidance cases  as  a  result  of  which  the  Upper
       Tribunal no longer designated the two  appeals  as  country  guidance
       cases.




Background


    3. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan. The judge who found an error  of
       law, Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer, noted at [4 and 5] the following:

           "4.    The appellant made fresh claim submissions, which focused
                upon the fact that his brother  ('B')  was  granted  refugee
                status, for reasons relating to his membership of the  Berti
                tribe, together with DNA evidence  that  they  are  brothers
                with the same parents.

           5.     In a  decision  dated  25  August  2017,  the  respondent
                refused the  appellant's  fresh  claim  for  asylum  (albeit
                recognising that the fresh submissions should be treated  as
                a fresh claim). The respondent noted at [18] of his decision
                letter that B was "granted asylum on 1 September 2014 due to
                it being accepted that he was a member of the  Berti  tribe"
                and accepted at [23] the DNA evidence establishing that  the
                appellant and B are siblings, sharing  the  same  biological
                parents. The respondent  however  concluded  that  this  was
                insufficient to accept the appellant's  claimed  nationality
                or tribe, given the nature and  extent  of  the  credibility
                concerns regarding the appellant's account."

    4. At [18] Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer notes:

           "18.   Both  representatives  agreed  that  if  the  appellant's
                nationality and  tribe  are  accepted,  he  is  entitled  to
                refugee status ..."

    5. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr McVeety conceded that the  Secretary  of
       State had accepted that the appellant B was entitled to  a  grant  of
       refugee status as a result of his ethnicity as a member of the  Berti
       tribe and relevant country guidance case  law.  Mr  McVeety  accepted
       that the appellant is the biological brother of  B  as  a  result  of
       their shared parentage, supported by  the  DNA  results.  Mr  McVeety
       accepted having reviewed all the available evidence and applying  the
       lower standard applicable to a protection appeal of this nature  that
       the appellant had established that he is a member of the Berti  tribe
       as had been accepted with his brother.

    6. I find in light of the above and the respondent's  concession  before
       Judge Plimmer that as the appellant's nationality and  tribal  ethnic
       identity are accepted the appellant is entitled to be recognised as a
       refugee in light of the current country guidance cases. I  substitute
       a decision allowing the appeal on this basis.



Decision

    7. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.



  Anonymity.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 14th August 2019

