
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08249/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 August 2018                              |On 2 January 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  Saman [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, instructed by All Nations Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Saman [H], is a male citizen of  Iran.   By  a  decision
    dated 18 June 2018, I found that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in
    law such that its decision fell  to  be  set  aside.   My  reasons  for
    reaching that decision were as follows:

         1.   The appellant, Saman [H], was born on 23 January 1987, and  is
         a male citizen of Iran.  He appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         (Judge Saffer) against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         deport him pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and
         Sections 5(1) and 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The  First-
         tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 1 February 2018  allowed
         the appeal.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,
         to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The appellant claims to fear returning to Iran on  account  of
         having converted to Christianity.  Before the First-tier  Tribunal,
         the Presenting Officer (Mr Hunt-Jackson) had conceded that,  "if  I
         found the appellant has converted Christianity he would be at  real
         risk  of  persecution  in  Iran  and  the  appeal  must   succeed."
         [decision, 6].  The judge found that the appellant  was  a  genuine
         convert to Christianity.  He therefore allowed his appeal.

         3.   Judge Saffer was aware [14] that a previous  appeal  had  been
         dismissed  by   Judge   Hindson   in   proceedings   PA/02618/2015.
         Summarising that appeal, Judge Saffer wrote [14]:

             "He did not attend the hearing.  He had failed to establish he
             was in a relationship with a girl whose brother was  a  member
             of the PJAK he had become involved by  transporting  goods  on
             their behalf, they attempted to recruit him, they shot at  him
             whilst he tried to escape or that Ettela'at officers  attended
             his home looking for him and arrested his father."

         4.   Under the heading "Determination  of  Evidence"  Judge  Saffer
         does not refer again to the findings of Judge  Hindson.   At  [39],
         Judge Saffer wrote:

             "I agree [the appellant] could have approached the Church when
             he  found  himself  in  difficulties  following  his  previous
             refusal but that does not  mean  he  is  a  genuine  Christian
             convert, merely that he made an error."

         5.   The Secretary of State relies on  the  familiar  authority  of
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT
         00702 *.  The Secretary of State refers  to  the  fact  that  Judge
         Hindson had found that, "I do not accept the appellant has given  a
         truthful account of events in Iran or that he would be at  risk  of
         harm on return."  Ms  Chaudry,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant,
         submitted that Judge Hindson's findings carried less force  because
         he had not heard oral evidence from the appellant.   Moreover,  the
         appeal before Judge Hindson had been brought on a different  basis.



         6.   I do not consider it prudent to reject the  previous  findings
         of a Tribunal for the reasons proposed by Ms  Chaudry.   First,  it
         appears to have been the  appellant's  choice  not  to  attend  the
         hearing before Judge Hindson.  Secondly, Judge  Hindson  considered
         the evidence before him and concluded that the appellant had  given
         an untruthful account.  Judge Saffer should,  at  the  very  least,
         have considered the appellant's lack of  candour  in  his  previous
         appeal, as clearly  found  by  Judge  Hindson.   Just  because  the
         appellant was bringing an appeal on a new basis did  not  mean,  so
         far as the second Tribunal was  concerned,  that  there  existed  a
         "clean sheet" as regards the appellant's credibility as a  witness.
         Whatever the circumstances at the  hearing  before  Judge  Hindson,
         that judge had concluded that the appellant  had  given  untruthful
         evidence.  Judge Saffer  has  completely  ignored  that  fact.   In
         consequence, I find that he has erred in law.

         7.   The decision of Judge Saffer is set aside.  The Upper Tribunal
         can re-make the decision following a resumed hearing which will  be
         in Bradford on a date to be fixed.  I do not preserve  any  of  the
         findings  of  Judge  Saffer.   I  shall,  however,   preserve   the
         concession made by Mr Hunt-Jackson which is referred  to  in  Judge
         Saffer's decision at [6] as regard the risk to a Christian  convert
         returning to Iran.  If the Secretary of State now seeks  to  resile
         from that concession, then he will have to make an  application  at
         the resumed hearing to do  so.   Any  additional  evidence  at  the
         resumed hearing upon which either party may seek to  rely  must  be
         sent to the other party and to the Upper Tribunal no less  than  10
         days before the date fixed for the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         8.   The decision of Judge Saffer promulgated on 1 February 2018 is
         set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The decision
         will be re-made by the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lane)
         following a resumed hearing at Bradford on a date to be fixed  (two
         hours allowed).

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 6 August 2018, I  heard  evidence
    from the  appellant  and  also  [MB],  the  pastor  of  Legacy  Church,
    Doncaster.  I heard submissions on behalf  of  both  parties  and  then
    reserved my decision.

 3. The burden of proof is on the appellant.   The  standard  of  proof  is
    whether there are substantial grounds for believing  that  there  is  a
    real risk that the appellant  will  be  persecuted  or  ill-treated  on
    return to Iran.

The Decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Hindson

 4. By a decision dated 23 August 2016, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hindson
    had  (in  proceedings  under  reference  PA/02618/2015)  dismissed  the
    appellant's  asylum  and  human  rights  appeal.   At  that  time,  the
    appellant's claim was based upon  a  relationship  with  a  girl  whose
    brother was a member of PJAK, the  appellant  had  become  involved  in
    transporting  goods  on  their  behalf.   The  appellant  claimed  that
    Ettela'at officers had attended his home and had arrested  his  father.
    The appellant did not attend that hearing before Judge Hindson.   Judge
    Hindson did not believe  the  appellant's  account  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.  There was no successful onward appeal  by  the  appellant.   I
    found that Judge Saffer had erred in law by failing to take any account
    of the findings of Judge Hindson.

 5. At the hearing before me, the appellant sought to explain  his  reasons
    for not attending the hearing before Judge Hindson.  He told me that he
    had been waiting for rail tickets to enable him to make the journey  to
    the First-tier Tribunal but these had not materialised in time.  I have
    considered that explanation but reject it.   The  appellant  was  well-
    aware of the date of the hearing and he should have made every possible
    attempt to attend, whether or not he had a rail warrant.  He could have
    applied even at short notice for an adjournment of the  hearing  if  he
    was literally unable to attend at the given time.  He took no steps  to
    notify the Tribunal that he would not attend  nor  did  he  raise  this
    issue with the Tribunal following the dismissal of his appeal.

 6. I fully accept that a hearing at which an appellant gives oral evidence
    which is testified in cross-examination may lead to findings in respect
    of credibility which are more significant than  those  made  where  the
    appellant has been absent from the hearing.  However, I find it was the
    appellant's  choice  not  to  attend  the  hearing  and  submit  cross-
    examination.   He  has  little  cause  for  complaint  if,   in   those
    circumstances, the judge  finds  that  his  account  is  not  credible.
    Further, there was no suggestion  that  Judge  Hindson  had  made  that
    finding simply and only because the appellant  did  not  attend;  I  am
    satisfied that he considered the evidence carefully.  I am  aware  also
    that  the  basis  upon  which  the  appellant  now  appeals  (Christian
    conversion) differs entirely from that put before Judge Hindson.  Judge
    Hindson has not made findings  on  the  particular  issues  before  the
    Tribunal now.   However,  I  consider  that  I  should  (following  the
    principles of Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  D  (Tamil)
    [2002] UKIAT 00702 *) proceed on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  has
    previously been found to be an unreliable witness.  In that  regard,  I
    take into account also that the  appellant  had  been  convicted  of  a
    criminal offence (fifteen months' imprisonment for  the  production  of
    cannabis).

 7. The appellant claimed before the Upper Tribunal that he  is  a  genuine
    convert to Christianity.  So  far  as  the  appellant's  own  claim  is
    concerned, I do not believe him.  I accept that he attends church  but,
    examined against the background of all the evidence in this appeal  and
    in particular previous findings as to the  appellant's  credibility,  I
    find it likely that  the  appellant's  attendance  is  solely  for  the
    purpose of seeking to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   I  make  that
    finding having had regard for all the evidence including that  of  [MB]
    (see below).

The Evidence of Pastor [MB]

 8. Pastor [B] adopted his witness statement as his evidence-in-chief.   He
    was cross-examined by Mrs Pettersen.  He told me that he was aware that
    some asylum seekers to would seek to "pull  the  wool  over  my  eyes."
    However, the appellant had been submitted in the past for baptism.   Mr
    [B] said that the church did not just "baptise anybody."   They  waited
    until  it  was  possible  to  see  that  the  level  of  commitment  to
    Christianity before baptism was authorised.  Mr [B] said  that  he  had
    been  "gutted"  when  he  found  out  about  the  appellant's  criminal
    conviction.  He was sad that  the  appellant  had  not  approached  the
    church for help.  He confirmed that his church did not actively  engage
    in proselytising Christianity.

 9. The appellant had given evidence (not  challenged  by  the  respondent)
    that  his  own  brother  (who  had  also  been  convicted  of  cannabis
    production)  had  returned  voluntarily  to  Iran  via  Germany.    The
    appellant's brother had also been baptised by Mr [B]'s church.  Mr  [B]
    confirmed to me that the brother had been baptised at the church but he
    did not recall whether he  (like  the  appellant)  had  attended  on  a
    "Alpha" course prior to baptism.  The brother had not  attended  church
    with the same regularity as the appellant.  However, Mr [B]  said  that
    someone at the church would have "made sure that he was  ready"  before
    baptism was authorities.

10. I was grateful to Mr [B] for coming to church.  I fully accept that  Mr
    [B] has an close knowledge of the  appellant  as  an  attendee  at  his
    Christian Church. I am aware also, however, that  the  appellant  is  a
    practised liar (see above) and would, in  my  opinion,  be  willing  to
    deceive Mr [B] and his colleagues if he believed that it  would  result
    in his remaining in the United Kingdom.  In my opinion,  the  appellant
    has sought to deceive Mr [B].  Further, I attach little weight  to  the
    fact that Mr [B]'s church has a procedure to check the  genuineness  of
    those converting to Christianity before they are baptised.  I say  that
    because the appellant's brother was baptised by the church  and  it  is
    agreed evidence that he has  returned  to  Iran  voluntarily  where  it
    appears  he  has  not  encountered  any  difficulties.   The  appellant
    confirmed that he had spoken with his  brother  after  the  latter  had
    returned to his home area of Iran.  It was clear from what Mr [B]  said
    to me that, in retrospect, the brother's conversion to Christianity was
    not as genuine  as  members  of  the  church  believed  before  he  was
    baptised.  I consider that to be evidence that the procedures prior  to
    baptism adopted by the church are plainly fallible.

Risks to the Appellant on Return to Iran

11. It is particularly difficult in cases such as these to  determine  risk
    on return because no evidence appears to exist as to the  interrogation
    which is like to occur of a failed returned asylum seeker returning  to
    Tehran.  However, this is an unusual case in which  an  individual  who
    has been baptised into a Christian Church has returned  voluntarily  to
    Iran  apparently  without  any  repercussions.   It  follows  from  the
    brother's experience of having returned and having suffered no  adverse
    consequences that he was either not asked whether had had converted  to
    Christianity or he did not volunteer that  information  to  anyone  who
    questioned him on return.  Having rejected Mr [B]'s evidence  that  the
    appellant is a more genuine convert to Christianity than his brother, I
    cannot see any reason why the appellant would  experience  a  different
    level of interrogation upon return.  I  do  not  accept  that,  if  the
    appellant were forcibly returned as a failed asylum seeker, there is  a
    real risk that he would face a more rigorous or  hostile  interrogation
    than an individual, such as his brother, who returns voluntarily.  Like
    the appellant, the brother had claimed asylum in the United Kingdom and
    had undergone baptism.

12. Given the particular facts in  this  case  and  having  regard  to  the
    experience of the appellant's brother, I find the appellant has  failed
    to establish that he does face a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
    treatment upon return to Iran. The parties agree that the "pinch point"
    of risk, if any, will occur at the airport; it has not been argued that
    the appellant would face any difficulties thereafter in his  home  area
    simply on account of having been a failed asylum  seeker.   I  find  it
    likely that the appellant's experience at that "pinch point"  would  be
    the same as that of his brother.  The brother has  passed  through  the
    airport and is now living apparently without difficulty in  Iran.   The
    appellant, who I find is not a  genuine  convert  to  Christianity,  is
    likely to fare no worse.

13. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

14. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 14th August 2017 is dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.
     The appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 29 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 29 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

