
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08990/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28th March 2018                        |On 17th April 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               md toriqul [i]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Anyene, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  [  ]  1987.   The
    Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  12th  November  2009  and
    claimed asylum on 24th February 2017.  From the period 16th April  2011
    to 17th April 2012 the Appellant was validly in this  country  under  a
    Tier 4 Student visa.  His application for a further  visa  in  December
    2014 was refused and consequently since  that  date  and  indeed  since
    April 2012 he had been an overstayer.

 2. On 24th February 2017 the Appellant made an application for asylum  and
    a claim for human rights.  The basis for that claim was that he  was  a
    member of a particular social group  namely  a  gay  man  and  he  also
    contended that removing him to Bangladesh or requiring him to leave the
    UK would be a breach of his Article 8 ECHR rights because he  had  been
    in the UK for seven  years  and  nine  months.   That  application  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal issued in August 2017.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  and  the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan  sitting  at
    Birmingham on 13th October 2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated
    on 27th October 2017  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

 4. On 10th November 2017 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 11th December 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Bird
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Bird  noted  that  the  Appellant
    sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge had failed to
    adequately consider the evidence and had failed further to give reasons
    for the finding that he made.  It was alleged that the judge in finding
    that the Appellant was not credible when he gave approximate dates  for
    when he began to realise his sexuality, made an arguable error  of  law
    in failing  to  give  reasons  why  this  evidence  was  not  credible.
    Further, it was alleged that at paragraph 12  the  judge  had  asserted
    that the Appellant would have been more certain about his feelings  had
    he been a "genuine homosexual"  but  again  gave  no  reason  for  this
    assertion.  The grounds asserted that this was pure speculation on  the
    part of the judge on a matter for which he had no direct knowledge.

 5. Judge Bird concluded that it was  arguable  that  in  failing  to  give
    reasons why the Appellant was  not  credible  when  he  said  that  the
    acceptance of his sexuality was a gradual process the judge had made an
    arguable error of law.  Further Judge Bird noted that it was alleged by
    the Appellant that the judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    disregarding the evidence of the two witnesses who were called and that
    the judge's decision that the evidence was "just bold  statements"  did
    not deal with the evidence that he heard and that it was arguable  that
    in failing to give adequate reasons for dismissing the evidence of  the
    two witnesses the judge had made an arguable error of law.

 6. On 25th January 2018 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That Rule 24 response  submits  that  the  judge
    made adequate findings of  fact  and  gave  adequate  reasons  for  the
    findings made, as set out at paragraphs 10 to 18, and  that  the  judge
    had adequately considered the evidence from the two witnesses and found
    that it was self-serving.  Further the Rule 24  reply  notes  that  the
    judge had concluded that there was no evidence from gay clubs that  the
    Appellant claimed to have attended.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Anyene and the Secretary of State appears by her Home Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Duffy.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Mr Anyene relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He states  that  the  judge
    has made a number of misdirections firstly, in that he  has  failed  to
    consider the evidence where at paragraphs 10 to 13 the judge refers  to
    the Appellant's evidence about becoming  aware  of  his  sexuality  and
    suggested that it was confused and inconsistent.  He asked me  to  look
    at paragraphs 12 and 13 of the judge's decision and  submits  that  the
    judge has rejected the Appellant's  claim  without  engaging  with  the
    evidence.  He contends that the judge has at any stage failed to direct
    himself that insofar as the Appellant had referred to being  13  or  14
    and 15 or 16 he was giving inevitably approximate dates  for  what  was
    likely to have been a gradual process rather than "a  sudden  flash  of
    insight", and since he was 30 at the date of hearing he  was  referring
    to events many years before.  In those circumstances it is submitted  a
    degree of uncertainty or imprecision was not  merely  unremarkable  but
    positively to be expected and that  the  adverse  inference  drawn  was
    unjustifiable.  Mr Anyene notes that at  paragraph  12  the  judge  had
    asserted that the Appellant would have  been  more  certain  about  his
    feelings had he been a genuine homosexual and submits that there is  no
    basis supplied for this assertion and no account taken into account has
    been made of the cultural and  religious  background  with  its  marked
    homophobia in which the Appellant was raised.   It  is  submitted  that
    this was pure speculation on the judge's part on a matter of  which  he
    had no direct knowledge and had no place in his determination.

 9. Mr Duffy concedes that  the  challenge  made  herein  is  a  perversity
    challenge and that it may have some merit.  He accepts that there is  a
    high threshold to be reached by the Appellant but that the Secretary of
    State would not be  surprised  if  that  threshold  had  in  fact  been
    reached.

10. There are two further Grounds of Appeal firstly,  that  the  judge  has
    failed  to  consider  evidence  and  give  reasons  relating   to   the
    Appellant's evidence about his relationships in the United Kingdom  and
    that the judge had attached weight to the absence of evidence from  any
    of the Appellant's sexual partners.  It is submitted in so  approaching
    the matter the judge  had  failed  to  consider  either  that  sexually
    explicit evidence should not be required or  considered  in  claims  of
    homosexuality or that there might be many reasons  why  such  partners,
    particularly if the relationships had been casual, would  be  unwilling
    to come forward and testify openly.

11. Further the judge had referred at paragraph 17 to the delay in claiming
    asylum but appears to have included in this period from the Appellant's
    arrival in 2009 given his express rejection of the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant did not know then about asylum and  ignore  the  evidence  to
    which he said  he  attached  importance  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    experienced problems in Bangladesh.   Consequently,  it  was  submitted
    that the judge had failed  to  direct  himself  or  consider  that  the
    Appellant would have no reason to consider  claiming  asylum  until  he
    became aware that his sexuality would put him at risk in Bangladesh and
    if he had suffered no difficulties whilst there it was not obvious when
    that would have  occurred.   That  being  so  before  weight  could  be
    attached to delay in claiming asylum,  it  was  necessary  for  careful
    consideration to be given by the judge and findings made about when the
    Appellant might reasonably have been expected to  make  his  claim  and
    thus the extent of the delay.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. It is Mr Anyene's submission that the judge's  findings  are  not  only
    perverse but he has failed to give reasons for making his findings.  Mr
    Duffy in response has accepted that this is a perversity challenge  and
    that the threshold may well have been reached but it may well  be  that
    the Tribunal should be looking at this matter as  if  it  were  a  mere
    discrepancy.

15. The key paragraphs are paragraphs 12 to 13 of  the  decision.   Therein
    the judge appears to have made findings which, as is submitted to me by
    Mr Anyene, sets the judge out as being an expert on homosexuality.   He
    submits that the failure of the judge to give  proper  reasons  and  to
    make findings in the manner in which he has done namely, to expect  the
    Appellant to have been more precise about his homosexual  feelings  and
    when he realised he was a homosexual, is so perverse that the  decision
    should be not only found to have contained an error of law  but  should
    be remade.

16. Whilst Mr Duffy does not rein hard against the finding that there is an
    error of law which is material, he does argue  strongly  against  there
    being a finding that this case should be  merely  remade  allowing  it.
    For all the above reasons  in  particular  the  findings  made  without
    reasons by the judge with regard  to  the  decision  that  he  did  not
    believe the Appellant's version of events, I find that  the  judge  has
    imposed  his  own  stance  and  consequently  that  the   decision   is
    effectively perverse and discloses a material error of  law.   However,
    the  finding  is  a  credibility  finding  and  a  proper  approach  to
    credibility would require an assessment of  the  evidence  and  of  the
    general claim.  This could include  the  internal  consistency  of  the
    claim, the inherent plausibility of the claim and  the  consistency  of
    the claim with external factors of the sort  to  be  found  in  country
    guidance.  Whilst I acknowledge that theoretically a claimant  need  do
    no more than state his claim that claim still needs to be examined  for
    its consistency and inherent plausibility.   In  such  circumstances  I
    agree with the view expressed by Mr Duffy that this cannot  be  a  case
    where credibility is automatically accepted but  that  the  finding  on
    credibility is unsafe.  In such circumstances the correct  approach  is
    to find a material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and to remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing.

Decision and Reasons

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.  Directions are given below for the rehearing  of
    this matter.

      i) That on the finding that there is a material error of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal the decision is set aside  with
         none of the findings of fact to stand.

     ii) That the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
         Birmingham on the first available date 28 days hence  to  be  heard
         before any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than  Immigration
         Judge Chohan.

    iii) That the estimated length of hearing be three hours.

     iv) That there be leave to either party to file and serve an up-to-date
         bundle of both objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they
         seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

      v) That it is  not  envisaged  that  the  Appellant  will  require  an
         interpreter but if he does  then  his  instructed  solicitors  must
         notify  the  Tribunal  within  seven  days  of  receipt  of   these
         directions.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 16 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 16 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris





