
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08134/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 February 2019                  |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AHA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, instructed by Bankfield heath, solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1977 and is a citizen of  Sudan.  He  claimed
    asylum in the United Kingdom on 20 April 2017. His wife and  son  (born
    2001) are dependants upon his claim. By a decision dated 13 June  2018,
    the Secretary of State refused the appellant international  protection.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal are helpfully summarised by  Judge  Alis  in  the
    grant of permission:

         "The CPIN report 2017 considered the position of non-Arab  Darfuris
         in section 5.2. The  report  played  down  the  risks  to  non-Arab
         Darfuris pointed to an improved security situation in Khartoum. The
         CPIN Report does not unequivocally conclude that it  was  safe  for
         non-Arab Darfuris in Sudan. Indeed, whilst there may be  the  green
         shoots of improvement this is  a  far  cry  from  stating  non-Arab
         Darfuris are now  safe  and  no  longer  at  risk  of  persecution.
         Moreover, many of the sources upon which the CPIN  had  been  based
         pre-dated the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MM. The appellant's
         bundle contained numerous reports which support the  argument  that
         MM is still good law. For the  Tribunal  to  depart  from  existing
         country guidance law (sic), then it must have  sufficient  evidence
         to enable it to depart from such law."

 3. The grounds  of  appeal  are  particularly  well-drafted.  I  told  the
    representatives at the initial hearing at Bradford that  I  found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its  decision  falls
    to be set aside. For the reasons cogently articulated in the grounds of
    appeal, I find that the judge erred by relying only upon  the  CPIN  to
    depart from existing country guidance. In doing so, the judge failed to
    have proper regard to the country material produced by the appellant.

 4. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I have re-made the
    decision. The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum  grounds  and  on
    Article 2/3 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I have remade the
    decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State dated 13 June 2018 is allowed on asylum and Article  2/3  ECHR
    grounds.


Signed                              Date 7 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

