
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08897/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 December 2017                   |On 24 January 2018                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     S H
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan of Thompson & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fletcher-Hill promulgated on 26 April 2017 dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against a refusal of a protection claim.


2.   The Appellant was refused permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page on 7 September 2017, but was subsequently granted permission
    to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 11 October 2017.


3.   Judge Bruce granted the Appellant permission to  appeal  on  the  basis
    that "it is arguable that credibility findings made  over  five  months
    after the evidence was heard may be unsafe".  Judge  Bruce  added  that
    "All grounds are arguable"; however, before me Mr Khan on behalf of the
    Appellant has acknowledged that the second  and  third  grounds  relied
    upon in the grounds in support of the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal are contingent  upon  succeeding  on  the  principal  ground  in
    respect of the delay in preparing and promulgating the Decision.


4.   By way of background to the challenge  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the
    appeal was heard at  Hatton  Cross  before  Judge  Fletcher-Hill  on  4
    November 2016.  The Decision is dates as having been signed on 18 April
    2017, and promulgated on 26 April 2017.


5.   Both representatives before me today have acknowledged the  application
    and relevance of dicta in the case of Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department and RK  Algeria  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  868,  in  particular  at
    paragraphs 21-23.  The substance of that decision has found  expression
    in a decision of this Tribunal  in  the  case  of  Arusha  and  Demushi
    (deprivation of citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT 80 (IAC).  This was a
    decision of Judges Latter and Waumsley; paragraph 2 of the headnote  is
    in these terms:

         "To establish that a delay in the promulgation of  a  decision  has
         led to an error of law it has to be shown that the decision was not
         safe and therefore unlawful.  There must be  a  nexus  between  the
         delay and the safety of the decision, see Secretary of State  v  RK
         Algeria [2007] EWCA Civ 868".


6.   It  is  against  these  principles  and  guidance  that  I  turn  to  a
    consideration of the decision of Judge Fletcher-Hill.


7.   At paragraphs 1.2 to 1.7  of  the  Decision  the  Judge  rehearses  the
    Appellant's immigration history.  No  criticisms  or  inaccuracies  are
    identifiable therein.  At paragraphs 6.1 to 6.26 -  over  approximately
    four pages - the Judge sets out at length the evidence that was  before
    her, by reference to both documentary and oral evidence.  Mr  Khan  has
    acknowledged that there are no criticisms to be made of  the  rehearsal
    of the evidence - no inaccuracies may  be  identified.   Similarly,  no
    criticism is made of the Judge's recitation  of  the  submissions  made
    before her at paragraphs 7.1 to 7.20 - over approximately three pages.


8.   The Judge's findings are then set out at paragraphs 8.1 to 8.19.


9.   In circumstances where the Judge has fully set out  the  factual  basis
    of the Appellant's claim - and has done so accurately, as  acknowledged
    by his representative - I do not propose to reiterate the  claim  here.
    It is a matter of record and is known to the parties.  I  will  however
    refer to certain aspects of the case as is incidental for the  purposes
    of my decision.


10.  I have ultimately accepted Ms Fijiwala's submission that  there  is  no
    nexus shown between the delay and the safety of the  decision.   In  my
    judgement it is plain, given the  unchallenged  detailed  rehearsal  of
    both evidence and submissions in her Decision, that the Judge must have
    had clearly in mind all aspects of the case and evidence when preparing
    her Decision notwithstanding the time  that  had  elapsed  between  the
    hearing and the completion of the Decision.  Moreover, in  my  judgment
    it is also  clear  that  the  adverse  evaluation  of  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's case is based on the facts of the case as claimed,  and  is
    not in any way made by reference to such matters as  demeanour  or  the
    impression that a witness might have made at the hearing.


11.  Mr Khan urges me to consider that the Judge  likely  had  in  mind  the
    impression that the Appellant and his  supporting  witnesses  may  have
    made during the course of giving their evidence.   In  this  regard  he
    emphasises in particular the Judge's  reference  at  paragraph  8.8  to
    there being "not a shred of documentary evidence to support any of  the
    Appellant's assertions relating to threats whether made in person or by
    telephone or of attempted kidnapping".


12.  Mr Khan  invites  me  to  consider  that  the  absence  of  documentary
    evidence to support the Appellant's case made it  inevitable  that  the
    Judge was relying upon written and oral testimony, and to  that  extent
    is likely to have had regard to the impression that a witness made.   I
    do not  accept  that  submission.   Judges  in  this  jurisdiction  are
    generally well aware that such matters as demeanour  are  not  reliable
    indicators of credibility in  circumstances  where  evidence  is  being
    heard through persons from different cultures and through interpreters.
     There is nothing to suggest in the body  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's Decision that any such matters influenced her evaluation of the
    evidence.  Indeed the opposite is the case.  It seems to me  absolutely
    clear, particularly for example at paragraph 8.6 (see below)  that  the
    Judge had regard to the substance of what the Appellant was saying, and
    not the manner of saying it.  Whilst it is indeed  the  case  that  the
    Appellant was primarily relying upon oral and written testimony in  the
    absence of supporting documents, I cannot see that such a circumstance
    in itself is sufficient to establish any error on the part of the Judge
    or the necessary nexus contemplated in the guidance of RK Algeria.


13.  In making her findings the Judge had consideration to Section 8 of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  and
    offered reasons for concluding  that  the  Appellant  had  not  claimed
    asylum at the earliest opportunity, and that this was damaging  to  his
    credibility.  This reasoning is also echoed later  in  aspects  of  the
    Judge's reasoning, for example at paragraph 8.7.  Nonetheless the Judge
    identified that she needed to consider all matters 'in the round'  (see
    paragraph 8.3).  At paragraph 8.4 the Judge reiterated in  summary  the
    substance of the Appellant's case.  At  paragraph  8.5  she  identified
    that members of the Appellant's  family  had  continued  to  reside  in
    Pakistan well after the key events of 2006-2008 - which were said to be
    the primary matters that had  led  to  the  Appellant  being  at  risk,
    including the  persecutory  treatment  of  his  father  and  his  older
    brother.  The Judge then made the following observations  at  paragraph
    8.6


         "Dealing  first  with  the  Appellant's  claimed  difficulties   in
         Pakistan I have found his evidence  to  be  completely  lacking  in
         credibility.  I accept that his family may have had a dispute  with
         [S]'s family but I do not find it credible  that  he  was  at  risk
         because of this.  His evidence is that  his  family's  difficulties
         with [K] began in 2006, and that in 2008 his father and  sister-in-
         law moved to the UK.  However, his evidence  is  that  he  was  not
         personally threatened at this time and  the  only  threats  he  has
         recounted amount to a threatening stare in the market in  2011  and
         phone calls in 2013.  His evidence is that he did not report any of
         the matters to the police".


14.  As indicated above, it seems to me that it is significant that in  this
    paragraph the Judge repeatedly bases her analysis upon "his  evidence".
    It is clear that it is the nature of the account that is troubling  the
    Judge, rather than anything to do with  the  manner  in  which  it  was
    presented.  To that extent, given that  the  Judge  clearly  accurately
    rehearsed the nature of the account, I cannot see that  the  delay  has
    impacted in  any  way  upon  her  analysis  of  the  substance  of  the
    Appellant's claim.


15.  The Judge gave consideration to an  incident  that  was  said  to  have
    occurred in 2015 when the Appellant had returned to Pakistan to  attend
    the wedding of a younger brother: see paragraphs  8.7  and  8.11.   The
    Judge noted at paragraph 8.9  that  at  no  stage  during  any  of  the
    Appellant's claimed difficulties had he ever reported any events to the
    authorities.   At  paragraphs  8.8  and  8.10  the   Judge   identified
    deficiencies or gaps in the evidence: I have already  referred  to  the
    Judge's reference to an absence of  documentary  evidence;  further  to
    this the Judge also refers to the absence  of  any  telephone  records.
    The key findings are then made at paragraphs 8.12  and  8.13  in  these
    terms

         "8.12    I  do  not  find  the  Appellant's  account  plausible  or
                credible.  I find that had [S]'s father wished to  harm  the
                Appellant he would have had ample opportunity to  do  so  in
                the many years that  the  Appellant  continued  to  live  in
                Pakistan after the love marriage of 2006 which commenced the
                family feud.


         8.13 I find that the Appellant's older brother [A] and  his  father
                were the victims of the family feud but there is no evidence
                that the other members of the family including the Appellant
                have been targeted or harmed in any way".

16.  In my judgement such  a  conclusion  was  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
    analysis set out in the foregoing paragraphs.  Moreover,  the  analysis
    in the foregoing paragraphs clearly drew  upon  the  factual  narrative
    claimed by the Appellant and made findings adequately reasoned.  I  can
    see nothing  that  suggests  that  the  Judge  fell  into  error;  more
    particularly I can see nothing that suggests that the passage  of  time
    had in any way impacted  upon  the  Judge's  ability  to  consider  and
    determine this particular appeal.


16.  In those circumstances I find that there is no  relevant  nexus,  there
    is no error of law, and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Notice of Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
stands.


18.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 22 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

