
         [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08602/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 November 2017                            |On 18 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                    P A D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr, O Omoniruvbe of Church Street, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

An order has been made under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellant being identified. Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to a contempt of court.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 3 August 2016 refusing his claim for asylum.
Background.

2.    The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  [  ]  1982.   He  first
    entered the UK on 5  September  2008  as  a  student  and  subsequently
    extended his leave to remain in this category until  30  January  2013.
    On 11 February 2012 married a Ugandan citizen who is settled in the UK.
     Before the expiry of his leave to remain, they  separated  because  he
    caught her being unfaithful with another man.  He did not leave the  UK
    because he hoped that there would be a  reconciliation,  which  on  his
    account there was.  However, he did not apply for leave to remain as  a
    spouse as his wife was not earning the  minimum  earnings  required  to
    meet the financial requirements of the Rules.

3.    In September 2015, he found out that his wife was  again  cheating  on
    him.  The appellant was working as a toilet attendant and  at  work  he
    met a man, CW, with whom he started a sexual relationship.  This  ended
    in  January  2016  when  CW  became  too  possessive.   Prior  to  this
    relationship, the appellant had never had any sexual feelings towards a
    man.   He  and  his  wife  agreed  to  an  open  relationship  and  the
    appellant's evidence was that he had had numerous male sexual  partners
    since meeting CW.  However, his family  had  disowned  because  of  his
    sexuality and he claimed asylum in February 2016 as he would be at risk
    of persecution on return to Nigeria because he wanted to live an openly
    bisexual life.

4.    The respondent accepted the identity and nationality of the  appellant
    but she was not satisfied that his account of  becoming  aware  of  his
    bisexuality was credible or that he had not been aware of  the  way  in
    which bisexual and gay people were perceived  and  treated  in  Nigeria
    until November 2015.

The Hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal.

5.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant gave  oral
    evidence as did a friend, Mr K.  The judge did not find  the  appellant
    to be a credible witness and was not satisfied to the lower standard of
    proof that he was bisexual.  She set out the reasons for  this  finding
    in [16]-[21] of her decision.  At [16], she  commented  that  the  fact
    that Mr K had identified a different person in the photographs  in  the
    appellant's bundle as CW, the person identified  by  the  appellant  as
    awakening  his  bisexuality  and  with  whom   he   had   a   six-month
    relationship, from the person identified by the  appellant  was  highly
    damaging to the appellant's credibility, particularly as  Mr  K  was  a
    personal friend of CW.  She found that there was no similarity  between
    the men identified and that no plausible  explanation  was  forward  on
    behalf of the appellant to explain this.

6.    At [17] the judge went on to say that she found that  the  absence  of
    the appellant's wife as a witness cast further doubt on the credibility
    of the claim.  She placed significant  weight  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's  representative  did  not  make  an  application   for   an
    adjournment to enable her to attend despite  the  appellant's  evidence
    that she was willing to do so.  It was submitted  that  her  attendance
    was not necessary for the appeal to succeed but the  judge  found  that
    her absence did affect her assessment of the credibility of  the  claim
    as their relationship was a key part of that claim.  In  [18]-[21]  the
    judge gave further reasons why she did not find  the  appellant  to  be
    credible, his evasion of the issue of why he had not left the  UK  when
    his student visa expired, given that he had  at  that  stage  separated
    from his wife and had not discovered his bisexuality,  his  immigration
    history and the lack of plausibility in his account of realising he was
    bisexual and his inability to recall when he had told his family  about
    this.  For these reasons, the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions.

7.    In the grounds of appeal, it  is  argued  that  the  judge  materially
    erred in [16] where she found that Mr K identified a  different  person
    in the photographs as CW.  It is submitted that in fact  he  identified
    the same person as CW as the appellant but in a photograph where he was
    not in female make-up and dress.  Secondly, it is argued that the judge
    erred at [17] by saying that the appellant and his wife's  relationship
    was a key part of his claim when his asylum claim did not rely  in  any
    shape or form on his continued relationship with his spouse.   Thirdly,
    it is argued that the judge erred in  [18]-[19]  by  stating  that  the
    appellant's refusal to leave the UK after expiry of  his  student  visa
    damaged his credibility and that the issue of delay did  not  apply  in
    this case.

8.    Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that, given  the  importance
    attached to the issue of the photographs by the First-tier Tribunal, it
    was arguable that the two photographs were in fact the same man and  so
    arguable that there had been some  procedural  unfairness  in  that  an
    adverse inference have been  drawn  from  the  appellant's  failure  to
    provide a plausible explanation  for  the  inconsistency  when  it  had
    arisen during the evidence of the witness and he was  not  recalled  or
    given an opportunity to address the Tribunal on the matter.  The  judge
    granting leave commented that the point about the  appellant's  partner
    had less merit as her evidence was obviously important  but  permission
    was granted on all grounds. In the light of the issues  raised  in  the
    first ground and the potential  relevance  of  the  judge's  record  of
    proceedings to whether there was any  procedural  irregularity  causing
    unfairness at the hearing, the record was photocopied and given to  the
    representatives so that they had the opportunity of considering it.

9.    Mr Omoniruvbe submitted that the photographs in  issue  (at  pages  54
    and 59 of the appellant's bundle) were in fact of the same  person  but
    in one photograph he was dressed as a woman and Mr K had not known  him
    in that role.  The appellant had not  been  given  the  opportunity  of
    being re-examined and he  should  have  had  a  proper  opportunity  to
    address that issue.   The judge had given undue weight to  the  absence
    of the appellant's wife and had failed to give  proper  weight  to  the
    fact that the appellant's  evidence  was  consistent.   Similarly,  the
    judge had given undue weight to the delay in claiming  asylum  and  had
    been wrong to reject as implausible his  account  of  how  he  came  to
    realise that he was bisexual.

10.   Ms Fijiwala submitted that the grounds simply sought to reopen  issues
    of fact.  The fact remained that the appellant had identified CW in the
    photo at page  54  whereas  Mr  K  identified  him  as  the  person  in
    photograph at page 59.  It was for the judge to decide what  inferences
    could properly be drawn from that evidence.  It was also for the  judge
    to decide what inferences to draw from the fact  that  the  appellant's
    wife had not given evidence and also from the factors she identified in
    [18]-[21].

Assessment of the Issues.

11.   The  first  ground  argues  that  in  fact  the  appellant  and  Mr  K
    identified  the  same  person  in  the  photographs  and  that  in  one
    photograph CW is dressed as a woman whereas in the other he is  dressed
    as a man.  It has not been  argued  that  the  claimed  error  of  fact
    amounts to an error of law within the principles set out by  Brooke  LJ
    in R (Iran) v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ982 at para 9(vii) (and
    more fully set out at paras 28-33) where there has been a mistake as to
    a material fact which can be established by objective and uncontentious
    evidence where the appellant and/or his advisors were  not  responsible
    for the mistake and when unfairness  resulted  from  the  fact  that  a
    mistake was made. There is no further evidence which can be regarded as
    objective and  uncontentious  to  resolve  the  issue  of  whether  the
    photographs are of the same person and, in any event, this  was  simply
    one of a number of issues relied on  by  the  judge  in  rejecting  the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence.

12.   When granting  permission  to  appeal,  the  judge  identified  as  an
    arguable issue  whether  there  had  been  some  procedural  unfairness
    arising from a lack of the opportunity of dealing with this issue which
    only arose during the evidence  of  the  witness.   It  is  clear  from
    judge's record of  proceedings  that  the  issue  of  whether  the  two
    photographs  showed  the  same  person  was  raised  during  the  cross
    examination of Mr K.  He had identified CW as in photograph 59.  It was
    put to him that the appellant had said it was CW in photograph  54  and
    he replied, "after dressing up".  It was then put to him  that  he  had
    identified someone different and he  replied,  "that's  your  opinion".
    The issue of the photographs was referred to, albeit  briefly,  in  the
    submissions. On behalf of the respondent it was argued  the  Mr  K  had
    picked out the wrong person  as  the  partner  and  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant the submission is recorded as "witness picked diff. person  -
    he said [CW] in two appearances".

13.   Whilst the record of proceedings casts little light on  the  issue  of
    whether it was the same or different people  in  the  photographs,  the
    record makes it clear that it became a live issue during  the  hearing.
    There was ample opportunity to apply for the appellant to  be  recalled
    for further evidence on this issue but no such application was made and
    both representatives made submissions on the issue.  I am therefore not
    satisfied  that  there  was   any   procedural   irregularity   causing
    unfairness.  The issue of whether the  photographs  were  of  the  same
    person and what, if any, inferences could be drawn  from  the  evidence
    about who was in them were issues of fact for the judge to  assess  the
    light of the evidence as a whole.

14.   I am also satisfied that the second  ground  arguing  that  the  judge
    erred by drawing an adverse inference on  the  appellant's  credibility
    from the fact  that  his  wife  did  not  give  oral  evidence  has  no
    substance, although the grounds put the  matter  more  narrowly  taking
    issue with the judge's finding or comment that the relationship  was  a
    key part of the claim.  It is recorded at [11] that the judge was  told
    that the appellant's wife had attended the hearing centre but  left  to
    go to hospital because  she  was  experiencing  stomach  pains  but  no
    application was made for adjournment.  I also note from the  record  of
    proceedings that during  the  appellant's  oral  evidence,  when  asked
    whether his wife had come to court, he replied yes.  He  said  she  had
    been taken ill.  The judge asked him if he was happy for the case to go
    ahead without her and he replied that he was.

15.   It was for the judge to decide what inference  should  be  drawn  from
    the fact that the appellant's wife had not given oral  evidence.   This
    was evidence  that  the  appellant  could  reasonably  be  expected  to
    produce. There is no substance in the assertion in the grounds that his
    asylum claim did not rely  in  any  shape  or  form  on  his  continued
    relationship with his spouse.    The judge was entitled to regard their
    relationship as a key part of his claim in the light  of  his  evidence
    that he and his wife had agreed to have an  open  relationship  and  to
    sleep with other people [6].

16.   Finally, it is argued that the judge erred by taking  account  of  the
    appellant's failure to leave after the expiry of his  student  visa  in
    January 2013.  However,  that  was  a  factor  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider.  The appellant had been asked in cross-examination why he had
    not left the UK when his student visa expired, given that at that stage
    he was separated from his wife and had not discovered his  bisexuality,
    but the appellant sought to evade the issue even though the  presenting
    officer put the question several times  and  in  different  ways  [18].
    That was clearly an issue the judge was entitled to take into  account.
    The grounds refer to the issue of delay but the judge made no error  on
    this issue.  She was entitled to assess the claim in the context of the
    appellant's immigration history.

17.   Further, the judge was entitled to find that the  appellant's  account
    of realising that he was bisexual lacked plausibility when, on his  own
    evidence, he was 33 years old, had never had any feelings for  men  but
    within one night after he met CW he realised he was bisexual.  She  was
    also entitled to take into account the fact that he had  not  described
    any feelings of confusion or hesitation his full asylum  interview  but
    it was only in  his  oral  evidence  that  he  sought  to  add  to  his
    description of his feelings.

18.   In summary, the grounds do not satisfy me  that  there  has  been  any
    procedural irregularity causing unfairness or that the judge  erred  in
    law in her  assessment  of  the  evidence.  She  reached  findings  and
    conclusions properly open to her for the reasons she gave.

Decision.

19.    The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its decision stands.

20.   In the light of  the  issues  raised  in  this  asylum  appeal,  I  am
    satisfied that this is a proper case for an order to be made under rule
    14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I  make
    an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely
    to lead to the appellant being identified.


Signed:          H J E Latter                      Dated: 17 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
