








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08281/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 23 November 2018                 |On: 7 December 2018                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between


                                Aksshayan [A]

                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on [~] 1995. He appeals
      with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge,
      promulgated on 20  August  2018,  dismissing  his  appeal  on  asylum,
      humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.


   2. Neither the appellant, nor any representative on his behalf,  attended
      the hearing of his appeal at Taylor House on 30 July 2018.


   3. The Judge noted at [8] that a letter 26 July 2018  was  received  from
      the appellant at the Tribunal on 27 July  2018.   In  his  letter  the
      appellant asked that his hearing be  adjourned  for  two  months.  His
      reasons for the request were that he has been very sick and  depressed
      and is unable to concentrate in his case. As he was sick he could  not
      instruct a representative to represent him at the hearing on  30  July
      2018. He is due to  see  the  doctor  and  will  forward  the  medical
      certificate once he has received it.


   4. The application to adjourn was considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Peart on 27 July. He refused the application on  the  basis  that  the
      reason given was insufficient to warrant an adjournment.


   5. At the hearing on 30 July, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  noted  that
      given that the application to adjourn had been made, she was satisfied
      that the appellant was aware of the hearing date.


   6. She considered whether to use her power under Rule 28 of the  Tribunal
      Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules
      2014. She was satisfied that it was in the  interests  of  justice  to
      proceed, taking into account  matters  referred  to  at  [12]  of  her
      decision.


   7. The Home Office Presenting Officer made no submission in  relation  to
      the issue regarding adjournment. Nor  did  she  make  any  submissions
      thereafter in relation to the substantive issues in the case [13].


   8. The Judge considered the appellant's claimed fear of persecution.  She
      had regard to the basis of  his  claim  as  set  out  in  his  witness
      statement dated 31 May 2018, produced in the  respondent's  bundle  at
      C1, as his "Statement of Persecution." She also had regard to a letter
      purporting to come from a Member of the Provincial Council, which  the
      appellant handed to the respondent at the time of his interview [30].


   9. She had regard to the country  guidance  decision  in  GJ  and  Others
      [2013] UKUT 00319. She found that there  was  a  "remarkable  lack  of
      detail" in both the asylum interview and his witness  statement,  even
      on his own account, that his family had been in touch with his brother
      up until  six  months  before  the  asylum  interview,  and  that  the
      incidents he complained about had been going on since 2012. There  was
      no explanation why the alleged harassment only began in 2012  when  he
      and his parents were all in the UK by 2008. The only reason given  for
      the suspicion of the authorities was the absence of  his  parents.  No
      explanation was given as to why  this  would  be  sufficient  for  the
      authorities to be suspicious that his brother  was  involved  in  LTTE
      activity. She did not  find  it  "inherently  credible"  that  such  a
      suspicion would arise for such a reason.


  10. Nor did the appellant give any explanation as to why his brother  went
      into hiding, given that he was released from detention. No explanation
      was given as to why the authorities tried to  extort  money  from  his
      brother. Nor has any explanation been given  as  to  why  his  brother
      cannot speak to his parents on the telephone [39].


  11. She also noted that there were important inconsistencies  between  his
      account given at the asylum interview and the account in  his  witness
      statement as set out at [39(7)]. She gave  no  weight  to  the  letter
      purporting to be from the member of the Provincial  Council  dated  30
      March 2013 for reasons set out at [39(8)].


  12. She found that the appellant would not be at risk  of  persecution  or
      serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.  His  removal  would  not  breach
      Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention. Nor did he fit into  any  of
      the risk categories defined in GJ.


  13. He did not meet the requirements under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.


  14. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant contended that  he  sought  an
      adjournment as he was not  well  enough  to  attend  the  hearing.  He
      attached the letter sent to the Tribunal. He again set out his  claim.
      He stated that he is depressed and is arranging to attend counselling.


  15.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal,   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
      Hollingworth stated that it is arguable that the appellant was not  in
      a  position  to  properly  present  his  case  in  the  light  of  the
      contemporaneous assessment  in  relation  to  depression  and  anxiety
      reflected in the NHS documentation provided by the appellant.


  16. In his grounds of appeal the appellant contended that it  was  evident
      from his letter that he sent to the Tribunal that he has been sick and
      depressed and is unable to concentrate in  his  case.  He  accordingly
      could not instruct a representative to represent him at the hearing on
      30 July 2018.


  17. Ms Jones on behalf of the appellant referred  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      decision in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  (IAC).
      Although the Tribunal considered the appeal under the "old Rules," she
      submitted that the same principles continue to apply.


  18. In Nwaigwe, neither party was present or represented at  the  hearing.
      His solicitors wrote to the Tribunal a few days before  the  scheduled
      hearing that they had been informed that he was  ill,  but  they  were
      unable to give any further information. An adjournment  was  therefore
      requested.  They  stated  that  they  had  been   unable   to   obtain
      instructions from their client to enable them to prepare properly  for
      the hearing. They had been informed that their client has been ill and
      all attempts to contact his doctor and hospital to provide  them  with
      the information about his situation have  proved  abortive.  This  was
      because of the restraints under the Data Protection Act.  Accordingly,
      they had no other option than to apply to adjourn the  hearing  for  a
      short period.


  19. The Upper Tribunal considered that the Judge erred in law in  deciding
      that the appellant's adjournment application should be refused. At [7]
      of the decision, the President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Justice
      McCloskey,  stated  that  if  a  Tribunal  refuses  to  accede  to  an
      adjournment request, such a decision could in principle  be  erroneous
      in law in several respects. In practice, in most  cases  the  question
      will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of  his  right
      to a fair hearing.


  20. He stated that where an adjournment refusal is challenged on  fairness
      grounds it is important to recognise that the question for  the  Upper
      Tribunal is not whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted  reasonably.
      Rather, the test to be applied is that  of  fairness:  was  there  any
      deprivation of the affected party's  right  to  a  fair  hearing?  Any
      temptation to review  the  conduct  and  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal through the lens of reasonableness, must be  firmly  resisted
      in order to avoid a misdirection in law. In a  nutshell,  fairness  is
      the supreme criterion.


  21. Mr Justice McCloskey noted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  procedural
      Rules applicable in that appeal were to be replaced by a new  code  in
      2014. The substantially less prescriptive formula in  the  2014  Rules
      reinforces the necessity of giving full effect, in every case, to  the
      common law right and principles referred to. The overriding  objective
      remains unchanged: see Rule 2.


  22. First-tier Tribunal Judges  dealing  with  adjournment  issues  should
      continue to apply the principles rehearsed in Nwaigwe and the decision
      of the Court of Appeal in SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284
      at [13]. There the Court of Appeal held that when considering  whether
      the Immigration Judge ought to have granted an adjournment,  the  test
      was not irrationality. The test  was  not  whether  his  decision  was
      properly open to him or was Wednesbury unreasonable or  perverse.  The
      test and sole test was whether it was unfair.


  23. In addition, the Court  must  also  consider  whether  the  error  was
      material. In Nwaigwe, the Tribunal ultimately held that there had  not
      been a material error and that the secretary of state's  decision  was
      sustainable.


  24. Ms Jones submitted that prior to the date that the  Judge  promulgated
      her decision, the appellant had received a summary  of  an  assessment
      undertaken  by  Hounslow  IAPT  (Improving  Access  to   Psychological
      Therapies), dated 17 August 2018.


  25. The appellant had  a  telephone  appointment  with  the  psychological
      wellbeing practitioner, Ms Rachel Watson. He  told  her  that  at  the
      moment the main thing bothering him is  low  mood  and  anxiety  as  a
      result of his  current  legal  status.  He  scored  19  on  the  PHQ9,
      indicating severe symptoms of depression and 17 on GAD  7,  indicating
      severe symptoms  of  anxiety.  His  reply  to  one  of  the  questions
      indicated some thoughts that he might be better off  dead  or  harming
      himself in some way. However, he stated that his family  is  a  strong
      protective factor preventing him from taking those thoughts further.


  26. As a result, the outcome was that they had agreed to  a  plan.  Having
      regard to the specific nature of his difficulties, it  was  felt  that
      specialist services would be better able to support him at the moment.
      Their service only offered short term CBT. He was  therefore  provided
      with information relating to services. A team of mental health  social
      workers  are  linked  with  primary  care  services.   A   number   of
      organisations providing counselling and therapy are  set  out  on  the
      second page of Ms Watson's assessment.


  27. On behalf of the respondent Ms Kiss submitted that credibility  issues
      were raised against the appellant. The application for an  adjournment
      had been  refused.  The  Judge  had  regard  to  the  refusal  of  the
      adjournment by Judge Peart on 27 July 2018. The letter requesting that
      adjournment was not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


  28. She referred to [12] of the decision. The Judge took into account that
      there was no good reason for the appellant's absence. He claimed  that
      his sickness and depression meant he was unable  to  concentrate,  but
      not that he could not attend  the  hearing.  Further,  adjourning  the
      hearing was unlikely to result in  evidence  being  submitted  by  the
      appellant. Despite being aware at the date of the appeal  hearing  and
      being well enough to correspond with the Tribunal, he had not sent  in
      a bundle of evidence. He stated that he had  no  documents  to  obtain
      from Sri Lanka at his screening interview.


  29. She  also  noted  the  inconsistencies  identified  as  affecting  his
      credibility. There was no evidence produced apart from the appellant's
      asylum statement.


  30. In reply, Ms Jones submitted that the reasons  for  adjournment  might
      well have resulted in further evidence. The appellant should have been
      given the benefit of the doubt. He had indicated that  he  was  taking
      steps to prepare. Further, the appellant had lived in the UK  for  ten
      years. His Article 8 claim was considered without the benefit  of  any
      evidence.






      Assessment


  31. First-tier Tribunal Judge Peart refused  the  appellant's  application
      for an adjournment on the basis that "this is no reason to adjourn  an
      asylum hearing." That decision is recorded on the file  and  dated  27
      July 2018.


  32. The appellant had however asserted that he  has  been  very  sick  and
      depressed and was unable to concentrate in his case. Further,  he  was
      due to see a doctor and would forward the medical certificate once  he
      received it.


  33. Following the hearing on 30 July 2018, and  before  promulgation,  the
      appellant did produce to the Tribunal his assessment from Hounslow  to
      which I have referred. He had a telephone appointment with them  on  8
      August 2018. It is evident from the report produced on 17 August 2018,
      some three days prior to the date of promulgation  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge's decision, that the  appellant  had  indicated  severe
      symptoms of  depression  and  anxiety.  There  was  also  evidence  of
      intrusive thoughts including harming himself in some way or worse.


  34. It was recorded that specialist  services  would  be  better  able  to
      support him. Short term  CBT  would  not  be  of  assistance  to  him.
      Accordingly, he  was  referred  to  various  counselling  and  support
      groups.


  35. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not refer to, nor direct herself, in
      accordance with Nwaigwe, supra.  She did not exercise  her  discretion
      in accordance with the approach to be adopted in such a case.


  36. The appellant has challenged the decision to refuse his adjournment on
      fairness grounds. As noted, the question for the Upper Tribunal is not
      whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge acted reasonably. The sole  test
      relates to that of fairness. Was there any deprivation of the affected
      party's right to a fair hearing?


  37. I am satisfied that in the circumstances of the  case,  the  appellant
      has been deprived of his right to a fair hearing.


  38. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error on a point of law. There has  been  no
      contention  that  the  error  of  law  was   not   material   in   the
      circumstances.


  39. I accordingly set it aside. In the circumstances, the appeal  will  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision  to  be  made
      before another Judge.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and it is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 2 December 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer








