

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08839/2019


|Heard at Bradford                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 12 March 2020                            |on 19 March 2020               |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MFD
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Howard, Solicitor, of Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Myers promulgated on 30 September 2019 in which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born on 1 September 1991 who
        claimed to be a supporter of  PG7,  as  were  his  father  and  his
        brother, although the appellant claimed he did not tell  the  other
        family members of his involvement. The appellant  claimed  to  have
        attended demonstrations in his home area of Gondar.  On 1  November
        2016 the appellant claims he and other members of his cell were  at
        a meeting which was  raided  by  the  Ethiopian  authorities.   Two
        members of the cell were shot, and the appellant beaten unconscious
        and taken into detention. The appellant claimed he spent two months
        in detention during which time he was tortured although,  following
        payment of a bribe by his uncle, he was released  and  subsequently
        left Ethiopia. The appellant claims his  father  and  brother  have
        been held in detention since 2016 and that he does  not  know  what
        has happened to them.
     3. The appellant claims he has joined PG7 in the  United  Kingdom  and
        attended meetings and demonstrations and claims he will face a real
        risk on return to Ethiopia as a result of his political activities.
     4. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [20] of the decision under
        challenge in which the Judge finds that the appellant had not  made
        out his case even to the  lower  standard  for  the  reasons  given
        between [21 - 35] of the  decision  under  challenge.  The  Judge's
        conclusions at [36] are in the following terms:


             36.  I cannot find that the Appellant has made out  his  claim
                  that he had to leave Ethiopia because of  persecution  due
                  to his political activities. In any event even if  he  had
                  made out his claim, it  was  conceded  by  Mr  Hussain  on
                  behalf of the Appellant that there had been  a  change  of
                  circumstances in Ethiopia and PG 7 was no longer a  banned
                  organisation, however in his submission it was  too  early
                  to say that there was cogent evidence  of  change.  Having
                  found that the Appellant had not made out his claim, it is
                  unnecessary for me to make  findings  as  to  the  current
                  country  situation  in  Ethiopia.  Nevertheless,   it   is
                  interesting to note that at around the same time  as  this
                  hearing Abiy Ahmed, the Prime  minister  of  Ethiopia  was
                  awarded the Nobel Peace Prize  for  ending  the  war  with
                  Eritrea and bringing about fundamental change in Ethiopia,
                  including appointing former dissidents to political roles.


     5. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the Judge  made
        irrational findings on material matters, failed to make findings on
        material matters relating to the appellant's sur place  activities,
        failed to apply applicable country guidance case law, and failed to
        consider article 8/paragraph 276 ADE.
     6. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by  a  judge  of  the
        Upper Tribunal, the operative part of which  is  in  the  following
        terms:


             2.   It was arguably an error of law not to make any  findings
                  in respect of the appellant's claim that removal from  the
                  UK would breach article 8 ECHR, given that it  was  raised
                  by the appellant. It is arguable that the appellant  could
                  face  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration   into
                  Ethiopia even if he would not face persecution or  a  real
                  risk of suffering serious harm; and  therefore,  arguably,
                  the findings  in  respect  of  the  asylum  claim  do  not
                  necessarily mean that the article 8  claim,  relying  upon
                  the same or similar facts, would inevitably not succeed.


             3.   It was also arguably an error for the Judge to  state  at
                  para. 36 that because the appellant had not made  out  his
                  claim it was unnecessary to make findings on  the  current
                  country situation in  Ethiopia,  when,  arguably,  it  was
                  necessary to consider the current country situation as  an
                  integral part of the assessment of whether the  claim  was
                  made out.



Discussion



     7. Mr Howard, in his submissions, focused on the claim relating to the
        background  material  and  country  guidance  case  law.  He   also
        submitted the Judge failed to consider the Danian  point  regarding
        the appellant's sur place activities. It was accepted PG7 no longer
        exist but submitted it was necessary to consider all the  available
        material. A new fact-finding mission to Ethiopia had been published
        by the respondent dated 10 February 2020 and the country  situation
        was relevant and should have been considered by the Judge.
     8. The core finding of the Judge, which  has  not  been  shown  to  be
        infected by arguable legal error,  is  that  the  appellant  lacked
        credibility and had not established his claim. At  [33]  the  Judge
        writes:


             33.  I have serious concerns about  the  appellant's  evidence
                  because of the numerous inconsistencies and his  inability
                  to give satisfactory answers in cross-examination. It  may
                  be that he suffers from memory problems,  and  it  may  be
                  that  these  problems  caused  by  ill-treatment  suffered
                  either in Ethiopia or on his journey to the  UK.  However,
                  the onus is upon the Appellant to prove his  case  to  the
                  lower standard and in the absence of any medical  evidence
                  or anything else to explain  the  inconsistencies  in  his
                  case I cannot find that he has done so.


     9. The Judge considered the appellant's sur place activities at [34  -
        35] in which the Judge noted that despite having  claimed  to  have
        joined PG7 in the United Kingdom the appellant had not attended any
        activities or meetings since June 2018  which  coincided  with  the
        date he actually joined the organisation.
    10. The Judge's finding the appellant had failed to make out his  claim
        to face problems in Ethiopia or  that  he  had  a  genuine  adverse
        political opinion demonstrated by activities in the United  Kingdom
        is a finding within the range of those available to the Judge. Even
        if joining PG7 in the UK, as found, is disingenuous it could  still
        give rise to a real risk of ill treatment depending on the view  of
        a potential  persecutor,  whatever  the  appellant's  motives,  the
        Danian point. In this case it was not made out the appellant joined
        PG7 for anything other than disingenuous reasons or that the  facts
        he did so will have come to the attention  of  the  authorities  in
        Ethiopia for, on the facts as found, the appellant has no  credible
        adverse profile and did not attend meetings or undertake activities
        for this group which may have been monitored by the authorities  in
        Ethiopia.
    11. The updated country material  proved  by  Mr  Howard  also  clearly
        states that this group have now disbanded  and  members,  including
        high profile leaders, do not face a real  risk  on  Ethiopia  as  a
        result the changes that have occurred in that country.
    12. The Judges comment at [36] that it was not  necessary  to  consider
        the country material relates to the appellant's original Grounds as
        he claimed it was as a result of the  country  conditions  that  he
        will face a real risk on return in light of his  claim.  The  claim
        was not found to be credible meaning the appellant was no more than
        a failed asylum seeker. It is not made  out  by  reference  to  the
        grounds, evidence before the Judge, or country  material  that  the
        appellant will face a real risk on return in light of  his  profile
        as found in light of the country material. No arguable legal  error
        is made out.
    13. The far as ECHR is concerned, the Judge dismisses the appeal so far
        as article 3 is  concerned  in  line  with  the  rejection  of  the
        protection claim. In relation to article 8 the  Judge's  Record  of
        Proceedings clearly shows that counsel representing  the  appellant
        confirmed at the outset that article 8 was not in issue. The  Judge
        was  entitled  to  view  this   is   a   matter   that   had   been
        conceded/withdrawn and was therefore not a live  issue  before  the
        Judge. It is not made out any submissions were made to the Judge in
        relation to this aspect either. No arguable  legal  error  is  made
        out.
    14. In any event the country material and  factual  matrix,  as  found,
        does not, arguably, establish  the  appellant  can  succeed  either
        within or outside the immigration rules or on human rights grounds.


    15. Whilst the  appellant  disagrees  with  the  Judge's  findings  and
        clearly wishes to remain in the United Kingdom the grounds fail  to
        establish arguable legal error material to the decision to  dismiss
        the appeal sufficient to warrant a grant of permission to appeal to
        the Upper Tribunal.


Decision

    16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal made up an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
        of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12 March 2020
