
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08691/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th December 2017                         |On 23rd January 2018          |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     H H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel of Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Veloso
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 24th January 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on [ ] 1994.  He entered the UK
    on 23rd February 2016 and applied for asylum on the basis that he was a
    Peshmerga who had abandoned his colleagues in their fight against ISIS.
     He feared retribution from them on return.  Additionally, he came from
    Kirkuk which was in a contested area, and he could  not  safely  return
    there.

 3. The judge,  in  a  detailed  and  thoughtful  determination,  carefully
    analysed the appellant's claim and found it to  be  wholly  lacking  in
    credibility.  She accepted that he came from Kirkuk but concluded  that
    his evidence that he fled from a combat situation leaving his Peshmerga
    colleagues was not credible. She found that the appellant  had  cousins
    in Erbil who had given him shelter in the past and that  he  had  close
    family  in  Sulaymaniyah.   She  concluded  that  he  could  reasonably
    relocate there and dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law  in  her  assessment  of  the  viability  of  internal
    relocation.  On the judge's own findings, the appellant had established
    that relocation to Baghdad would be unduly harsh for  him.   The  judge
    had also failed to deal with the issue of how the appellant would reach
    the IKR from Baghdad since he does not originate  from  there  and  his
    identity will not have been pre-cleared with the authorities.

 5. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Hodgkinson on  23rd
    May 2017 but granted upon renewal by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill,  who
    observed that the Court of Appeal had  replaced  the  relevant  country
    guidance in its judgment of AA (Iraq)  v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944.
    Insofar as the grounds argued that the judge had erred in applying  the
    country guidance case  of  AA  (Iraq)  [2015]  UKUT  00544,  they  were
    arguable.

Submissions

 6. Miss Patel relied on her grounds and submitted that the judge had  been
    unclear in relation to whether she expected the appellant  to  relocate
    to Baghdad, had not properly considered how he was  expected  to  reach
    the IKR from Baghdad and had not assessed whether relocation to the IKR
    would be unduly harsh in light of the fact that the  appellant  had  no
    documentation, could not obtain employment  there  and  would  be  only
    granted a very short period of leave. She did not rely on any change in
    country guidance.

 7. Mrs Pettersen defended the determination and submitted that  the  judge
    had made reasoned findings which were open to her.

Findings and Conclusions

 8. The judge did not err in law.

 9. First, there is no lack of clarity in this  determination.   The  judge
    concluded in terms, at paragraph 59:

         "For the detailed reasons as set out above,  whilst  the  appellant
         may encounter some difficulty settling into  Baghdad,  I  find  the
         appellant has shown that relocation to the IKR via Baghdad will not
         be unreasonable or unduly harsh in the circumstances."

10. It is quite clear that, read as a whole, the  judge  did  not  consider
    that permanent relocation to Baghdad would be reasonable.  She set  out
    the difficulties which he would face in Baghdad.

11. There are regular flights  from  Baghdad  to  the  IKR.   There  is  no
    suggestion that the appellant would have to travel by land.   The  fact
    that the judge did not mention the mode of  transport  to  the  IKR  is
    immaterial.

12. The judge considered the issue of return to the  IKR  in  some  detail.
    She observed that he was a military trained driver and therefore  would
    not have difficulty in securing employment.  She was entitled to  place
    weight upon the fact that, on her unchallenged findings, the  appellant
    had family members in both Erbil and Sulaymaniyah.

13. The appellant claimed that he did not have a passport.  The judge found
    his evidence in relation to both the passport and the CSID  to  be  not
    credible.  However the appellant did have an original driving  licence,
    a Peshmerga identity card, a national certificate, a  letter  from  the
    mayor of Kirkuk and a copy  of  his  family's  ration  card.   She  was
    entitled to conclude, that on the basis of the documents which were  in
    his possession, there was no reason why he could not obtain a  passport
    and CSID.

14. The grounds amount to a disagreement with the decision but disclose  no
    arguable error of law.

Notice of Decision

The original judge did  not  err  in  law  and  her  decision  stands.   The
appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 22 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
