
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08001/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On February 4, 2019               |On 25 February 2019                    |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               Mr Mohamed [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes of Counsel, instructed by the CAB (Bolton)

For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on April 15, 2017 and  claimed
    asylum the same  day.   The  respondent  refused  his  application  for
    protection under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395 on June 8, 2018.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision on June  25,  2018  under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  arguing  he
    had experienced violence at the hands  of  his  extended  family  as  a
    vulnerable young person and  the  authorities  had  failed  to  provide
    protection.

 3. The appellant's appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Parker on August 2, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on  August  23,
    2018 the Judge dismissed his appeal  on  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought on September 6, 2018 and Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Keane found it was arguable there had been an error
    in law because the Judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding the appellant was not telling the truth and  on  two  occasions
    the Judge had simply  accepted  the  respondent's  submissions  without
    giving reasons for those conclusions.

 5. In a Rule 24 letter dated November 22, 2018, as amended by  Mr  Tan  at
    the hearing, the respondent accepted  the  Judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons but submitted that there was no material error because
    the Judge had considered the issue of internal relocation.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Holmes submitted that given the concession made by Mr Tan the  issue
    ultimately was one of internal relocation,  but  to  make  findings  on
    internal relocation there had to be findings made on the  core  of  the
    protection claim.  Findings  made  by  the  Judge,  and  in  particular
    paragraphs 37 to 39 of the decision, failed to take  into  account  the
    points which were raised in the grounds of appeal before this Tribunal.

 8. Mr Tan responded to that submission accepting that whilst the situation
    was not ideal the appellant was an adult and at paragraph 33 the  Judge
    had considered his appeal taking the case at its highest.

 9. Mr Holmes responded by submitting there had been a complete failure  to
    make adequate findings on the  core  issues  of  the  appeal  and  when
    considering the appeal at its highest the Judge  failed  to  take  into
    account that the appellant's mother was seeking to leave Guinea or  the
    fact that there was no contact between the appellant and his family and
    his family link had been broken.

    Findings

10. This was an  appeal  brought  by  the  appellant  against  the  Judge's
    decision. Mr Tan conceded that whilst the Judge had  made  findings  on
    credibility he had failed to give any reasons for reaching the negative
    findings that he did.

11. Mr Tan sought to persuade me that  the  issue  of  internal  relocation
    could be separated from that error and that there was no material error
    in law if the internal relocation assessment could stand.

12. I indicated to Mr Tan and Mr Holmes that the Judge was approaching  the
    issue  of  internal  relocation  having  already  formed  a   view   on
    potentially flawed credibility findings. Mr Holmes' submission internal
    relocation could not be separated from the credibility findings does in
    my view have force.

13. This is not simply a case where the the issue  of  internal  relocation
    can be looked at based on objective evidence  only  because  the  corer
    issues of the appellant's case needed addressing before a  decision  on
    on internal relocation could be addressed.  Whilst I accept  the  Judge
    did state at paragraph 33 that he  was  considering  the  case  at  its
    highest, I am satisfied that there  are  sufficient  areas  of  concern
    highlighted by Mr Holmes that suggest the decision is flawed.

14. I therefore find there has been an error in law.

15. I have considered whether to retain jurisdiction in this matter  or  to
    remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal.  Bearing in mind full
    credibility findings will be required  before  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation can be assessed, it seems more appropriate that this  matter
    be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal under Section 12(1) of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Notice of Decision

I find there is an error of law.  I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the
matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  Section  12(1)  of   the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Signed                              Date 19 February 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




