
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08401/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 July 2019                               |On 18 September 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                     MsT
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms H Short, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                         DETERMINATIONS AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He claims  to  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution as a gay man if returned to Pakistan.

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  6  October  2012  on  a
    Student visa.  His leave expired in November 2013.  He was arrested and
    detained, having been found working illegally, on 18 December 2014.  On
    13 January 2015, he claimed asylum.  His claim was refused.  His appeal
    was dismissed and permission to appeal was refused by both  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal.   He  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 9 February 2016.  He remained in the United Kingdom.  On 1
    June 2018 he lodged further submissions.  These were treated as a fresh
    claim and on 18 June 2016 the Secretary of State refused his claim.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, where  his  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge A J M Baldwin.  His appeal was dismissed.  Permission  to  appeal
    was refused by the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, but then
    granted following the quashing of the latter decision by order  of  the
    High Court.

 3. We do not need to set out the evidence relating to the  persecution  of
    homosexual men in Pakistan.  There is no  doubt  of  it,  and  save  in
    relation to what is described as new evidence of homophobia  (to  which
    we shall refer again later), it does not  feature  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.   The issue that the judge needed to address was set out in his
    decision, correctly in our view, as follows:

           "27.  In HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 the Supreme  Court  set
           out the questions which need to be  addressed  when  considering
           the issue of persecution in relation to an asylum claim by a gay
           person.  Assuming a person is indeed gay, but  conducts  himself
           discreetly, the question which needs to be asked is  "Why?"   If
           it is for cultural or religious reasons of his own choosing,  an
           asylum claim must be rejected.  However, if it is out of fear of
           persecution and that fear is well-founded, a grant of asylum  is
           appropriate, however  unreasonable  the  refusal  to  resort  to
           concealment may be.

 4. Judge Baldwin set out the  appellant's  history,  noting  that  at  his
    previous appeal it had been accepted that he was gay, but that  he  had
    not been believed in relation to various  aspects  of  his  account  of
    difficulties with family members.  The  previous  judge  had  concluded
    that although there was widespread  homophobia  in  Pakistan,  that  of
    itself did not amount to persecution;  and  that  the  appellant  would
    "exercise reserve in  the  expression  of  his  sexual  orientation  if
    returned to Pakistan".  So far as the evidence before the judge on  the
    present claim is concerned, it was summarised in paragraph  14  of  the
    determination, in a manner not now challenged, as follows:

           "14.   The  Appellant  realised  when  he  was  24/25   he   was
           homosexual.  Prior to that, he was pre-occupied with  study  and
           home affairs.  He first suffered as a result in August 2007 when
           his father and brother beat him, leaving him with scars  on  his
           right cheek and head.  He left home and has not  spoken  to  his
           father since, though he has  had  occasional  contact  with  his
           mother and one of his sisters, none of which contact  now  takes
           place.  He went to Lahore where he had sex with lots of  unknown
           males, as there are lots of  homosexuals  there.   He  also  had
           occasional sex when he moved to Kasir where he  resumed  contact
           with his mother.  Since being in the UK, he has  had  no  proper
           sex with males and his long-standing friends don't  know  he  is
           gay as they are not homosexuals.  He has, however, made  friends
           with homosexuals he meets at his Church and Refugee Organisation
           who believe he is homosexual."

 5. In his witness statement before Judge Baldwin, he repeated his  history
    of previous homosexual encounters in Pakistan,  which  he  kept  hidden
    from family and friends due to "society pressure and religious views on
    sexuality".  He had had casual encounters in the United Kingdom and was
    a member  of  various  homosexual  societies.   He  also  attended  the
    Unitarian Church's LGBT meetings.  In cross-examination he said that he
    had been living openly as a gay man since  he  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom and therefore was doing so at the  time  of  his  last  appeal.
    However, he had not had much knowledge  or  organisations  or  same-sex
    people as he had been busy studying (though  he  now  accepted  he  was
    neither studying nor working).  His friends, who he said  all  knew  of
    his sexuality, support him, and he said that he hides it from  no  one,
    not even the Pakistani community here.

 6. Four witnesses from the Unitarian Church gave evidence about him  which
    for the most part appeared to be repetition of what the  appellant  had
    told them.  As we understand the matter each of those  witnesses  is  a
    gay man to whom the appellant had been open about  his  sexuality.   On
    the other hand, as the judge notes at paragraph 24, another  individual
    wrote to say that he had been providing the  appellant  with  food  and
    other expenses since January 2018 at the property at  which  they  both
    live, but the author of that letter says nothing about the  appellant's
    sexuality.

 7. The judge's conclusions on the asylum claim are in paragraphs 31-33  of
    his determination:

           "31. The starting point for my  consideration  is  the  previous
              Determination which was challenged twice unsuccessfully.   It
              was accepted the Appellant was homosexual but found  that  he
              would  behave  discreetly  in   Pakistan   due   to   "social
              pressures".  The Judge did not accept  that  his  father  had
              disowned him but, in any event, family disapproval  in  which
              the  State  played  no  part   fell   outside   International
              Protection  and  the  Appellant  had  been   able   to   live
              subsequently unmolested in Lahore and Kasir for  five  years.
              There was no evidence to show that he could be tracked  down,
              even assuming  his  family  would  be  motivated  to  do  so.
              Further, there was no real risk he would be prosecuted.

           32. It is not suggested  that  the  situation  in  Pakistan  has
              changed appreciably in  relation  to  homosexuals  since  the
              first Determination and there is no new evidence relating  to
              what happened to the Appellant in Pakistan as  the  witnesses
              called to give evidence before the  Tribunal  confirmed  that
              they had no personal knowledge of what had  happened  to  the
              Appellant in Pakistan and they had relied upon  what  he  had
              told them.  The question is whether the Appellant's  approach
              to his sexuality has genuinely changed since his first Appeal
              was dismissed and he had exhausted  all  Appeal  avenues.   I
              accept that shy people who behave very discreetly can and  do
              sometimes become confident and outgoing people over time  and
              in a supportive  environment.   However,  the  Appellant  had
              already been in the UK for three years when his first  Appeal
              was determined - and he made it clear he came here, partly at
              least, because of the sexual freedom  this  country  allowed.
              Furthermore, he was not a teenager still finding his  way  in
              the world, as he was already 29  when  he  arrived  here.   A
              homosexual  asylum-seeker  does  not  have  to  prove  he  is
              sexually active but this Appellant has been here  for  nearly
              six years and there is no evidence from a single  person  who
              can attest to a relationship with the  Appellant  and  no-one
              who can say they know of anyone with whom they believe he has
              been in a relationship.   That  strongly  suggests  that  the
              Appellant has been  incredibly  discreet  in  his  homosexual
              contacts throughout  his  time  in  the  UK.   The  Appellant
              maintains that everyone he knows is now aware  he  is  openly
              homosexual.  However, it is I  find  telling  that  the  very
              person with whom the Appellant lives and is said  to  be  the
              person providing  him  with  accommodation,  food  and  other
              expenses  is  completely  silent  as   to   the   Appellant's
              sexuality, still less whether he is open about it -  "openly"
              being the key issue in this case.  Corroboration  is  not  an
              evidential requirement in Asylum cases but that does not mean
              that an absence of evidence on a point of crucial  importance
              from someone who should be able to give such evidence  cannot
              be regarded as significant.  In this  case  it  is,  I  find,
              highly significant and  notable.   The  witnesses  called  do
              appear to  believe  that  the  way  in  which  the  Appellant
              conducts himself in their company is such that his  behaviour
              has  not  been  contrived  and  represents  the   Appellant's
              genuinely open approach to his sexuality.  In the context and
              timing of this wholly  different  approach  since  he  became
              Appeal Rights exhausted, I have no hesitation  in  concluding
              that this Appellant is not being  open  to  the  wider  world
              about his sexuality and continues to keep it  from  those  he
              does not know to  be  homosexual.   He  acted  discreetly  in
              Pakistan in relation  to  people  he  did  not  believe  were
              homosexual before he came here and I have no  doubt  that  he
              would continue to act discreetly whether he is in the  UK  or
              in Pakistan - other that is than in the presence of those  he
              knows to be homosexuals.  He is one who suffers from  anxiety
              and depression, but neither the Maudsley nor his treating  GP
              have suggested his symptoms might  provide  a  diagnosis  for
              PTSD and it  is  clear  from  his  Medical  Records  and  the
              Maudsley Assessment that he has worried about all  manner  of
              symptoms he has had over the last six years.  The Appellant's
              issues fall well short of founding an  Article  3  claim,  as
              they do the medical condition of Paposhvili.

           33. Judge Courtney did not believe that the Appellant  had  been
              disowned by his father for the reasons given - not because he
              conclude that in Pakistan homosexual children  would  not  be
              disowned in such circumstances.  Even if  the  Appellant  has
              been disowned, which I  do  not  accept,  the  Appellant  has
              stated he lived away from his family  for  several  years  in
              Pakistan.  The Expert Report indicated that the family  could
              probably locate the Appellant elsewhere in Pakistan, but  the
              question which arises is whether the family would wish to  do
              so if he has been disowned and  none  of  them  has  been  in
              contact for many years.  More than a decade has passed  since
              the Appellant moved away in  2007  and  I  find  that  it  is
              unlikely in the extreme that his father or brother would have
              any interest whatsoever in  tracking  him  down  or  learning
              anything about him if they still feel as strongly  about  his
              sexuality as the Appellant claims."

 8. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge's findings "are  undermined
    by the following errors of law":

           "5 a. The Judge accepts the evidence  of  the  Appellant's  four
                witnesses (who were all gay men, two of whom were originally
                from the UK and two from Pakistan)  that  the  Appellant  is
                open with them about his sexuality.  It  is  submitted  that
                this evidence clearly suffices to show  that  the  Appellant
                lives openly in the UK as a gay man.  There is no principled
                or reasonable basis for  the  distinction  the  Judge  makes
                between openness towards persons whom the  Appellant  "knows
                to be homosexuals" and  others.   This  is  particularly  so
                given the background evidence which demonstrates the lack of
                public LGBT community in Pakistan, a factor which the  Judge
                fails to consider.




             b. In any event, there is  no  proper  basis  for  the  Judge's
                finding that the Appellant is only open about his  sexuality
                to those whom he "knows to  be  homosexuals".   The  Judge's
                reasoning on this point displays the following errors:




                   i. The Judge focuses excessively and unreasonably on the
                      absence of positive evidence  about  the  Appellant's
                      expression  of  his  sexuality  from  one  particular
                      individual (the Appellant's housemate).




                  ii. The Judge relies on the fact that the  Appellant  has
                      not been in a relationship in the UK as evidence that
                      he   has   been   "discreet".    This   approach   is
                      unreasonable.  There are clearly many reasons  why  a
                      person may not have found a romantic partner.



                 iii.  The Judge fails to take into  account  the  evidence
                      that the Appellant has attended events as  an  openly
                      gay  man  which  are  attended  by  persons  of   all
                      sexualities: see [23], where th4e Judge discusses the
                      evidence  about  the  Unitarian  Church,  where  "the
                      majority of the congregation were not gay".



             c. The Judge fails to properly apply the test in HJ Iran, as he
                makes no assessment of the reasons why the  Appellant  would
                conceal his sexuality in Pakistan (only one of which need be
                a fear of persecution, according to the  test).   The  Judge
                fails to address the submission set out in  the  Appellant's
                skeleton argument at [17(c)] that:




                    The view that the Appellant does not fear persecution in
                    Pakistan is similarly unsustainable in the light of  the
                    fact that he has consistently and  repeatedly  expressed
                    such a fear.  For example, in his asylum  interview,  he
                    explained that he feared being killed, thrown out of his
                    village or beaten if his relationship with a man  became
                    known (at question 95); he was scared of being caught by
                    the authorities  when  engaging  in  clandestine  sexual
                    activity in Lahore (at question 189);  he  feared  being
                    killed in Pakistan by his family or  by  others  if  his
                    sexuality became known (at questions 253 and  254).   In
                    his current Appeal  Statement,  he  reiterates  that  he
                    fears being persecuted and killed (at [32])."




             d. The Judge fails to address or make any findings in  relation
                to the following submissions  set  out  in  the  Appellant's
                skeleton argument at [17(a))] to [176(b)],  in  relation  to
                (a) the proper approach to  the  previous  determination  of
                Judge  Courtney,  and  (b)  the  effect  of  recent  country
                background  evidence,  including  the  Respondent's  Country
                information and guidance: Pakistan: Sexual  orientation  and
                gender identity Version 2.0 April 2016 (also  cited  in  the
                skeleton argument at [14]) and the Appellant's expert report
                prepared by Uzma Moeen:




                    a. Judge Courtney's reasoning was that  although  "there
                       is a homophobic climate in  Pakistan  which  prompted
                       the  Appellant  to  keep  his  sexual  orientation  a
                       private  matter",  the  Judge  considered  that  this
                       amounted   to    "social    pressures"    and    that
                       discrimination  in  Pakistan  did   not   amount   to
                       persecution (at [65]).  Therefore, the Judge  defined
                       the  reasons  for  the  Appellant's  "discretion"  by
                       reference to  his  assessment  of  the  situation  in
                       Pakistan, rather than by reference to the Appellant's
                       subjective fears.




                    b. The conclusion that the levels of societal and state-
                       sponsored homophobia in Pakistan  do  not  amount  to
                       persecution is quite clearly unsustainable  in  light
                       of the evidence now presented  by  the  Appellant  in
                       this  appeal.   The  Appellant  has  provided   ample
                       evidence in the form of Uzma Moeen's  Expert  Report,
                       current country background materials, and indeed  the
                       Respondent's own CPIN, to demonstrate  that  gay  men
                       who live openly in  Pakistan  are  at  real  risk  of
                       persecution.

                Indeed, the Judge wholly fails to  assess  the  new  country
                background evidence put forward by the Appellant.   Notably,
                Uzma Moeen discusses the possibility of a gay  man  such  as
                the Appellant being required by his family to enter into  an
                arranged marriage  and  therefore  deny  his  sexuality  (at
                [54]).  In addition to the errors  already  identified,  the
                Judge's discussion of "discretion" fails  to  encompass  the
                risk that the  Appellant  would  be  compelled  to  actively
                conceal his sexuality in Pakistan."

 9. Ms Short expanded on those grounds  before  us.   She  made  additional
    submissions.  She asserted firstly that "we  say"  that  the  appellant
    lives openly as a gay man in the United Kingdom.  In her discussion  of
    grounds A and B she asserted that the judge's  conclusion  that  he  is
    discreet about his sexuality in the United Kingdom was irrational,  and
    that there was no proper basis for finding that he was not  being  open
    to the wider world.  She reminded us that even if he is discreet in the
    United Kingdom, there remains a need  to  determine  why  he  would  be
    discreet  in  Pakistan.   This  was  accompanied  by  the   submission,
    remarkable in the light of H  J  (Iran),  that  even  if  he  would  be
    discreet entirely of his own choice, he is  entitled  to  status  as  a
    refugee.  Mr Bramble submitted simply that the judge  was  entitled  to
    reach the conclusions he did and that no error of law had been shown.

10. We bring two  overarching  principles  to  the  determination  of  this
    appeal.  The first is that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    not a legislative instrument, to be pored over to see whether it  would
    be possible for an uninformed person  to  misunderstand  it:  it  is  a
    determination of the issues before the judge, addressed to the parties,
    to be read as a whole and in its context.    The  second  principle  is
    that an appeal to the Upper Tribunal lies on an error of law  only.   A
    judge may commit an error of law if  he  fails  to  take  into  account
    relevant material,  or  takes  into  account  irrelevant  material,  or
    reaches a  conclusion  which  is  irrational  when  compared  with  the
    material before him as a whole.  The assessment of the persuasive power
    of individual items of evidence, and their weight  in  contributing  to
    his ultimate conclusion are, however, matters entirely for  the  judge.
    Neither of these principles was  very  obvious  in  the  way  that  the
    appellant's case was presented to us or, apparently, to the High Court.



11. So far as concerns the judge's conclusions on the question  of  "why?",
    we do not think that there is any real scope for misunderstanding.   By
    the time the judge came to make his decision, the appellant had been in
    the United Kingdom as a gay man for very nearly six years.  The judge's
    conclusion was that, contrary to the  appellant's  assertions,  he  had
    revealed his sexuality to, and discussed it with, only those  he  "felt
    comfortable" with, by which he meant other gay men.   There  cannot  be
    the slightest suggestion that any  motive  connected  with  persecution
    could have been influencing his choices in this matter  over  the  last
    six years.  As a result, there is simply no reason to suppose  that  if
    one  added  the  risk  of  persecution  to  the  factual  matrix,   the
    appellant's choices, and his conduct, and  his  wishes,  would  be  any
    different.

12. It is inherent in HJ (Iran) that the mere fact of  the  persecution  of
    homosexuals in a  country  does  not  mean  that  all  homosexuals  are
    entitled to status as refugees.  It cannot therefore be said that,  for
    all individuals, the addition of the risk of persecution to the factual
    matrix will make them refugees.  It will if either they will  be  known
    to be homosexual, or if the fear  of  persecution  causes  them  to  be
    discreet about their sexuality.  If their discretion  (if  any)  arises
    from other factors, their claim is not made out.

13. The judge set out the HJ (Iran) test and, as it appears to us,  applied
    it to the factors he found  them  in  such  way  as  is  impossible  to
    misunderstand.  The appellant makes his own lifestyle  choices  in  the
    absence of any risk of persecution: he has accordingly failed  to  show
    that those lifestyle choices are motivated by a fear of persecution.

14. So far as concerns the suggestion that the judge failed to  answer  the
    "why?" question posed by HJ (Iran), we reject it.

15. We turn then to the attack on the judge's factual  conclusions  as  the
    appellant's lifestyle choices themselves.   We  reject  the  submission
    made in the grounds that there is "no principled  or  reasonable  basis
    for the distinction the judge makes between  openness  towards  persons
    whom  the  appellant  "knows  to  be  homosexuals"  and  others.    The
    difference is precisely that between discretion and openness.   In  his
    oral evidence the appellant appears to have claimed that he was open to
    everybody about his sexuality, but there was clearly  evidence  to  the
    contrary; in particular, as we  have  noted,  the  judge  recorded  the
    appellant's evidence that "his longstanding friends don't  know  he  is
    gay and they are not homosexuals".  The fact that he is not a party  to
    an openly gay relationship is clearly a factor to  take  into  account:
    obviously, the absence of such relationship does not  of  itself  prove
    either discretion or the wish to be discreet; but it is properly  taken
    into the  balance  in  determining  whether  the  appellant's  evidence
    demonstrates that he is, as he claims, open.  Looking at  the  evidence
    as a whole, we cannot see any proper basis for challenging the  judge's
    conclusion that the appellant is open about  his  sexuality  only  with
    other homosexuals.

16. We turn then to the argument raised at ground d. as set out above.  The
    existence in Pakistan of societal homophobia does not, as it  seems  to
    us, really arise in this  case.   As  we  have  said,  the  appellant's
    lifestyle choices are sufficiently demonstrated by what he does in  the
    United Kingdom.  Societal pressures not present in the  United  Kingdom
    do not influence his choices in the United Kingdom,  and  there  is  no
    reason to suppose that they would influence his choices anywhere  else.
    And Judge Baldwin's treatment of Judge Courtney's decision was that  he
    took it as a starting point, that he noted the facts Judge Courtney had
    found; but there is really no sign of his having determined  a  present
    risk on the basis of anything  other  than  the  evidence  before  him,
    despite his reference to nothing having materially  changed  since  the
    appellant's appeal before Judge Courtney.  In this context it is  right
    to say that the assertions made in the report by  Uzma  Moeen  are  not
    very different from those that were part of the evidence  before  Judge
    Courtney.

17. One new feature of the evidence is asserted in the grounds.  As we have
    noted above, the grounds submitted to the First-tier Tribunal say that:

          "Uzma Moeen discusses the possibility of a gay  man  such  as  the
          Appellant being required by his family to enter into  an  arranged
          marriage and therefore deny his sexuality (at [54])".

    The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  say  that,  before  Judge
    Baldwin, the following submission was made:

          "The country background evidence and the Expert Report  illustrate
          that gay men in Pakistan are ostracised if they do not  present  a
          heterosexual narrative of e.g. marriage to a woman."

18. What Uzma Moeen actually says at paragraph 54 is this:

          "I must also point out that once back in Pakistan there  would  be
          only one way for  an  individual  like  [the  appellant]  to  seek
          reconciliation with his family, and that would be to agree  to  an
          arranged  marriage  of  their  choice,  and  to  deny  his  sexual
          orientation.  I therefore consider [the  appellant's]  claim  that
          his family will  not  let  him  live  as  he  pleases,  and  would
          seriously harm him if they got the chance to be entirely plausible
          and consistent with the country situation in Pakistan."

19. It does not appear to us that Uzma Moeen is there making either of  the
    general statements attributed to the report in the two sets of  grounds
    of appeal.  The conclusion is predicated on the appellant's wishing  to
    seek reconciliation with this  family.   The  appellant's  relationship
    with his family is a matter  upon  which  his  evidence  has  not  been
    believed, and there is no proper basis for conclusions about it.  If he
    is estranged from his family, he has not given any indication  that  he
    would seek reconciliation.

20. A further matter  is  raised  on  the  grounds,  although  it  was  not
    addressed orally by Ms Short.  It relates to the judge's  dismissal  of
    the appeal on grounds other than asylum.  The ground is put as follows:

          "e.  The Judge's findings on Articles 3 and 8 are infected by  the
             errors set out above.  Further, the Judge's failure to adjourn
             the hearing to allow the Appellant to obtain  the  psychiatric
             report was unfair.   The  Judge's  reasons  for  refusing  the
             adjournment (at [5])  were  inadequate.   The  Appellant's  GP
             notes  plainly  do  not  constitute  an   expert   psychiatric
             assessment of the likely effects  of  the  Appellant's  mental
             health of removal to Pakistan."

21. The position is that, as we have already noted, the appellant's  appeal
    rights were exhausted in June 2016.  He made his further submissions 28
    months later, in June 2018.  It is said that only in July  2018,  after
    the refusal of those submissions, did he assert  psychiatric  problems.
    The most recent medical evidence before the judge  did  not  support  a
    claim that he was at risk of suicide, as the judge noted  at  paragraph
    5.  In these circumstances it seems to us that the judge  was  entitled
    to decide, as he did, that there was no good reason for  deferring  the
    hearing.  As he noted, on the basis of evidence derived from five and a
    half years of medical records "the appellant has had a great variety of
    issues of which the only  ones  described  as  "significant"  are  ones
    recorded as lichen planus and fracture of malar or maxillary bones,  in
    2007 and 2013 respectively".  The judge  summarised  the  rest  of  the
    medical evidence and concluded in paragraph 34 that "his medical issues
    fall far short of founding an article 3 claim and his  own  GP  clearly
    believes that he is not currently a suicide risk".

22. We have already determined that the judge did not err in law as  argued
    in grounds a to d.  No such error therefore infected his assessment  of
    the claims under article 3 or article  8.   His  consideration  of  the
    request for an adjournment  was  wholly  adequate,  and  he  took  into
    account the medical evidence that was before him.  There was  no  error
    of law in his treatment of the  non-asylum  parts  of  the  appellant's
    claim.

23. For the foregoing reasons we conclude that there was no error of law in
    Judge Baldwin's decision.  We therefore dismiss this appeal.











                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 11 September 2019



Pursuant to Rule 14, we order that no person shall disclose or publish any
matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant.
