
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08189/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 03 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   mr s a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Anzani, Counsel instructed by
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka of Tamil ethnicity born  on  2
    September  1986.   His  appeal  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
    consideration of whether or not there was an error  of  law  and  in  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 11 April 2019, I found  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  by  reason  of
    the reliance by the judge on the Appellant's responses in his screening
    interview  absent  any  or  proper  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility, in light of his confirmed vulnerability due to mental ill-
    health and PTSD.  A copy of that Decision and Reasons is appended.

 2. The appeal then came before the Upper Tribunal for hearing  on  4  June
    2019.  The Appellant sought to rely on a skeleton argument  drafted  by
    his Counsel, Ms Anzani, and served prior to the hearing and an  updated
    bundle 4 submitted by his solicitors  which  included  in,  particular,
    evidence that he had been referred to the Refugee Support  Service  for
    psychological treatment and  a  psychiatric  report  by  Dr  Obuaya,  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist, dated 21 May 2019.

 3. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Jarvis on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State submitted that whilst the decision of the First-tier Tribunal had
    been set aside in its  entirety,  he  had  noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had accepted much of what the Appellant  had  said.   Mr
    Jarvis indicated that he had read the  contents  of  bundle  4  and  in
    particular the psychiatric report of Dr Obuaya and  he  accepted  there
    was fairly extensive multi-disciplinary evidence as to the  Appellant's
    mental health.  Mr Jarvis submitted that whilst the medical evidence is
    not absolutely determinative of the  Appellant's  claim,  that  it  was
    difficult for the Secretary of State to argue against the weight of the
    evidence now available.  Mr Jarvis accepted in light of the new medical
    evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  produced  significant  and  fairly
    compelling evidence as to his mindset, both now and  historically,  and
    as a  consequence  the  Secretary  of  State's  position  is  that  the
    Appellant had made out his claim to the lower standard,  i.e.  that  he
    had been detained and ill-treated  in  Sri  Lanka  on  account  of  his
    perceived political profile.  On that basis  it  was  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that the Appellant would be at risk if  returned  to
    Sri Lanka now due to his historic experience of persecution,  in  light
    of the country guidance decision in  GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.

 4. Ms Anzari was content to accept the concession made by  Mr  Jarvis  and
    for the appeal to be allowed on the basis that the Appellant has a well-
    founded fear of persecution in Sri Lanka.




    Notice of Decision

 5. In light of Mr Jarvis's helpful concession, I find that  the  Appellant
    has a well-founded fear of persecution in Sri Lanka on account  of  his
    perceived political opinion arising from his Tamil  ethnicity  and  the
    perception that he  was  involved  previously  with  the  LTTE.   As  a
    consequence he falls within the risk  categories  set  out  in  GJ  and
    others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.

 6. It is therefore unnecessary for me to go on to determine whether or not
    Articles 3 and 8 are engaged given my decision to allow the  appeal  on
    refugee protection grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 29 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08189/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 April 2019                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                   Mr S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Laughton, Counsel, instructed by Tamil Welfare
                    Association (Romford Road)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka of Tamil origin.  He was born
    on 2 September 1986.  He arrived in the UK on 12 February 2017 and
    claimed asylum the same day.  He was given a screening interview, when
    he stated that he had worked as a fisherman.  He stated that he had not
    been detained and he had not been accused of being involved with any
    armed or violent organisation, group or party although he had been
    coerced into joining the Tamil Tigers in 2006.  He stated that he fled
    because a friend had been killed for no reason and he was afraid of the
    CID and military because after his friend's death they had visited his
    home.  He was subsequently interviewed substantively on 26 July 2017,
    when he said he wished to correct an answer that he had provided at his
    screening interview, and that was that he had been detained by the
    government forces.

 2. His asylum application was refused in a Decision and Reasons dated 10
    August 2017.  The Appellant appealed against this decision.  His appeal
    was heard by the First-tier Tribunal and dismissed but following an
    application to the Upper Tribunal an error of law was found and the
    appeal was remitted for a hearing de novo.

 3. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kimnell for
    hearing on 16 November 2018.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on
    10 December 2018, the judge dismissed the appeal, primarily on the
    basis that he simply did not believe that what the Appellant said was
    true, because if it was, he would not have stated in his screening
    interview that he had not been detained. The judge found that the
    Appellant would not be on any watch list because he has never been
    detained and so would not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka and that
    any activity in the UK for the TGTE was negligible and did not
    demonstrate a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
    separatism.

 4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought in time on the
    basis that the judge had erred in his assessment of the Appellant's
    credibility as the judge failed to properly assess his credibility in
    light of the finding which was evidenced through the medical reports
    that the Appellant is a vulnerable witness cf. the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 of 2010, the UNHCR Handbook, the Respondent's policy
    guidance, judicial authority and the article by Dr Stuart Turner and Dr
    Jane Herlihy on the effects of mental ill health on human memory.  It
    was submitted that the Appellant's psychological needs were such that
    they were too complex for his local IAPT and the symptoms of PTSD were
    unaffected despite the prescription of 100mg of Sertraline on a daily
    basis.  The Appellant had been observed to have poor recall and memory
    problems and there was a risk of completed suicide.

 5. It was submitted that the judge had further erred in rejecting the
    letter from the President of the Fishermen's Cooperative Society dated
    17 July 2017 on the basis that the author of the letter did not explain
    how the matters he states in his letter, i.e., that the Appellant had
    been detained and tortured, had come to his attention and the witness
    was not available for cross-examination.  It was submitted that this
    point had never been raised by the Respondent nor was it put to the
    Appellant at the hearing in order to give him the opportunity to
    respond, which was procedurally unfair, particularly in light of the
    fact that the Appellant was vulnerable.

 6. Reliance was sought to be placed on the decision in Maheshwaran [2002]
    EWCA Civ 173 at [4]. Attention was also drawn to the judgment in JA
    (Afghanistan) [2014] EWCA Civ 450, as to the need for caution when
    relying on asserted discrepancies between a screening interview and a
    full asylum interview to justify making a negative credibility finding,
    see [17].  It was further submitted that the judge's decision was
    contrary to the approach set out by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367 at [19](a) and also contrary to the guidance in AM
    (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 112 per the Senior President at [13],
    [18](a) and [19](a).

 7. It was submitted that the judge had further erred in entirely failing
    to address the risk arising during the re-documentation process, given
    that the Appellant is a genuine supporter of Tamil nationalism and
    would have to disclose this fact whilst being interviewed for an
    emergency travel document, which would bring him to the attention of
    the Sri Lankan authorities.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted in a decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge Mailer dated 21 February 2019 in the following terms:

"It is arguable that the judge did not properly factor the effects of the
Appellant's diagnosis of PTSD and moderate depression into his assessment
of his evidence nor consider whether the discrepancies resulting in
negative credibility findings might be referable to such vulnerability.
This was an Appellant who had needs too complex for his Waltham Forest IAPT
Talking Therapies.

Permission to appeal is granted on all grounds."

     Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me, Ms Laughton on behalf of the Appellant sought
    to rely on the grounds of appeal.  She submitted that essentially the
    judge had treated the failure by the Appellant to refer to being
    detained during his screening interview as determinative of the appeal,
    but this failed to take into consideration the Appellant's
    vulnerability in circumstances where the medical evidence was extremely
    strong.  There was a report from Dr Smith of the Medical Foundation and
    also from Professor Fox, a consultant psychiatrist.  There were also
    documents as to the therapeutic treatment the Appellant had been
    receiving.  She sought to rely on a skeleton argument that she had
    prepared dated 29 March 2019.  She submitted that Dr Smith's report did
    not only refer to scarring but also to PTSD and specific symptoms the
    Appellant had been explaining, e.g. the fact that he shows physical
    distress by gagging and he had also vomited when anxious.

10. The letter at AB1 to 8 from the Appellant's GP and further evidence
    shows that whilst the Appellant had been referred to a Talking
    Therapies organisation, it was considered his needs were too complex,
    so he has been referred to the Psychology Panel at Thorpe Coombe
    Hospital. She submitted that there was strong corroborative evidence
    before the judge, who erred in three key areas: firstly, in failing to
    have regard to the vulnerable Appellants' guidance; secondly, in
    failing to consider the corroborative effect of the psychiatric
    evidence and thirdly, in light of Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 in
    finding the Appellant's account not to be credible, absent
    consideration of the medical evidence.

11. In relation to the first point, Ms Laughton submitted that at [20], the
    judge accepted that the Appellant was to be treated as a vulnerable
    witness but essentially, he paid only lip service to that and failed to
    consider vulnerability as a consideration when assessing his
    credibility.  She submitted that the appeal had essentially been
    dismissed on the basis of one discrepancy between the screening
    interview and the Asylum Interview Record, and that was the issue of
    whether or not the Appellant had been detained.  She submitted that it
    is clear from the Presidential Guidance Note at [10.3], [14] and [15]
    that there are some kinds of disability which are impacted by trauma
    and thus, comprehension of questioning can be impaired.  She submitted
    that weight should be given to objective indicators rather than the
    Appellant's state of mind, cf. JL China at [26], and it was incumbent
    upon the judge to apply the vulnerable witness guidance.

12. In relation to AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 112, she submitted that
    it is clear it is an error of law to fail to have regard to
    vulnerability when assessing an Appellant's account and expert medical
    evidence.  In finding against the Appellant, the judge failed to take
    into account that the Appellant has problems with memory and recall,
    see the Medical Foundation report at [114], where it was found due to
    fear this was likely to impact on his ability to give clear and cogent
    answers in his screening interview.

13. In relation to the second point and the failure to consider the
    corroborative aspect of the medical evidence, whilst at [45], the judge
    found that the medical evidence stated that the Appellant's physical
    injuries were consistent, it was not found that those injuries were
    highly consistent or diagnostic.  However, nowhere does the judge bear
    in mind that the Appellant had been diagnosed with severe PTSD and
    depression.  The Appellant's florid, observable symptoms were seen as
    corroborative of his past experiences of sexual abuse.  However, there
    was no reference at any point to the Appellant's needs and the fact
    that they were considered too complex to be dealt with by the local
    mental health team.  She submitted that it was significant that the
    Appellant had been diagnosed with PTSD.  Whilst the judge was not
    obliged to accept the medical evidence, he was obliged to factor it
    into the assessment of the Appellant's credibility.  Ms Laughton
    submitted that the judge was also obliged to consider the corroborative
    aspect of the fact that the Appellant's brother had been granted asylum
    in Australia and that the Appellant's wife has been questioned by the
    authorities about him.  However, this was not even mentioned.

14. In relation to the third point, and that is the application of the
    Court of Appeal judgment in Mibanga (op. cit) and AM (Afghanistan) (op.
    cit) Ms Laughton submitted that a credibility assessment must be
    holistic and include an assessment of the medical condition at the time
    evidence was given.

15. Ms Laughton further sought to challenge the Judge's approach to the
    letter from the President of the Fishermen's Society.  This was dealt
    with extremely briefly by the judge at [40], who found it attracted
    little weight.  She submitted that this point was not put to the
    Appellant by the judge or indeed by the Respondent, and in a situation
    where there is a vulnerable witness, in order to be procedurally fair,
    the Appellant needs to have the opportunity to address the points being
    taken against him, cf. Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 at [4] and AM
    (Sudan) [2015] UKUT 00656 (IAC) at 7(v).  Ms Laughton submitted that
    the Fishermen's Union had secured the Appellant's release from
    detention, as the letter confirmed, the Appellant had reported to the
    authorities for six months and that the Appellant's wife had complained
    about a continued ongoing interest in him.

16. The second point Ms Laughton sought to rely on is that the judge had
    failed to have regard to judicial guidance in respect of the treatment
    of the screening interview, cf. JA (Afghanistan) at [24], where it was
    found that the Tribunal should be alert to discrepancies between a
    screening interview and subsequent evidence, particularly when an
    interpreter is not present or the person is vulnerable due to age or
    infirmity.  The screening interview is supposed to be a preliminary
    enquiry and not the full reason why the Appellant is claiming asylum.

17. Ms Laughton submitted the screening interview took place after a long
    journey.  The Appellant vomited during the interview.  There was no
    interpreter physically present and the interview was conducted over the
    telephone and was not recorded.  When the Appellant was interviewed in
    respect of his substantive interview he immediately corrected the error
    made in the screening interview at the beginning of his interview.  The
    judge failed to have regard to the jurisprudence on this point and all
    the relevant factors when determining this issue.

18. In relation to the other ground of appeal, Ms Laughton sought to rely
    on it as set out.  As a member of the TGTE the Appellant would be at
    risk during the documentation process.  He would have to disclose his
    involvement in the UK and could not be expected to lie.

19. In her submissions, Ms Pal on behalf of the Secretary of State stated
    that the Appellant was a vulnerable witness, as the judge noted at
    [20].  The judge also made reference to the medical evidence and
    attached weight to this in the assessment of credibility, see [33] and
    [34].  The Appellant also took into account the letter from the
    President of the Fishermen's Society at [39].  She submitted he
    properly took into account the Appellant's evidence and the reports to
    the various medical experts and concluded that the Appellant was not
    credible.  She submitted the judge was entitled to make that finding of
    fact, bearing in mind the Appellant had just fled from his home country
    and events were fresh in his mind and was entitled on the basis of the
    evidence to find that the Appellant had never been detained or ill-
    treated.

20. Ms Pal submitted the judge was entitled to attach little weight to the
    Fishermen's letter.  Matters were not clearly set out in that letter
    and the author was not available to be questioned on its contents.  The
    judge assessed the Appellant's activities in the UK and found he could
    not be said to pose a threat to political beliefs or security in Sri
    Lanka and was not likely to be perceived as a threat.  The judge
    properly concluded the Appellant was not on a watch list and it was not
    accepted that he had been detained.  Thus, she invited the Upper
    Tribunal to find that the judge's approach and assessment was correct
    and should stand.

21. In reply, Ms Laughton submitted that it is well-known that there is a
    fundamental and qualitative difference between referring to the
    evidence and factoring it in.  Whilst there were other credibility
    issues raised at [49] and addressed above, the judge makes it quite
    clear that it is the difference between the screening interview and the
    subsequent evidence that is decisive.  The judge's finding as to the
    Appellant's sur place activities was clearly based on his previous
    negative credibility finding.

     Decision and Reasons

22. I find material errors of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Kimnell for the reasons set out in ground 1 of the grounds of
    appeal and fully expanded upon by Ms Laughton.  Whilst the judge was
    aware that the Appellant should be treated as a vulnerable witness in
    light of the medical evidence and made reference to this at [20] of the
    decision and reasons, I find the judge did not properly factor in the
    Appellant's mental health and vulnerability when assessing the
    credibility of his account as given in his screening interview, which
    took place shortly after his arrival in the UK, on the same day.

23. In JA (Afghanistan) [2014] EWCA Civ 450, Lord Justice Moore- Bick held
    inter alia as follows at [24]-[25]:


         "24.     In the absence of a statutory provision of the kind to be
found in               section 78 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984, I do not think that in        proceedings of this kind the tribunal
has the power to exclude relevant            evidence. It does, however,
have an obligation to consider with care how          much weight is to be
attached to it, having regard to the circumstances in          which it
came into existence. That is particularly important when considering
the significance to be attached to answers given in the course of an
interview         and recorded only by the person asking questions on
behalf of the Secretary         of State. Such evidence may be entirely
reliable, but there is obviously room        for mistakes and
misunderstandings, even when the person being                  questioned
speaks English fluently. The possibility of error becomes greater      when
the person being interviewed requires the services of an interpreter,
particularly if the interpreter is not physically present. It becomes
greater still          if the person being interviewed is vulnerable by
reason of age or infirmity.         The written word acquires a degree of
certainty which the spoken word may          not command. The "anxious
scrutiny" which all claimants for asylum are          entitled to expect
begins with a careful consideration of the weight that             should
properly be attached to answers given in their interviews. In the
present case the decision-maker would need to bear in mind the age and
     background of the applicant, his limited command of English and the
         circumstances under which the initial interview and screening
interview took         place.

         25.     In my view the common law principle of fairness which
underpins the          decision in Dirshe requires the tribunal to consider
with care the extent to         which reliance can properly be placed on
answers given by the appellant in       his initial and screening
interviews and, as I have already indicated, I do not          think that
it is a foregone conclusion that the Upper Tribunal would decide       that
they could properly be given the degree of weight which the First-tier
     Tribunal gave them."

24. I find that, in this context, the Judge erred in placing such weight on
    the omission by the Appellant to mention in his screening interview
    that he had been detained that it proved to be the determinative factor
    in his decision to dismiss the appeal.

25. The decision and reasons of First tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell contains
    material errors of law. I set that decision aside and adjourn the
    appeal for a further hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent of being  adjourned  for  a  hearing  de
novo before the Upper Tribunal.

Directions

1. The appeal shall be listed for 2 hours 30 minutes on 4 June 2019.
2. A Tamil interpreter will be required.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date   6 April 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
