
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08501/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 9th May 2019   On 7th June 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR A H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Criggie of Latta and Co, Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr A Govan, Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Lebanon, born in May 1970. He arrived
      at Heathrow airport on 30 December 2017 with his wife [I]. Their
      daughter, [G], born in 2008, accompanied them. They were granted entry
      on foot of visit visas. Then, on 10 January 2018 the appellant made a
      claim for protection on the basis of political opinion.

   2. His claim was that they married in 1997. His wife was unable to
      conceive and in 2007 underwent fertility treatment. She then gave
      birth to their daughter who was born prematurely. The medical fees
      were significant and the appellant approached organisations for
      support. He said that Hezbollah were willing to pay the US$18,000
      required by the American Hospital.

   3. Following this, he joined Hezbollah and was assigned to security
      duties. He did not undertake military service on account of his age
      but on several occasions was asked to do so. Matters came to a head in
      2017 when they wanted him to go to Syria to fight. Rather than do this
      he resigned. Then in October 2017 he learned from his friend that he
      was to be killed because of his unwillingness. Consequently he fled.
      Initially said he travelled to Turkey but was returned at the point of
      entry. Then he came to the United Kingdom.

   4. The respondent refused his claim on 22 June 2018. The respondent did
      not accept the claim made was true. The appellant had also referred to
      the family's various medical issues but the respondent concluded they
      did not meet the high threshold applicable to remain on health
      grounds.

The First tier Tribunal

   5. His appeal was heard at Glasgow on 20 September 2018 before First-tier
      Tribunal Judge I Ross. In a decision promulgated on 11 October 2018 it
      was dismissed.

   6. The judge found the evidence of the appellant about Hezbollah vague
      and inconsistent with the objective evidence. The appellant had
      obtained an expert report from a Dr Fatah. That report stated that due
      to the conflict in Syria Hezbollah had a shorter training period for
      new recruits. The judge did not find it credible that the appellant
      would suddenly be called upon to fight if he was involved as a non-
      combatant with Hezbollah since 2007. The appellant had produced
      photographs said to be of him holding a gun. However, the judge could
      find no indication as to circumstances whereby they were taken.

   7. The judge rejected the appellant's claim that Hezbollah would pay for
      his child's medical treatment. The expert could find no reported
      incident of Hezbollah paying medical bills as described. The amounts
      would be substantial for the organisation and the expert could not
      understand why they would spend this amount of money on someone who
      was not a significant figure or well connected with the organisation.
      It was noted that the appellant's wife is a Sunni Muslim and the judge
      thought it unlikely that Hezbollah would assist her.

   8. The judge also referred to the appellant's claim that he travelled to
      Turkey on 7 November 2017 and then returned to Lebanon until 30
      December 2017. An ability to remain as claimed suggested he was not at
      risk.

   9. His credibility was also damaged by his failure to claim on arrival at
      Heathrow airport.

  10. The judge also referred to the absence of documentation about his
      daughter's medical treatment.

The Upper Tribunal

  11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on a renewed
      application. The application submitted that the judge erred in
      consideration of the assistance given by Hezbollah in respect of his
      daughter medical treatment. The appellant's evidence was that the
      hospital may have waived the charges for Hezbollah. It was pointed out
      there was no requirement in an asylum claim for corroborative evidence
      and it was argued the judge materially errors in expecting documentary
      evidence about the hospital charges. It was also argued that the judge
      erred in attaching weight when assessing the appellant's credibility
      to the negligible delay in claiming asylum.it was contended the judge
      gave in adequate reasons for rejecting the claim of the appellant and
      the evidence of his wife.

  12.  Mr Criggie argued that the judge erred in law in his reasoning and in
      the standard of proof applied. The 1st point raised related to
      requiring corroboration of the settlement of hospital bills. He also
      submitted the judge required a higher standard of proof than
      necessary.

  13. The other issue he referred me to was the section 8 point taken by the
      judge. He said the delay amounted to around 11 days between arriving
      in the country and claiming protection. The appellant in his witness
      statement at paragraph 29 said that he had contacted the police 3 days
      after he had arrived who then directed him to the asylum screening
      unit.

  14. The judge at paragraph 24 of his decision refers to the appellant's
      failure to claim on arrival at Heathrow airport and that the evidence
      of the appellant and his wife was inconsistent as to whether or not
      there was a conversation with the immigration official. The appellant
      said he had attempted to claim asylum in Turkey and was turned away.
      Because of his experiences the appellant said he did not claim on
      arrival at Heathrow. He submitted that the delay on the appellant part
      was insignificant and, furthermore, he had given a reason for not
      clearing on arrival.

  15. The 3rd ground raised related to paragraph 26. The judge recorded that
      he found it an incredible coincidence the appellant would speak to a
      friend who was a travel agent who advised him that the United Kingdom
      is a good place to claim asylum in. The judge suggested that the claim
      was manufactured and that the appellant was aware claims involving
      Syria might be successful. Mr Criggie suggested this was speculation
      by the judge and lacked sufficient reasoning.

  16. The final ground advanced he felt was the strongest. I was referred to
      paragraph 27 were the judge did not attach weight to the evidence of
      the appellant's wife. His wife had submitted a statement at the
      hearing and he argued the judge did not give reasons for rejecting her
      evidence in this way. He said there was no assessment by the judge of
      her evidence or how she performed in relation to cross-examination. On
      the other hand, the judge appeared to accept her evidence that she was
      receiving medical treatment in the United Kingdom which was the same
      as that received in Lebanon. He said the judge wrongly dismissed her
      evidence as being purely concomitant upon the appellant's and did not
      look upon the merits of her evidence independently of the appellant's.

  17. In response, Mr Govan said the central finding behind the decision was
      the rejection by the judge of the appellant's account about how he
      came to be involved with Hezbollah. The rejection of the account was
      consistent with the expert report obtained on behalf of the appellant.
      I was referred to paragraph 17 through to 20 where the appellant's
      claim was inconsistent with the objective evidence about how Hezbollah
      recruited. Paragraph 18 quotes from the expert report to the effect
      that Hezbollah's recruitment process is an arduous and thorough
      undertaking, lasting months. This eased with the war in Syria but this
      related to new recruits whereas the appellant said he had been
      involved since 2007.

  18. I was referred paragraph 22 where the judge said that the appellant's
      profile did not fit with the type of individual Hezbollah would seek
      to recruit. The reference to documentation about the medical treatment
      was, he submitted, peripheral to the question as to why the appellant
      would be recruited. He said taken in context the reference to the
      production of the hospital bill was peripheral.

  19. Regarding the delay in claiming I was referred to paragraph 339L of
      the immigration rules which provides that a failure to claim timely is
      a factor to be taken into account. It refers to making a claim at the
      earliest possible time unless good reason for not having done so is
      demonstrated.

  20. Regarding paragraph 26, he submitted no material error was
      demonstrated as the judge had looked at all the evidence in the round
      and rejected the underlying claim, describing it as being
      manufactured.

  21. Regarding the evidence of the appellant's wife, Mr Govan made the
      point that the judge had looked at the evidence of the round and
      concluded the claim was not genuine. She in effect was a dependent
      upon her husband's claim.

  22. In response, Mr Criggie said that the comment about his wife's
      evidence at paragraph 27 had to be read with paragraph 15. He
      submitted the judge failed to analyse the evidence obtained at
      paragraph 15 but jumped to a bald dismissal at paragraph 27.

Conclusions

  23. Mr Criggie has highlighted particular paragraphs in the decision in
      support of his challenge. It has been suggested the judge materially
      erred in law by reference to the paragraphs referring to his wife's
      evidence; the medical bills in respect of his daughter; the
      requirement fight for Hezbollah; section 8 issues and the reference to
      the claim being manufactured. It is important however to look at the
      decision as a whole. The decision does not distinguish between
      evidence in chief in cross-examination but it seems most likely the
      reference is to answers given in cross-examination.

  24.  Paragraph 12 records the appellant stating that he had been a sales
      manager and owned a small phone shop which operated from his house. In
      the course are giving evidence he referred to his Visa application.
      This suggested someone of substance. It recorded previous travel to
      China and Turkey. There was also bank balance of E52,298.

  25. His evidence was that the bank account was artificially inflated so as
      to facilitate his Visa application. Paragraph 41 of his statement
      refers to his brother supplying these funds whereas in oral evidence
      he said it was his nephew lived in Greece. The appellant then said it
      was his nephew and that the money has since been returned.

  26. Paragraph 14 referred him being asked about the medical bills
      allegedly paid by Hezbollah. He was asked about the documentation he
      brought with him and it was pointed out he came here with the
      intention of claiming asylum. He said he had travelled to Turkey with
      a similar aim. These questions are against the background where his
      credibility is not accepted. He was asked why he did not claim at
      Heathrow. His recorded answer was that this he was not aware this was
      possible. Later it was suggested he was not unaware it can be done at
      the airport but was mindful of his experiences in Turkey and therefore
      delayed until he was in the country. His evidence was that at Heathrow
      he and his wife were questioned and they said they were visiting
      intending to leave after 10 days.

  27. According with the usual procedure, the appellant's wife would have
      been excluded when her husband gave evidence. She confirmed the bank
      statement reflected monies from the appellant's nephew. She also said
      they came to the United Kingdom to claim asylum. She denied any
      conversation with the immigration officer.

  28. At paragraph 22 the immigration judge refers to the claim that
      Hezbollah paid his daughter's medical bills. The reference to the
      absence of the bill is in brackets. The judge is not suggesting by
      this a requirement of corroborative evidence. Rather, this reflects
      the questions he was asked about the bill at hearing. This is in the
      context of claim made where the claimed indebtedness arose out of
      something which he should have been able to demonstrate. His evidence
      was that this was a preplanned flight claim asylum. He left from home
      and had the opportunity to assemble his evidence.

  29. Central to the appellant's claim was the account of his indebtedness
      which the judge rejected. That rejection was consistent with the
      expert evidence. It was in this context following cross-examination
      that the reference to the hospital bills arose. The notion that
      Hezbollah would be involved in this way flies in the face of the
      expert report commissioned on behalf of the appellant. Dr Fatah's
      evidence as recorded at paragraph 21 was that the amounts claimed
      would have been a substantial amount for the organisation. He could
      find no similar record. He was open to the possibility of this
      happening if the individual was an important figure in the
      organisation or well-connected: this was not the appellant situation.
      Furthermore, albeit judging by his subsequent Visa application, the
      appellant was not impecunious.

  30. The appellant's claim was that his flight was precipitated by a call
      to arms. However his account of being taken on in the 1st place by
      Hezbollah was contradicted by the expert report. This referred to an
      arduous process which only eased in later years.

  31. The reference to his wife's evidence at paragraph 27 has to be read
      with her evidence at paragraph 15. She was confirming that the bank
      account was inflated to obtain their visas. She contradicted the
      appellant's account by saying there was no conversation with the
      immigration officer at the airport. Her evidence was not central to
      the claim but added to the negative credibility finding. The central
      claim was the one made by the appellant rather than his wife.

  32. Associated with the credibility issues where the failure to claim on
      arrival and the account about why the appellant came to the United
      Kingdom.

  33. The assessment of the appellant's credibility was a matter for the
      judge. The primary focus was upon the central claim. There was a solid
      foundation for rejecting the claim about financial assistance,
      recruitment and fighting in the expert report. The other matters
      really supplemented this. In conclusion, I can find no material error
      of law established.

Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated in the decision of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Ross. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

Date 05 June 2019

