
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08770/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 5th December 2017                     |On the 17th  January 2018     |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

                          MR ALISHAABAN ALI MOHAMED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Jagadesham, Counsel instructed by the Bury Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Alishaaban Ali Mohammed against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin to dismiss his appeal against  refusal
    of his Protection Claim.

 2. The appellant originates from the Palestinian territory of Gaza. He was
    born on the 28th November 1993. He entered the United  Kingdom  on  the
    30th March 2009, aged 15 years, and was granted discretionary leave  to
    remain as a minor. That leave expired on the 28th May 2011. It was  the
    respondent's  refusal  to  grant  him  further  leave  to  remain,   on
    international protection and private life  grounds,  that  led  to  the
    present appeal.

 3. The basis of the  appellant's  application  for  further  discretionary
    leave to remain, as  well  the  grounds  upon  which  he  appealed  the
    respondent's decision to refuse it, was that he had a well-founded fear
    of persecution  on  return  to  Gaza  due  to  his  homosexuality.  The
    respondent accepted from the outset that the appellant was homosexual.

 4. Judge Devlin accepted that there would be very significant obstacles to
    the appellant's integration in Gaza were he to live there openly  as  a
    gay man. He did not however accept that those difficulties amounted  to
    a real risk of persecution. He therefore dismissed the  appeal  against
    refusal of the appellant's claim that he was in need  of  international
    protection. He nevertheless allowed the appeal on the ground  that  the
    appellant  had  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of   the
    Immigration Rules and that his return to Gaza would thus be a breach of
    his right to respect to private life as guaranteed by Article 8 of  the
    European Convention of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms.  The
    present appeal challenges the dismissal of the appeal on  international
    protection grounds. It also purports to challenge the basis upon  which
    the judge allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds. There  is  no  cross
    appeal by the respondent against the decision to allow  the  appeal  on
    private life grounds.

 5. The grounds, upon which Mr Jagadesham  helpfully  expanded  during  the
    hearing, may conveniently be summarised as follows:

   i) The finding that the appellant was not at risk of being persecuted  in
      the Palestinian territory of Gaza by living an  openly  gay  lifestyle
      was contrary to the evidence and to his own finding  that  this  would
      present very significant obstacles to his integration for the purposes
      of paragraph 276ADE;

  ii) Although the judge allowed the appeal under Article  8  on  the  basis
      that the appellant  would  face  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
      integration on return to Gaza, he should have done  so  on  the  basis
      that the appellant met the criteria for a grant of indefinite leave to
      remain under the  respondent's  policy  relating  to  those  who  have
      resided in the UK with discretionary leave for a period of 6 years.

    I will take the grounds in turn.

 6. In relation to the first ground, Mr Jagadesham accepted that  he  would
    need to meet the very high threshold of  'irrationality'  in  order  to
    succeed. In seeking to persuade me that this threshold was met, he drew
    my attention to paragraph 152 of  the  judge's  decision  in  which  he
    accepted that Gaza  presented,  "a  very  challenging  environment  for
    openly gay men and that the level of societal  discrimination  is  such
    that  many  gay  men  choose  to  shut  themselves  off  from   society
    altogether". The central thrust of Mr Jagadesham's submission was  that
    this limited characterisation of  the  background  country  information
    concerning the difficulties faced by gay men in Gaza was perverse,  and
    that the only rational conclusion to be drawn from the totality of  the
    evidence was that openly gay men were subject to systematic persecution
    by state and non-state actors alike. In support of this submission,  he
    drew my attention  to  the  relevant  'Country  of  Origin  Information
    Report' (COIR) which referred to instances of  many  homosexuals  being
    left with "no choice" but to close themselves off from society (a  fact
    that was, as  previously  noted,  acknowledged  by  the  judge)  before
    concluding that "the  incidence  of  ill-treatment  [on  the  basis  of
    sexuality] is not insignificant". The judge had failed to deal with the
    evidence that gay people are sometimes coerced  into  working  for  the
    Palestinian police and are suspected of being  collaborators  with  the
    Israelis. Insofar as there was an absence of evidence of specific  acts
    of persecution, the judge failed to have regard to the possibility that
    the climate of fear was such that gay people were too afraid to  report
    them. For the judge to subject the expert report to  his  own  critical
    analysis, in circumstances where the Presenting Officer  had  not  done
    so, "verged on  unfairness".  The  judge  had  been  selective  in  his
    references to the background country information and the passages  that
    he had quoted were incomplete and misleading.  The  judge  should  have
    treated the absence of a large, robust and  accessible  LGBTI  activist
    and support network as indicative of a climate of  persecution  of  gay
    men in Gaza.

 7. Mr Bates submitted that given the absence of any personal experience by
    the appellant of persecution in Gaza, from which  he  has  been  absent
    since 2000, he would have to demonstrate that  the  background  country
    information established that all openly gay men in Gaza were at risk of
    persecution. The judge was entitled to conclude that the evidence  fell
    short of establishing that this was the case.

 8. I agree with Mr Bates submission. I am satisfied that it was reasonably
    open to the judge to conclude, on the material before him, that it  had
    not been established that there was a reasonable degree  of  likelihood
    that those who belong to the appellant's particular social  group  were
    at risk of persecution in Gaza.  I  begin  by  noting  that  the  judge
    correctly directed himself  by  reference  to  the  UNHCR  handbook  on
    Determining Refugee Status concerning the circumstances  in  which  the
    cumulative  effect  of  discrimination  may   amount   to   persecution
    [paragraphs 131 and 132].  He also undertook  a  careful  and  detailed
    analysis of the evidence in a decision that contains 164 paragraphs and
    extends to some 29 pages. I do not accept the suggestion  that  it  was
    unfair of the judge to highlight the shortcomings in Dr Fateh's  report
    simply because the Presenting Officer had not done so. The principle of
    fairness is (among other things) intended to ensure that points are not
    taken against an appellant without first giving him the opportunity  to
    address them. A professional witness, on the other  hand,  is  under  a
    duty to the Tribunal to provide an impartial opinion. This involves not
    only drawing attention  to  the  evidence  that  supports  his  or  her
    opinion, but anticipating  that  which  might  be  considered  to  tell
    against it. The judge was in my view  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    background country information did no more  than  establish  that  Gaza
    provides a challenging environment for openly gay  men  such  that  the
    appellant would face very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration.
    Indeed, the judge's reference to a "challenging  environment"  was  one
    that he adopted from one of the sources of information that was  before
    him. I also  reject  the  suggestion  that  the  judge  ought  to  have
    considered the possibility that the limited evidence of openly gay  men
    being visited with acts of violence was due to them being too afraid to
    report it. On the contrary, the judge would doubtless have been accused
    of speculation by the respondent had he done so. Whilst it is true that
    the judge did not make specific reference to gay men being coerced into
    working  for  the  Palestinian  police  and  of  being   suspected   of
    collaboration with the Israeli authorities, it is also  true  that  the
    evidence  did  not  suggest  that  they  suffered  specific   acts   of
    persecution as a result. The judge was not in any event bound to  refer
    to  each  and  every  facet  of  the  voluminous   background   country
    information that had been presented to him.  This  observation  applies
    equally to the complaint that the judge made selective  and  incomplete
    references to that evidence. Whilst a strong LGBTI activist and support
    network may be said to militate against openly gay men being at risk of
    persecution in any given country, it was equally open to the  judge  to
    conclude that its absence was not indicative of the existence of such a
    risk when viewed within the context of the evidence as a  whole.  Thus,
    far from the judge's conclusion being irrational, I am  satisfied  that
    it was the result of a detailed and cogent analysis of the totality  of
    the evidence. I therefore turn to consider the second ground.

 9. I am not satisfied that it is open to the appellant  to  challenge  the
    judge's decision to allow  his  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  simply
    because he arrived at that decision by a different route to that  which
    had been urged upon him. As previously noted,  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis that the  appellant  would  face  very  significant
    difficulties to his integration on return to Gaza due to  his  wish  to
    live as an openly gay man. I note that Mr Jagedesham did  not  seek  to
    argue before me that this conclusion was perverse. Rather, he submitted
    that the judge ought instead to have allowed the appeal  on  the  basis
    that it is the respondent's policy to grant indefinite leave to  remain
    to those who have resided in the UK with discretionary leave to  remain
    for a period of 6 years. It is easy to see why the appellant would have
    wished to succeed on this basis rather than under paragraph  276ADE  of
    the immigration rules, given that the latter leads only to a  grant  of
    limited leave to remain for a period of 3 years as opposed  to  one  of
    leave to remain indefinitely. Mr Jagedesham sought to persuade me  that
    the relevance of the appellant meeting the terms of the policy  (which,
    incidentally, Judge Devlin found that he did not)  was  that  it  meant
    that there was no public interest to set against the appellant's  right
    to respect for private life  when  conducting  the  balancing  exercise
    under Article 8. However,  I  am  satisfied  that  this  is  simply  an
    artificial attempt to resurrect the now-repealed provision  of  section
    84 of the 2002 Act that formerly permitted an appeal against a decision
    by the Secretary of State that was contrary to her  own  policy  to  be
    allowed on the ground that it was "not in accordance with the law".  In
    my view, the only appropriate remedy in such circumstances is  now  one
    of judicial review. I am fortified in reaching this conclusion  by  the
    fact that the appellant's  representatives  have  issued  a  pre-action
    protocol letter prior to pursuing precisely this  remedy.  I  therefore
    conclude that the correctness or otherwise of Judge Devlin's conclusion
    that the appellant did not in  any  event  meet  the  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to remain under the policy was entirely immaterial  to
    the outcome of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

10. The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Judge Kelly                             Date: 13th January 2018

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

