
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08811/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 July 2019                      |On 25 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     A I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa, of Counsel, instructed by Prime
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Blake who, in a determination promulgated on  7
    May 2019, dismissed his appeal against a decision of the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse him asylum.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  5  April  1971.   He
    entered Britain as a student in May  2011  and  started  working  in  a
    chicken shop with a number of other men of Pakistani origin.  In August
    2011 one of those men took his passport and told him that they would be
    applying for an extension of his visa.  In October 2011  the  appellant
    asked for his passport  but  was  told  that  an  extension  was  still
    awaited.

3.   The appellant had complained about a smell in the second floor  of  the
    property where he was working and was told by one of the four men  that
    he should not go up there.  On 21 July 2012 whilst playing  cricket  he
    was taken by the four men to the shop and assaulted.  They tied him  up
    and threatened him by saying that if he  told  anyone  what  they  were
    doing he would be killed.   The  following  day  he  escaped  from  the
    property  and  reported  the  incident  to  West  Midlands  Police  who
    investigated the case but in October 2012  discontinued  the  case  for
    lack of evidence.

4.   The appellant asserts that in October 2012,  July  2014,  January  2015
    and October 2015 threats were made to his  family  by  unknown  men  in
    Pakistan about him and he claimed that on that basis he would  be  ill-
    treated or persecuted if he returned to Pakistan.  However, it was  not
    until February 2016 that the appellant applied for asylum.

5.   His claim was refused, detailed reasons  being  set  out  in  a  letter
    dated 5 August 2016.  The Secretary of State  having  noted  the  crime
    report from West Midlands Police in which it had been asserted that  he
    was a victim of kidnapping considered that he had been a  victim  of  a
    crime committed by the four men and therefore accepted that part of his
    claim.  However, the Secretary of State then went on  to  consider  the
    visits to his family home in Pakistan by unknown men and noted that his
    brother had stated to the men that he had  not  returned  to  Pakistan.
    His brother had also claimed that he had received two  telephone  calls
    in either 2014 or 2015 enquiring about the appellant  and  calling  the
    appellant's brother names.

6.   The appellant's brother had  made  a  First  Information  Report  to  a
    police station in Pakistan after the first visit by the unnamed men and
    indeed three further First  Information  Reports  after  three  further
    claimed visits.  These were considered by the Secretary  of  State  who
    had sent them for  verification  to  the  Pakistani  authorities.   The
    numbers on the reports had been checked and found to  not  be  genuine,
    and taking that factor into account, together with the  fact  that  the
    appellant had stated that he had not seen the four men with whom he had
    worked since July 2012 and had not received any  threats  from  any  of
    those men and did not know where they lived,  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that the appellant  did  not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution.  The Secretary  of  State  also  took  into  account  when
    considering the veracity of the appellant's claim the fact that he  had
    entered as a student and that he had not studied here.

7.   The appellant appealed.  The appeal first came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in March 2017.  Directions were set out and the appeal  listed
    for a hearing at which the allegation of trafficking was raised and the
    Tribunal was informed that an  application  to  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism was to be pursued.  There was  a  joint  application  by  the
    appellant's  representative  and  the   Presenting   Officer   for   an
    adjournment in order to pursue the NRM procedure.  Judge  Norton-Taylor
    who adjourned the appeal ordering that there should  be  an  oral  Case
    Management Review on 6 June 2017 when both parties were to  inform  him
    regarding the progress in the NRM procedure.  On  6  June  it  appeared
    that the respondent was to invoke the NRM procedure and the matter  was
    further adjourned.  Again, on 4 July 2017 the appeal was  adjourned  to
    14 December 2017, but then adjourned further until May 2018.  Again the
    appeal was adjourned but it was eventually listed for 12  October  2018
    and then further a judge adjourned to 2 April 2019.  On  that  day  the
    appeal came before Judge Blake who  considered  an  application  for  a
    further adjournment.  He had before him a letter  from  the  Respondent
    dated 18 October 2018 which stated that  the  Competent  Authority  had
    concluded that there were reasonable grounds to:-

         ".... believe that you have been a victim of modern slavery  (human
         Trafficking).


          You now have a period of 45  days  from  30  October  2018  to  14
         December 2018 to recover and consider your options.  This  recovery
         and reflection period is  provided  for  under  the  terms  of  the
         Council of Europe Convention, ratified by the United Kingdom on  17
         December 2008. ....


         AT THE END OF THE 45 DAY PERIOD


         At the end of the recovery  and  reflection  period  the  Competent
         Authority will make a conclusive grounds decision as to whether you
         are a victim of modern  slavery,  (human  trafficking  or  slavery,
         servitude or forced / compulsory labour).


          in order to be able to make your conclusive grounds decision in as
         timely a manner as possible. It would greatly assist if  you  could
         provide the documents which apply to your  case  as  per  the  list
         below by 14 December 2018


         - any personal/ witness statements


         -third-party reports/ supporting statements


         - medical information/ reports/ anything else  deemed  relevant  to
         your claim.


          It is important that you contact us on the detail above if for any
         reason you cannot provide information by this deadline. If you have
         not yet been interviewed  regarding  your  claim,  then  the  above
         documents be brought to the interview with you will be available as
         soon as possible following it, you should advise  the  interviewing
         officer if you have any problems with doing so.


         Individuals with a positive conclusive grounds decision  under  the
         NRM may be granted discretionary leave. If  you  have  applied  for
         asylum in the UK, then you will  automatically  be  considered  for
         discretionary leave so you do not need to confirm this If you  have
         not applied  for  asylum  and  would  like  to  be  considered  for
         discretionary please could you confirm this by contacting  the  NRM
         hub at the above address."

8.   Judge Blake considered the application for the further  adjournment  on
    the basis that there had not been a  conclusive  grounds  decision  but
    stated he considered it inappropriate to  adjourn  the  appeal  as  the
    decision to refuse asylum had been made as long before as 5 August 2016
    and there had been a number of previous  adjournments  to  obtain  that
    decision.   He referred to the case law of ES  (Section  82  NIA  2002;
    negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335.  He stated that he noted  from
    the head note that this recorded that:-

         "1.  ... a previous decision made by the Competent Authority within
             the National  Referral  Mechanism  (made  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities)  is   not   of   primary   relevance   to   the
             determination of an asylum appeal, despite  the  decisions  of
             the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ
             1469 and SSHD v MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594.


         2.   The correct approach to determining whether a person  claiming
             to be a victim of trafficking is  entitled  to  asylum  is  to
             consider all the evidence in the  round  as  at  the  date  of
             hearing, applying the lower standard of proof".

9.   The judge also considered the head note in the Upper Tribunal  decision
    of AUJ (Trafficking - No conclusive grounds of  decision)  [2018]  UKUT
    200.  He noted that the head note stated:-

         "(i) If a person ('P') claims that the fact of being trafficked  in
             the past or a victim of modern slavery gives rise  to  a  real
             risk of persecution in  the  home  country  and/or  being  re-
             trafficked or subjected to modern slavery in the home  country
             and/or that it has had such an  impact  upon  P  that  removal
             would be in breach of protected human rights, it will be for P
             to establish the relevant facts  to  the  appropriate  (lower)
             standard of proof and the judge should make findings  of  fact
             on such evidence.


         (ii) If P does not advance any such claim in the  statutory  appeal
             but adduces evidence  of  being  trafficked  or  subjected  to
             modern slavery in the past, it will be a question of  fact  in
             each case (the burden being on P  to  the  lower  standard  of
             proof) whether  the  Secretary  of  State's  duty  to  provide
             reparation, renders P's removal in  breach  of  the  protected
             human rights.


         ..."

10.  He noted that the letter from the Home  Office  NRM  dated  29  October
    2018 had stated that individuals with  a  positive  conclusion  grounds
    decision under the NRM may be granted discretionary leave where  it  is
    necessary because they are supporting a police investigation,  pursuing
    compensation or due to compelling personal  circumstances.   He  stated
    that on the basis that there was a reasonable grounds  finding  on  the
    file he concluded that a fair hearing would  be  possible  without  the
    need for a further adjournment and did not consider it to be  necessary
    in the interest of a fair hearing that a  conclusive  grounds  decision
    had to be made.  He found that the conclusive  grounds  decision  would
    not be binding on him in light of the authority of  ES  and  the  other
    authorities.  He therefore refused the adjournment application.

11.  The judge then heard evidence from the appellant noted the evidence  in
    the bundle before him which included a number of witness statements  as
    well as the evidence relating to the police report and a medical report
    of injuries the appellant had received here.  He  had  before  him  the
    FIRs from Pakistan which had been before the respondent.

12.  Having heard evidence from the appellant in paragraphs  64  onwards  he
    set out his findings  of  credibility  and  fact.   It  is  clear  from
    paragraph 64 onwards of the determination that he did take into account
    all relevant correspondence and the evidence including  the  reasonable
    grounds finding of trafficking.  He considered the FIRs in  detail  and
    the fact that the document verification  report  indicated  that  these
    were not genuine.  Indeed he analysed these reports in detail  pointing
    out clear inconsistencies in each one.  He noted that the appellant had
    put in  no  evidence  to  address  the  discrepancies  which  had  been
    highlighted in the document verification report.

13.  He went on to take into account the appellant's immigration history  in
    that he had entered as a student but had been dismissed by his  college
    and that he had overstayed and was working illegally.   He  found  that
    the appellant's family had not been visited in Pakistan  and  also  the
    fact that the appellant had been assaulted in Britain would  not  place
    him at risk on return to Pakistan.  He did not accept that he had  been
    pursued by armed men there and stated that he noted the  appellant  was
    living in the United Kingdom and that his alleged assailants were aware
    that he was in Britain as a result of a complaint he had  made  against
    them, but despite the case against them being  discontinued  there  had
    been be no repercussions on the appellant despite his being present  in
    Britain.  He therefore did not find the appellant's  account  of  being
    pursued was credible.  He found that the appellant therefore would  not
    suffer persecution on return to Pakistan but, in any event, pointed out
    that should the appellant not wish to return to his home area he  would
    be able to internally relocate there.   He  considered  there  were  no
    factors which would mean that the appellant's rights under Articles  2,
    3 and 8 of the ECHR would be engaged.

14.  The grounds of appeal argued that the judge had erred  in  law  by  not
    adjourning the appeal and that he should not have  taken  into  account
    that there had been previous adjournments.  It was argued that  because
    the appeal had not been adjourned he had been deprived  of  a  possible
    period of discretionary leave as a victim of  trafficking  which  might
    have been the final recommendation at the end of the conclusive grounds
    procedure.  It was stated that the judge should have  been  aware  that
    the low standard of proof which was required in asylum claims was lower
    than the standard of proof in the NRM procedure.

15.   It was on the basis that there might be potential  unfairness  against
    the appellant that permission to appeal was granted.  Mr Mustafa in his
    submissions before me pointed out the fact that there had been a  joint
    application for an adjournment and referred to the decision in ES which
    pointed out the relevant standards of proof.  He argued that this  case
    was different from that of the appellant in AUJ who  had  consented  to
    the withdrawal of the procedures against  the  traffickers  and  argued
    that  the  appellant  had  been  deprived   of   the   possibility   of
    discretionary leave.  In reply Ms Jones stated that the judge had acted
    correctly.  There was limited evidence that the appellant  had  been  a
    victim of modern slavery, but in any event the judge was entitled to go
    ahead and determine the decision before him.


Discussion

16.  I consider there is no material error  of  law  in  the  determination.
    It is important in this case to bear in  mind  the  chronology  of  the
    appellant's claim and the long period  before  he  claimed  asylum  the
    application to be treated as a victim of  trafficking  was  made.   The
    judge did take into account the decision that the appellant had been  a
    victim of trafficking and considered all relevant factors.   The  issue
    before  the  judge  was  whether  or  not  the  appellant  would   face
    persecution on return.  The fact that the judge did not accept that the
    FIRs were genuine - and the judge gave  very  clear  reasons  for  that
    conclusion - the fact that the appellant who had  remained  in  Britain
    and since 2012 had not  suffered at the hands of those whom  he  feared
    wished to harm him, and indeed the fact that  the  appellant  would  be
    able should he not wish to return to his home area internally  relocate
    in Pakistan mean that the judge's decision that the appellant  did  not
    have a well-founded fear of persecution is unassailable.

17.  The conclusion that it was inappropriate to adjourn the appeal was  not
    procedurally  unfair,  particularly   given   the   long   history   of
    adjournments. The judge properly applied relevant case law.  The  issue
    before  the  judge  was  whether  or  not  the  appellant  would   face
    persecution on return the issue of entitlement to  discretionary  leave
    was not made out and indeed the judge properly  considered.  It  is  of
    humanitarian protection and human rights, under articles 2, 3 and 8  of
    the ECHR. There is nothing unfair in the decision. I find that there is
    no material error  of  law  in  the  determination  and  therefore  the
    decision of the judge should stand.

Notice of Decision

     This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:  [pic]                          Date: 17 July 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

