
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08910/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2020                  |On 30 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     RG
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Nadeem, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original Appellants.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to his asylum claim.

      2. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 20 January 2020 dismissing his  appeal  on
         protection and human rights grounds.

      3. Mrs Aboni conceded that the FTT decision contains an error  of  law
         such that it must be set aside and remade by another FTT other than
         Judge Siddiqi.  Although a rule 24 notice had been filed seeking to
         uphold the FTT decision, Mrs Aboni resiled from that  notice.   Mrs
         Aboni noted that when granting permission to appeal in  a  decision
         dated  21  February  2020,  FTT  Judge  Scott-Baker  considered  it
         arguable that there were  very  little,  if  any  findings  in  the
         decision as the appellant's claim to be from Iran and accepted that
         the FTT failed to make  findings  on  significant  aspects  of  the
         appellant's claim to be Iranian.

      4. Both parties consented to the appeal being allowed  and  the  FTT's
         decision being set aside.  They also agreed that the appeal  should
         be remitted to be remade by the FTT de novo.  I have had regard  to
         para 7.2 of the relevant Senior President's Practice Statement  and
         the nature and extent of the factual findings required in  remaking
         the decision, and I have decided that this is an  appropriate  case
         to remit to the FTT to make completely fresh findings of fact.

      5. This is an appeal that turned on the credibility of the appellant's
         claim that he  was  an  Iranian  Kurd  with  anti-regime  views  as
         demonstrated by his sur  place  activities  on  behalf  of  Kurdish
         political rights in Iran.  As  explained  in  HB  (Kurds)  Iran  CG
         [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC) those who merely speak  out  about  Kurdish
         rights are at  real  risk  of  serious  harm  in  Iran.   In  these
         circumstances the FTT was required to very carefully  consider  the
         fresh evidence relied upon by the appellant  said  to  support  his
         claim.  In my view Mrs Aboni was entirely correct  to  accept  that
         the FTT failed to make findings on or give  reasons  for  rejecting
         the following evidence as  contained  in  the  appellant's  witness
         statement dated 17 June 2019  and  his  detailed  bundle  of  fresh
         evidence:

          i) The appellant cross-referenced to maps and country  background
             information to support his  claim  that  Sprakab's  conclusion
             that he was Iraqi  must  be  viewed  in  the  context  of  the
             proximity between his claimed home area in Iran and the  Iraqi
             border (which is in part corroborated by the Sprakab  report's
             detailed analysis  of  the  similarities  between  the  Sorani
             dialect in the appellant's home area and the Sorani dialect in
             Arbil and Makhmour in Iraq, and the fact  that  the  appellant
             demonstrated linguistic features common to both areas).

         ii) The appellant put  forward  a  detailed  claim  of  sur  place
             activities against the Iranian regime in  the  UK.   This  was
             accompanied by over 200 pages of evidence  including  facebook
             entries and photographs.

      6. Unfortunately the  FTT  failed  to  address  or  engage  with  this
         evidence other than observing at [29] that the appellant would  not
         be at risk on return to Iran for reasons relating to his sur  place
         activities because he is not Iranian.  The  FTT  did  not  consider
         whether it was reasonably likely that the appellant was Iranian  in
         the   light   of   the   fresh   evidence   particularised    above
         (notwithstanding the other  adverse  credibility  findings).  These
         omissions render the FTT's credibility findings unsafe. In all  the
         circumstances I consider it appropriate  to  make  my  decision  by
         consent and pursuant to rule 39 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Decision

      7. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      8. The appeal shall be remade by the FTT (a  judge  other  than  Judge
         Siddiqi) de novo.


Signed:  Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated: 19 November 2020
