
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/08060/2016
                                                               pa/09238/2016
                                                               pa/09240/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 December 2017                           |On 18 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            KAA (first appellant)
                            MJ (second appellant)
                            BAJ (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Malik, instructed by Arden Solicitors Advocates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Phull
    dated 7 April 2017, which allowed the protection claims  of  the  three
    appellants.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to KAA, MJ and BAJ  as  the  appellants,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
    direction applies  both  to  the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 4. The three appellants are a mother and her two children, MJ, her son and
    BAJ her adult daughter.  The claims of the children do not differ  from
    their mother and for the purposes of this decision I can refer only  to
    KAA's claim in the main.

 5. The family are Shia Muslims from Baghdad.  The appellant's husband  had
    a shop selling car parts, partly to the government.  At the end of July
    2005  he  received  threats  because  of  his  involvement   with   the
    government.  The family then relocated to the north of Iraq but  on  14
    September 2005 decided to return to their home  in  Baghdad.   On  that
    journey they were stopped on the road by militia  and  the  appellant's
    husband and one of her sons was killed.  The appellant was injured  and
    her daughter, BAJ, was in a coma for three months. After BAJ recovered,
    the appellant moved the family to Syria.  She returned to Iraq in  2007
    because she had no money left on which to survive in Syria.

 6. The appellant and her remaining children returned to Baghdad and  lived
    there until  2014.   The  appellant  took  up  the  management  of  her
    husband's business in order to support the family.  In 2014 she noticed
    unidentified individuals approaching her car.  The next day she noticed
    that the music in the car had been replaced  with  CDs  played  by  Al-
    Qaeda.  There was also a threatening letter in the car that if she  did
    not leave the area her son would be killed.  Three days  later  another
    car pulled up outside the appellant's house and a masked man approached
    her son.  Afraid that MJ  was  about  to  be  kidnapped  the  appellant
    grabbed her son, keeping him safe.

 7. The appellant became fearful that the threats to her son would continue
    and that there as a risk to herself and all of the family because  they
    were Shia Muslims living in  a  predominantly  Sunni  Muslim  area  and
    because in religious terms they were relatively liberal, her  daughters
    not covering their hair with a hijab.  The appellant also believed that
    there was a long-running adverse view of her in the area because of her
    husband's involvement with the government.  She  decided  to  sell  the
    contents of her house, her jewellery and left Iraq with MJ and BAJ.

 8. The appellant also claimed that in addition to the risks to herself and
    her family set out above, her own mental health made it very  difficult
    for her to return to Iraq.

 9. The  appellants'  asylum  claim  was  first  considered  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Powell in a decision dated 27 July 2015.  The claim  was
    refused.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell accepted that the attack  in
    2005 had taken place but concluded that the nature of  the  attack  had
    been different and that there was no risk on return.

10. The appellant made further submissions supported by  a  country  report
    prepared by Dr Fatah Rebwar dated 27 June 2016 and a psychiatric report
    dated 2 May 2016 from Dr Husni. The respondent refused  the  claim  but
    accepted that the further submissions amounted to a fresh claim  so  an
    appeal right arose.

11. The appeals against that refusal came before the First-tier Tribunal on
    10 March 2017.  Judge Phull found that the asylum  claim  succeeded  on
    the basis of the materials provided by Dr Rebwar and Dr Husni  as  well
    as wider country material, in  particular  finding  at  [36]  that  the
    appellant is a refugee as a lone woman,  a  Shia  Muslim  without  male
    protection in Iraq.

12. Judge Phull gave her reasons as follows:

         "18. My starting point is the decision of Judge Powell  promulgated
             27 July 2015.  Judge Powell accepted that an attack took place
             in 2005 but did not accept that the appellant's  belief  about
             it is reliable or that it was linked to  threats  against  the
             appellant's husband.  Mr Wilcox stated  in  submissions,  that
             the attack was not in dispute and neither were  the  injuries,
             sustained by the appellant and her children.

         19.  I have had regard to the case of BA (returns to Baghdad)  Iraq
             CG [2017] UKUT0018 (IAC) and the case of AA (article  15  (c))
             Iraq CG [2015] UKUT00544 (IAC).

         20.  I have also considered the country expert report of  Dr  Fatah
             and Dr Husni regarding  the  appellant's  mental  health.   Dr
             Fatah has prepared a detailed expert report dated the 27  June
             2016 on the appellant's specific account.  Both  professionals
             have summarised their qualifications and credentials.

         21.  Dr Fatah has produced many reports and five  Country  Guidance
             case reports from November 2011 to  May  2015.   He  regularly
             visits the MENA region with the most  recent  visit  in  2015,
             assessing the impact of the evolving security situation on the
             region.  The appellant's lawyers's instructed him  to  compile
             an objective  expert  report  on  this  appellant.   Dr  Fatah
             supports his opinion with references to sourced  and  credible
             background reports and articles.

         22.  Dr  Husni  is  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist  in  general  adult
             psychiatry.  He was instructed to  prepare  a  report  at  the
             instructions  of  the  appellant's  lawyers.   Dr  Husni   has
             published numerous papers  in  peer  review  journals  and  is
             approved by the Secretary of State for Health under  the  1983
             Mental Health Act as having experience in  the  diagnosis  and
             management of mental illness.

         23.  I am satisfied that Dr Fatah and Dr Husni have  the  necessary
             knowledge and experience to comment upon the matters raised in
             this  case.   Both  have  taken  a  careful  approach  to  the
             appellant's  evidence  and  considered  her   evidence,   with
             reference to objective material in  the  public  domain  where
             applicable.  I would add that Mr Wilcox made no  criticism  of
             the said reports.  I therefore found the  reports  to  provide
             strong supporting evidence  as  to  the  risks  faced  by  the
             appellant on return, should I find her account to be credible.

         24.  The appellant says that there was an  attempt  by  a  gang  to
             kidnap her son in 2014 and she  then  received  threats.   The
             respondent does not accept that there was an attempt to kidnap
             as claimed.

         25.  I found the appellant to be a credible witness and accept  her
             evidence that there was a threat to her  son  being  kidnapped
             because her claim is support by Dr Fatah's report  that,  '...
             kidnapping in (sic) known to be a problem ...   He  refers  to
             objective evidence  in  IHS  Jane's,  'Unidentified  militants
             kidnap child in Iraq's Baghdad 17 September 2015; a report  by
             Alaraby, 'Kidnapped by your neighbours and friends in Iraq' 20
             September 2015 and  a  report  by  MME,  'Kidnappings  greater
             threat  to  Baghdad  than  Islamic  State:  top  official'  13
             February 2015 and Al-Jazeera, "which  kidnap  victim  is  more
             valuable - US or Iraqi?' 29 January  2016.   Dr  Fatah  states
             that UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office also notes the,  "high
             threat of kidnapping in Iraq from both Daesh (ISIS) and  other
             terrorist and militant groups" Baghdad's top security official
             ..., was quoted in February 2015 as saying that  the  increase
             in the number of kidnappings posed a  greater  threat  to  the
             capital's  security  that  ISIS  and  that  kidnappings   were
             conducted for both  personal  gain  (by  gangs  in  search  of
             ransom) and with sectarian motives ...  Targets of  kidnapping
             include children."

         26.  The appellant's evidence is that she has two brothers, one  in
             Turkey and the other in Jordan.  I accept  her  evidence  that
             she is not in contact with her brother in Turkey and does  not
             know his whereabouts.  I find  that  she  was  candid  in  her
             evidence that she is in contact with her brother in Jordan and
             contacted him for evidence  of  his  status  there.   He  sent
             documents that also include his tenancy  agreement  copies  of
             which were translated, filed and served.  Mr  Wilcox  did  not
             challenge the documents.  I am satisfied therefore that  there
             is a reasonable likelihood that the appellant's brother  lives
             in Jordan.

         27.  Mr Wilcox alleged the appellant's brother could return to Iraq
             or he could provide her with money so that  she  could  return
             with her children.  Alternatively her children could  go  with
             her, work and support her there.

         28.  I take a  different  view  for  the  following  reasons.   The
             respondent accepts the appellant suffers from PTSD and has not
             taken with Dr Husni's report.  There was no criticism that the
             appellant has had suicidal  ideation.   I  accept  Dr  Husni's
             diagnosis that the appellant suffers with PTSD  because  of  a
             consequence of the attack of 2015 and the events in 2014.   Dr
             Fatah in his expert opinion states that  the  appellant  as  a
             lone  woman  with  a  young  daughter,  and  without  a   male
             protection is at risk in Iraq.  I find as  a  matter  of  fact
             that the appellant cannot look to Mortada, her minor  son,  to
             be her male protector in Iraq.

         29.  I also find that the appellant would be at risk in Iraq simply
             for being a lone woman, Shia by religion, having lived  for  a
             lengthy period outside of Iraq.  Dr Fatah says in  his  report
             that,  "most  women  in  Iraq  rely  on  the  family's  social
             networks.  Ms Al Azawi no longer has any family in Baghdad  or
             any parts of Iraq.  It would therefore be more  difficult  for
             her to relocate without any support."

         30.  I accept that there is a general discrimination in the country
             against  Shia  Muslims  largely  from  Sunni  Muslims  and  in
             particular by ISIS who consider anyone that  does  not  follow
             the strict Islamic  faith  to  be  infidels,  which  puts  the
             appellant and her children, at great risk in the country.

         31.  I find that the appellant is a lone woman and if  returned  to
             Iraq she would be returning with two children,  a  minor  son,
             and Buthania who is a young single woman.   I  find  that  the
             appellant has no ties to Iraq.   She  is  a  widow;  the  male
             members of her family are outside Iraq and cannot take care of
             her.

         32.  The respondent argues that the appellant could relocate to the
             northern part of Iraq, which is occupied by the Shia.  However
             I take a different view because I find that she cannot  return
             to Baghdad or relocate within the country because the evidence
             in Dr Fatah's  report  supports  her  fear  about  return  and
             relocation.  The appellant says her daughter does not wear the
             Hijab, which would cause difficulties for  the  appellant  and
             her children.  Dr Fatah says in this report that, "the  number
             of unveiled women in Iraq has declined in recent years.  It is
             likely that as a woman who has returned from the West,  if  Ms
             Al  Azawi  or  her  children's  mannerisms  and  clothing  are
             reflective of her absence from Iraq and residence in the West,
             it is plausible that she will be a soft target  for  non-state
             actors and harassment.  Ms Al Azawi may be  targeted  for  not
             adhering to the strict ideology of militia  groups.   She  may
             also be at risk of being ostracised by the community ...  Iraq
             remains unstable ... The current security situation in Iraq is
             rather stretched in  that  it  is  unpredictable  in  becoming
             increasingly fragmented.  Certain no  go  areas  due  to  ISIS
             control has led to a substantial increase in IDPs ...   Ms  Al
             Azawi's options of relocation  to  Iraq  proper  are  severely
             limited  by  the  unstable  security   environment   and   the
             incompetence of the security forces in bringing stability."

         33.  I  find  the  respondent  has  failed  to  consider  how,  the
             appellant a lone woman with two young children, would relocate
             from Baghdad to the south of the  country  without  attracting
             adverse attention.  Although Dr Fatah says that the  appellant
             would not face religious problems in the south of Iraq, I find
             there is a reasonable likelihood that the risk of  persecution
             remains because she cannot relocate to the south without  male
             protection.  I find she has no family in Iraq.  The respondent
             accepts that the appellant suffers with PTSD.  I find there is
             a reasonable likelihood that her mental state would impede her
             ability to secure work and support her children  placing  them
             all at risk on return.

         34.  In terms of relocation to the Kurdish  regional  governate,  I
             find this is not possible because the appellant  is  an  Arab.
             The  case  "AA"  says  the  respondent  will  only  return  an
             appellant if they originate from the  Kurdish  area  and  have
             been pre-cleared with the Kurdish  authorities.   I  find  the
             appellant will not be able to internally relocate within Iraq.
              She would be returning as a single woman with  two  children,
             it would be unreasonable to expect her to return where she has
             no family for support and her life is threatened.

         35.   The  evidence  is  that  the  appellant  has  looked  to  the
             authorities in the past  to  support  her.   The  police  were
             unwilling or unable to do so, which led the appellant to  flee
             the country.  The objective evidence says that the authorities
             generally are unable to provide effective  protection  because
             of the security situation on the ground.  Dr Fatah, refers  to
             'Reuters, Iraqi widows,  mothers  and  girls  face  heightened
             risks in displaced camps, 7 April 2016' as evidence  that  the
             appellant and her children,  are  particularly  vulnerable  if
             returned to Iraq without a male figurehead in the family (para
             214, report).  I find the appellant cannot relocate because of
             her mental health issues and the fact that  she  has  no  male
             protection in the country,  which  would  place  her  and  her
             children at significant risk on return to Iraq."

13. The respondent was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    by the First-tier in a decision dated 21 August 2017 in  which  it  was
    found that all grounds were arguable.

14. The respondent's grounds began with a challenge in paragraphs 2  and  3
    to the inclusion of BAJ as a dependant of the further submissions.   In
    paragraph 3 of the refusal letter, the respondent had clearly indicated
    that BAJ could not be a dependant in the further submissions claim  and
    was therefore not a party to the refusal and there could be no right of
    appeal or allowed appeal for her in  the  current  circumstances.   The
    refusal letter dated 8 July 2016 at paragraph 3 stated:

         "3.  Please note that in line  with  the  Immigration  Rules,  your
             eldest child 'BAJ' cannot  be  a  dependant  on  this  further
             submissions claim.  As she has already turned 18 years of  age
             prior to  the  further  submissions  claim  of  7/7/2016,  the
             following is noted from the guidance;

             '3.8 Dependants

             Where a spouse, civil partner, unmarried or  same-sex  partner
             or minor child of the principal  claimant  was  treated  as  a
             dependant on the initial asylum  or  human  rights  claim  and
             still wishes to be treated as such, they should continue to be
             considered as a dependant on  the  further  submissions.   See
             paragraph 349 of the Immigration Rules for the definition of a
             dependant in asylum cases.  Where a minor child was treated as
             a dependant on the initial asylum claim but  turns  18  before
             further submission are submitted, they will  need  to  make  a
             first protection claim or apply for leave to remain  in  their
             own  right.   See  the  Dependants   and   former   dependants
             instruction for further guidance".

15. I can deal with this matter relatively briefly.   The  defence  to  the
    challenge on behalf of the appellants, in particular BAJ,  appeared  to
    be that notwithstanding the  clear  contents  of  paragraph  3  of  the
    refusal letter, she had lodged an appeal which the First-tier  Tribunal
    had admitted and the point was not specifically put to Judge  Phull  at
    the hearing on 10 March 2017.  It may well be the case that  the  issue
    was not argued overtly before Judge Phull but it remains the case  that
    it was not open to her to assume jurisdiction where  BAJ  simply  could
    not have been a party to the matter.  Nothing indicates that  BAJ  made
    her own independent further submissions either in line  with  what  the
    main appellant  put  forward  or  on  any  other  basis.   The  further
    submissions referred her only as a dependent of her mother.  It  is  my
    conclusion that it was a material error of law  to  include  BAJ  as  a
    dependant in this matter where she was an adult  at  the  date  of  the
    further submissions.  The  decision  of  Judge  Phull,  insofar  as  it
    includes jurisdiction for BAJ, is therefore in error, must be set aside
    and BAJ can play no further part in this appeal.

16. The grounds of appeal went on to maintain in paragraphs 4  and  5  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull  took  an  incorrect  approach  to  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell in which the appellant was
    not found materially credible  and  did  not  follow  the  guidance  in
    Devaseelan.

17. The third ground was that even if the claim to be at  risk  in  Baghdad
    was made out, nothing explained lawfully why she and her  family  could
    not  relocate  to  another  part  of  southern  Iraq.   The  respondent
    maintained that the appellant had male family  members,  her  brothers,
    who, even if they lived abroad, could be expected to return to a sister
    or certainly provide her with some support.  The respondent also  found
    that the decision was in error where the appellants' Shia ethnicity  or
    Shia religion was cited as a reason for her to be  at  risk  on  return
    when the majority of  Iraqi  citizens  were  Shia  and  the  government
    comprised mainly Shia Muslims.  It was maintained that she would retain
    a network of friends and extended family and that her period in the  UK
    would not  be  sufficient  to  raise  her  profile  as  somebody  of  a
    westernised profile who might be at risk from extreme Sunni Muslims.

18. It is not my view that the challenge on the basis of Devaseelan and the
    correct approach to the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell is
    made out.  As shown in the section from the decision of Judge Phull set
    out above, at [18] she referred in  terms  to  the  decision  of  Judge
    Powell being the "starting point" of her consideration.  The summary of
    what Judge Powell found and the limited credibility findings that could
    assist the appellant were summarised  correctly  in  the  remainder  of
    [18].

19. Judge Phull's consideration then turned to the correct country guidance
    case and the new materials provided by Dr Rebwar  and  Dr  Husni.   She
    identified correctly that Dr Rebwar  is  an  accepted  expert  on  Iraq
    having featured in a number of country guidance cases and that  he  had
    been properly instructed by the appellants' lawyers.  Judge Phull  also
    comments at [22] on Dr Husni's qualifications and experience making him
    a suitable person to comment on the appellant's mental health.

20. Having identified particularly salient features of  the  new  materials
    relied upon, the finding at [23]  appears  to  me  to  show,  when  the
    decision is read fairly, why First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull found that
    the reports of Dr Rebwar and Dr Husni distinguished the  findings  made
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell in July 2015.  The whole  tenor  of
    paragraph [18] - [23] is that, having considered what was found against
    the appellant in 2015, the new materials were reliable  and  sufficient
    to show "strong supporting evidence of the risks faced on  return"  for
    this appellant.

21. Further, at [25]  the  judge  said  specifically  that  she  found  the
    appellant on this occasion to be a  credible  witness  because  it  was
    supported by the evidence of Dr Rebwar on the likelihood of  kidnapping
    as described by the  appellant.   The  judge  identifies  the  specific
    paragraphs from Dr Rebwar's  report  which  supported  the  appellant's
    account.  For these reasons, the respondent's second ground  of  appeal
    is not made out.

22. It is also my conclusion that the third ground of appeal  is  not  made
    out.  The finding that the appellant  could  not  return  to  Iraq  and
    relocate without facing undue harshness did not arise  because  of  her
    Shia religion or her  daughter's  liberal  presentation  as  women  not
    wearing a hijab or veil.  The appellant's profile was found  to  be  as
    already set out from [36] a "lone woman, a  Shia  Muslim  without  male
    protection in Iraq".  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was clear that  the
    appellant's evidence about her brothers  was  credible,  the  appellant
    having been "candid" about being in contact with one brother who  lives
    in Jordan  and  being  unable  to  locate  her  other  brother  who  is
    understood to be in Turkey.  At [27] the judge considered  specifically
    the respondent's submission that one of the brothers could be  expected
    to return to Iraq to assist her or could  provide  her  with  financial
    support if she returned.  At [28] the judge finds that the  appellant's
    mental health, her claim on that issue being supported by the report of
    Dr Husni, unchallenged by the respondent, indicated that the  appellant
    could not be expected to return as a lone woman with a  young  daughter
    and without male protection.

23. At [29] the judge identified a further  factor,  the  appellant  having
    been outside of Iraq and her social networks having become reduced as a
    result.  The grounds take issue  with  the  amount  of  time  that  the
    appellant has been outside of the country but it appears to me  that  a
    period of approximately three years was sufficient  for  the  judge  to
    reach this conclusion which was one open to her.

24. At [32] the judge also explains why it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant to relocate to a different part of southern  Iraq  which  was
    occupied by Shia rather than Sunni Muslims.  Again, the  report  of  Dr
    Fatah entitled the First-tier Tribunal Judge here to find that  someone
    in  her  position  would  not  be  able  to  do  so   without   serious
    difficulties, that becoming additionally so for  this  appellant  given
    her mental health problems.  It was found that the appellant could  not
    relocate given the liberal presentation of the family which would  make
    them a "soft target" for a number of  non-state  actors  wherever  they
    went to in Iraq and that the family would be very noticeable where they
    were  a  household  headed  by  a  lone  woman,  the  appellant   being
    additionally vulnerable because of her mental health problems.

25. It is therefore my conclusion  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal granting the asylum and human rights appeals  of  KAA  and  MJ
    does not disclose an error on a point of law and shall stand.

26. In the event that BAJ makes further submissions for  leave  to  remain,
    the upheld judicial findings on the claim of  her  mother  and  brother
    will no doubt form part of the respondent's consideration.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal concerning KAA and MJ does  not
    disclose an error on a point of law and shall stand.

28. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concerning  BAJ  discloses
    material error and is set aside. There  is  no  valid  appeal  for  BAJ
    before the Tribunal.


Signed   [pic]                          Date: 16 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
