
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08760/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 May 2019                  |On 14 May 2019                  |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    K. F.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, Solicitor, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The Appellant, a Moroccan national, made a protection  claim  on  8
         January 2018 on the basis that she faced a real risk of persecution
         as a member of a particular social group in the  event  of  return,
         from a non-state agent and his associates. It was argued  that  the
         authorities could not provide her with state protection,  and  that
         she could not avoid the  risk  through  internal  relocation.  That
         application was refused on 9 July 2018.
      2. The Appellant's against that decision was heard  and  dismissed  by
         First Tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan in a decision promulgated on  20
         December 2018.
      3. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  decision  of  19
         January 2019 of First tier Tribunal Judge  Murray  because  it  was
         considered arguable that the Judge had failed to take into  account
         relevant evidence, and/or failed to give adequate reasons  for  his
         findings.
      4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to  Rule
         15(2A) for permission to  rely  upon  further  evidence.  Thus  the
         matter came before me.


    The hearing
      5. The Appellant has advanced two different sets of grounds, by way of
         two different applications for permission. Mr Howard confirmed that
         he relied upon those prepared by Counsel who had appeared below.


    The Appellant's challenge
      6. The focus of the grounds is (a) to the adequacy of the reasons that
         underpinned the Judge's  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  not
         sought the assistance of the Moroccan authorities against the  non-
         state agent who was said to pose a risk of harm to  her,  and,  (b)
         the Judge's  conclusion  that  there  is  a  sufficiency  of  state
         protection afforded by the Moroccan  authorities  to  its  citizens
         against serious crime.
      7. The difficulty with that approach is, as Mr Howard accepts, that it
         fails to engage with the conclusion that the Appellant could  avoid
         any risk she might face from the individual she has  identified  as
         posing a continuing threat of harm  to  her  by  relocating  within
         Morocco. The Judge noted the size of the country,  the  population,
         and the absence of  any  reliable  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
         individual the Appellant claimed to fear had any reach  beyond  two
         towns situated "in a small area of a very large country"  [42].  It
         is not possible to argue that the Judge overlooked the  Appellant's
         evidence concerning a previous attempt to avoid this threat through
         relocation, since he makes specific reference to the town to  which
         this attempt was made, and had earlier in the decision set  out  in
         full her evidence concerning what happened when this was attempted.
      8. In considering the ability to relocate  the  Judge  looked  at  the
         evidence concerning the Appellant's health, her ability  to  access
         family support, and her ability  to  find  employment  and  support
         herself. He could also have gone on  to  consider  her  ability  to
         access  the  support  packages  available  to  those   who   return
         voluntarily to their country of origin. Thus all  of  the  relevant
         evidence was considered.
      9. In the circumstances the grounds disclose no material error of  law
         in the Judge's approach to  the  protection  appeal.  (The  grounds
         offer no challenge to the separate  findings  in  relation  to  the
         Article  8  appeal.)  Thus,  notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which
         permission to appeal was granted the appeal must be dismissed.


    DECISION
    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    20 December 2018 contained no material error of law in the decision  to
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set
    aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.




   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 10 May 2019


