
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08475/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 August 2018                              |On 4 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  Rabar [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Rabar [M], was born on 10 October 1999  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Iraq.  The appellant  claims  to  have  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in February 2016 when he claimed asylum.  By a  decision  dated
    25  July  2016,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused   the   appellant's
    application for international protection.  The  appellant  appealed  to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Greasley)  which,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 2 February 2017, dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge did not believe the appellant's account  of  past  events  in
    Iraq.  However, credibility is not seriously at issue  in  this  appeal
    which turns instead on the ability of the appellant to return safely to
    Iraq (he will be returned to Baghdad) and thereby travel onwards to the
    Independent Kurdish Region (IKR).  At [36], Judge Greasley wrote:

         "Alternatively, even if I were to accept  the  appellant's  account
         were credible, and for the avoidance of doubt I conclude that it is
         not, I found there is also reliable  evidence  that  the  appellant
         would be able to relocate to the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (the  IKR).
         In this respect, I find that the appellant  has  a  sponsor  there,
         namely his father's friend, who is a married man with  a  wife  and
         children.  The appellant concedes that he was able to live  in  the
         area of Kalar in the IKR for a period of one year when he  came  to
         no harm whatsoever.  I find that this is  a  particularly  relevant
         factor in this appeal.  The  appellant  asserts  he  cannot  locate
         anywhere in Iraq or in the IKR but this is simply not the case.   I
         find there is no reason why the appellant  would  not  be  able  to
         relocate there and live in  a  Kurdish  area  with  whose  language
         traditions and culture the appellant remains entirely familiar."

 3. The appellant asserts that he would be at risk  upon  return  to  Iraq.
    Both parties accept that  a  Kurdish  single  male  living  in  Baghdad
    without documentation (in particular, a CSID card) would be at risk  of
    harm.  The question in this appeal is whether the  appellant  would  be
    able to obtain in Iraq the necessary documentation which  he  currently
    does not possess and whether he would be able to use that travel safely
    to the IKR where, it is claimed by the respondent, the appellant  would
    be able to seek the sponsorship of his father's friend.

 4. In what is otherwise  a  thorough  analysis,  I  find  that  there  are
    problems with the what the judge says at [36].  First, the judge, in my
    opinion, places excessive weight upon the fact that the  appellant  was
    able to live in Kalar in the IKR for one year where he "came to no harm
    whatsoever."  Indeed, the judge considered that to be  a  "particularly
    relevant factor" in the appeal.  The  finding  is  problematic  because
    there is a difference between the appellant at some time  in  the  past
    having lived in the IKR and his returning now from the  United  Kingdom
    via Baghdad to the IKR which will  entail  travelling  over  land  from
    Baghdad to the Kurdish region.  The parties  accept  that,  whilst  the
    appellant may or may not be able to access "appropriate documentation",
    he does not have that documentation now and he cannot fly directly from
    the United Kingdom to the IKR nor can he transfer without  leaving  the
    airport in Baghdad and fly directly  to  Erbil.   It  does  not  appear
    contentious to say that, should the appellant be able to  actually  get
    in to the IKR safely, he would, whether or  not  he  could  access  the
    sponsorship of his father's friend,  be  safe  in  that  region;  Judge
    Greasley's comment  about  the  appellant  having  lived  in  Kalar  is
    relevant here.  However, the appellant's problem lies in  reaching  the
    IKR, not residing there and that is a problem which the judge's finding
    that the appellant had lived safely in the past in  the  IKR  fails  to
    address.

 5. Secondly, I find that the judge has attached too much  significance  to
    the fact that the appellant's father's friend may be able to access his
    sponsor in the IKR.  There is no evidence that  this  person  would  be
    willing to assist the appellant or,  as  importantly,  exactly  how  he
    might be able to assist the appellant.

 6. In my opinion, Judge Greasley has failed to adopt the approach urged by
    the Upper Tribunal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944).   Given  that  it
    appears to be common ground between the parties that the appellant will
    be returned to Baghdad and that, as a single  male  Kurd,  he  will  be
    potentially at risk in that city, then very considerable caution should
    be taken before the Tribunal concludes that the appellant would be able
    with a  reasonable  degree  of  certainty  to  travel  onwards  without
    suffering  harm  to  the  IKR.   I  have  already  explained  why   the
    appellant's  previous  residence  in  the  IKR  is  not  of  particular
    relevance to  determining  his  risk  on  return  now.   Likewise,  the
    appellant's father may have a hundred friends living  in  the  IKR  who
    might, if asked, be willing to assist the appellant but their existence
    will not be of any use to him if there is  not  a  reliable  degree  of
    certainty that they will be able to obtain the documents the  appellant
    requires to travel safely between Baghdad and the  IKR  and  that  they
    will be able to convey those documents to the appellant  either  before
    he travels or after he reaches Iraq.  Furthermore,  if  the  friend  is
    able to assist the appellant only after he has  reached  Baghdad  there
    will inevitably be some delay  before  any  documentation  reaches  the
    appellant there.  By reference to the existing  country  guidance,  the
    appellant would during that (possibly brief)  period  of  delay  be  at
    risk.

 7. In the light of my observations set  out  above,  I  found  that  Judge
    Greasley has erred in law such that his decision falls to be set aside.
     On the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and, indeed, before the
    Upper Tribunal I am not satisfied that  the  appellant's  residence  in
    Baghdad will prove to be so short or free from risk that it would be in
    accordance with the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  ECHR  to
    return the appellant at the present time.  For that  reason,  I  remake
    the decision allowing the appellant's appeal.  However,  the  appellant
    should be aware that the situation in Iraq is  changing  very  rapidly.
    It may be the case soon that individuals such as the appellant  may  be
    able to be returned directly to the IKR or alternatively with documents
    which will enable them to transfer within Baghdad Airport without risk.
     Should such developments occur then it is likely  that  the  appellant
    will then be required to return.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  2
    February 2017 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  I  allow  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated
    25 July 2016 on human rights grounds (Article 3, ECHR).

 9. There is no anonymity direction.

Signed                              Date 26 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 26 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


