
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08779/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a hearing|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1 July 2021                             |On 09 July 2021                 |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    T T T
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On 7 May 2021 I gave the following directions:-

             "1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In  the  light  of
             the present need to take precautions  against  the  spread  of
             Covid-19,  and  the  overriding  objective  expressed  in  the
             Procedure Rules[1], and having had regard to the  judgment  of
             Fordham J in JCWI v President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  [2020]
             EWHC 3103 as well as the  order  made  in  that  case  I  have
             reached the provisional view,  that it would in this  case  be
             appropriate to determine the  following  questions  without  a
             hearing:

               a) whether the making of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
                  involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

               b) whether that decision should be set aside.

         2. I have reached this conclusion as, although it  appears  that  a
             copy of the grant of permission  and  accompanying  directions
             were not  sent  to  the  appellant,  they  were  sent  to  the
             respondent who, in a letter of 27  January  2021,  has  stated
             that it does  not  opposed  the  appellant's  application  and
             invites the Upper Tribunal to remit the appeal to  the  First-
             tier tribunal for a hearing de novo.   The respondent accepted
             that the FtTJ erred in taking  an  adverse  credibility  point
             against  the  appellant.  On  that  basis  alone,  it  is   my
             preliminary view that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
             involved the making of an error of law, and must be set aside.
             It is also my preliminary view that as that error goes to  the
             issue of credibility, the decision must be set  aside  in  its
             entirety with none of the findings of fact preserved.

         3. Accordingly, unless within ten working  days  of  the  issue  of
             these directions there is any written objection to this course
             of action, supported by cogent argument,  the  Upper  Tribunal
             will proceed to determine the appeal without an  oral  hearing
             and will remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard again
             by a judge other than Judge Chana.

         4. In the absence of a timely response  by  a  party,  it  will  be
             presumed that it has no objection  to  the  course  of  action
             proposed."

 2. There has been  no  response  to  these  directions  by  either  party.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that neither party objects  to  the  matter
    being determined without a hearing and has nothing further to say. I am
    satisfied that that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law for the reasons  set  out  above,
    and must therefore be set aside.  In the circumstances, given that  the
    assessment of credibility was flawed, it will be necessary for all  the
    contested findings of fact to be remade, and thus,  it  is  appropriate
    for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard
    again de novo by a judge other than Judge Chana

Summary of conclusions

      1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
         of an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
         on all issues


Signed                                             Date:  1 July 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

