
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08108/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd August 2019                           |On 5th September 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    m h i
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms B Asanovic (instructed by Simman Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a judgment of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach who heard, on
    27th March 2019 at Taylor House, the appeal of an Iraqi Kurdish man who
    had made a protection claim which  was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The appellant was  successful  in  his  appeal  in  a  Decision
    promulgated on 24th May 2019.

 2. The appellant had fled Iraq when ISIS had entered his  home  area.   He
    said his father had been killed fighting ISIS and that his  father  had
    previously  been  a  member  of  the  Ba'ath  Party.   The  judge   was
    unimpressed by the claim that he would be at risk  on  account  of  his
    father but accepted the appellant's evidence that he had left Iraq with
    his mother  and  sibling  but  that  they  had  become  unintentionally
    separated in Turkey. He accepted that the appellant, being a  minor  at
    the time, it was quite probable that it would be  his  mother  who  had
    kept any ID documents and information as  to  the  whereabouts  of  any
    persons who could provide  support  in  Iraq.   He  accepted  that  the
    appellant had no contact with family members or anyone who could assist
    him on return.  He accepted that he had no CSID or any ID documents and
    on that basis would be unable to return and travel to the  IKR  through
    the proposed route, which was via Baghdad.  However, the  judge  having
    so  found  then  allowed  the  appeal  on  both  asylum   grounds   and
    humanitarian protection grounds.

 3. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  on  the  basis
    that the judge had made errors of law.   Briefly,  the  grounds  assert
    that the judge made no finding in respect of what the Convention Reason
    was and in allowing the appeal on the  basis  of  asylum  he  had  thus
    erred.  He did make that error as he does not identify  the  Convention
    Reason and he further erred by allowing the appeal on both  asylum  and
    humanitarian  protection  grounds,  which   are   mutually   exclusive.
    However, it is clear on the basis of the findings that the judge  made,
    which have not been challenged by the  Secretary  of  State,  that  the
    appeal could and should have been allowed  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds. With the consent of  both  representatives  I  set  aside  the
    Decision to the extent only that I set aside the appeal  being  allowed
    on asylum grounds and I allow it on humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]                            Date 28 August 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

