
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08081/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2019                    |On 23 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                   mr k k
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Stuart King instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
                    Solicitors
                    (83 Kilburn)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal who dismissed his appeal against the  Secretary
    of State's decision of 8 August 2017 refusing his asylum claim.

2.   There had been  a  previous  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    September 2017 but that decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal in
    a decision dated 17 April 2018 and remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a de novo hearing.

3.   The appellant claims to be at risk  on  return  to  Eritrea,  of  which
    country he claims to be a citizen, on the basis of religion and imputed
    political opinion on account of exiting Eritrea illegally.

4.   He claimed to have been born in Eritrea,  in  Assab,  on  5  May  2001.
    Thereafter he said he left Eritrea illegally in 2004 at the age of 3 as
    his family could not  practise  their  Pentecostalist  religion.   They
    travelled to Sudan and lived there illegally and moved to  Addis  Ababa
    in Ethiopia in 2008.  Again they lived there illegally.

5.   The family returned to live in  Sudan  in  2013  as  life  in  Ethiopia
    without status was difficult.

6.   In 2016 the appellant returned back to Eritrea with his  father.   They
    were both detained on arrival and he was held for just  under  a  month
    before being released after his uncle paid a bribe.  Two days after his
    release his uncle arranged for him to leave Eritrea  illegally  via  an
    agent, again to Sudan.

7.   Alternative accounts were given including him not having been  detained
    in Eritrea,  not  having  encountered  the  authorities  when  entering
    Eritrea in 2016, having been detained  after  being  encountered  at  a
    Pentecostal church and being detained for two  days,  or  alternatively
    ten days.

8.   The judge had a considerable amount of evidence to consider and he  set
    this out at pages 5 to 7 of his decision.  The first  issue  the  judge
    considered was the appellant's  claim  to  have  been  detained  at  an
    Eritrean police station.  In a statement of 16 March 2017 it  was  said
    he was kept detained separate from his father for just  less  than  one
    month.  However, in response to question 5.4 of the screening interview
    on 26 June 2017 when he was asked whether he had  ever  been  detained,
    either in the United Kingdom or any other country for  any  reason,  he
    replied "no".

9.   In his substantive interview this discrepancy was put  to  him  and  he
    said that he had said he was never detained as it was two days but  his
    uncle paid a bribe.  He said he was detained when eight or nine of them
    were praying together  and  the  police  came.   He  said  he  was  not
    mistreated and nothing else happened during his detention.   His  uncle
    arranged his release and he did not know it was by way of a bribe.   It
    was put to him that in his witness statement he had said he had paid  a
    bribe and he said it was possible but he  did  not  remember.   At  the
    interview he said he was detained for two to three days.  When  it  was
    put to him that in his witness statement it was  written  that  he  was
    detained for about a month he said he did not remember that much and it
    was about ten days.

10.  In a later statement he said he could not remember if he  was  detained
    on the same day of entry or a few days after as he was  very  young  at
    the time and believed he was detained for a few days.  He said  he  did
    not recall saying one month in his statement and thought  he  mentioned
    ten days.

11.  At the hearing in cross-examination he said that  he  had  memory  loss
    and it could be between one and ten days that  he  was  in  the  police
    station in Eritrea.  This it seems was attributed by him to  his  young
    age and/or because of mental health issues.

12.  The judge bore in mind the fact that the appellant was a child  at  the
    time but noted that he was 15 years of age and he  would  not  normally
    expect such a degree of discrepancy in accounts given as to a period of
    detention.  He did not consider that the inability  of  the  appellant,
    now 18, to recall and provide a  coherent  account  about  a  memorable
    event that happened to him when he was 15  could  simply  be  explained
    away by pointing out that he  was  a  teenager  at  the  time  when  it
    occurred.  The judge went on to  consider  evidence  of  mental  health
    issues which could account for memory deficiencies.  He  bore  in  mind
    the Joint Presidential Guidance.  The report  from  the  health  worker
    dated 26 January  2017  did  not  identify  any  physical  problems  or
    inability to communicate other than that the  appellant  seemed  a  bit
    unhappy and depressed at times.

13.  The judge then considered a letter  from  Ms  Grace  Gillman  a  social
    worker employed by Enfield Council who considered when  she  first  saw
    the appellant on 5 January 2017 that his presentation then  and  for  a
    couple of months after the first meeting was indicative of someone  who
    had experienced trauma or abuse and that  he  had  lasting  PTSD  as  a
    result of this.

14.  The judge noted that Ms Gillman was not called as a  witness  and  that
    there was no evidence to show that she was qualified to diagnose  PTSD.



15.  He went on to consider a report from  the  Tavistock  and  Portman  NHS
    Foundation Trust, dated 18 September 2017, which was referred to by  Ms
    Gillman.  The author of the report was  qualified  first  as  a  social
    worker and secondly as a systemic psychotherapist, rather than being  a
    psychiatrist as Ms Gillman had described him.  The  judge's  conclusion
    on the report of the psychotherapist, Mr Amias, was  that  it  did  not
    state or even give the slightest  indication  that  the  appellant  was
    mentally ill or that his  experiences  in  travelling  to  the  UK  had
    traumatised him to such an extent that he  was  suffering  from  memory
    loss or  suicidal  intent.   Nor  did  the  report  indicate  that  the
    appellant was referred to a GP or a psychiatrist, either during  or  at
    the end of the counselling/group therapy sessions  which  he  attended.
    The judge also considered that Mr Amias constantly strayed outside  his
    role when writing his  report,  for  example  with  references  to  the
    appellant's fears of  further  incarceration  or  death  being  utterly
    realistic, or the fact that  his  father  was  almost  certainly  still
    incarcerated or dead.

16.  At his asylum interview on 26 June  2017  the  appellant  said  he  had
    never been diagnosed with any medical condition and  was  receiving  no
    medication and had never tried to harm himself.

17.  As a consequence the judge did not find credible the appellant's  claim
    that the major discrepancies regarding a central aspect of his  account
    could be explained due to memory loss caused by trauma.  In so  finding
    he took into account that as a young  person  travelling  across  North
    Africa (including Libya) he  would  have  experienced  hard  times  and
    possibly poor treatment.

18.  The judge went on to consider the issue  of  the  appellant's  language
    skills.  Both his parents were nationals of Eritrea on his account  and
    his grandparents also.   He  said  that  he  spoke  Amharic  and  could
    understand some Tigrinya.  He had spent a lot of time in Ethiopia where
    Amharic is the official language and so it was easy for them  to  speak
    to him in Amharic.  He said that in Sudan he spent  most  of  his  time
    with Amharic speakers.  He said that when they were  in  Ethiopia  life
    was difficult as they had no status and he began attending a  community
    school run by Eritrean refugees when he was in Sudan.

19.  At interview he said that his parents spoke  Tigrinya.   He  was  asked
    why he spoke Amharic and said that the area he lived in in Sudan people
    used to speak in Amharic.  He was asked what language he used to  speak
    with his parents and he said they speak Amharic  and  also  they  speak
    Tigrinya.  He said he knew a little bit of Tigrinya.

20.  In his statement signed on 12 September  2017  the  appellant  said  he
    could understand some Tigrinya but did not speak  it  fluently  and  he
    spoke Amharic fluently.  He said his parents tried to speak to  him  in
    Tigrinya sometimes but he was born in Assab  where  Amharic  is  widely
    spoken.  He said that in Ethiopia Amharic is a spoken language and even
    in Sudan he was always around Amharic speakers.  His  parents  when  he
    was growing up spoke to him in Amharic and sometimes  in  Tigrinya,  he
    said in his evidence at the hearing.

21.  The judge considered the background evidence in this  regard.   He  had
    not been provided with any independent evidence that Amharic was spoken
    by indigenous communities in either  Sudan  or  the  newly  independent
    state of South Sudan  as  their  first  language,  although  there  was
    reference in evidence to 13,000,000 people speaking Amharic as a second
    language in Ethiopia  and  Sudan.   The  judge  noted  the  appellant's
    evidence that he lived in Eritrea until the age of 3 and that  when  in
    Sudan he had attended a community  school  run  by  Eritrean  refugees.
    There was  no  explanation  as  to  why  post-independence  a  Tigrinya
    speaking couple living in Eritrea would  raise  their  child  to  speak
    Amharic.  The judge took judicial note of the fact that by the  age  of
    3, when the appellant said he left Eritrea, a child should already have
    developed significant language skills with a vocabulary of about  1,000
    words.  He noted that it was of course the case  that  language  skills
    could subsequently be lost, but noted that the appellant's account  was
    that he continued to live with both his Tigrinya speaking parents until
    2016 and in those  circumstances  it  was  difficult  to  see  why  his
    Tigrinya language skills should have become defunct from lack of use.

22.  He considered the explanation given by the  appellant  to  be  unlikely
    where he said that whilst in Sudan all the people used to speak Amharic
    around him, given the absence of evidence that people  in  Sudan  speak
    Amharic as  their  first  language.   He  had  not  given  evidence  of
    precisely where he lived in Sudan in order to be surrounded by  Amharic
    speakers.  With regard to the fact that the appellant said that he  and
    his family also lived in Amharic speaking Addis Ababa between the  ages
    of 7 and 12, he had said that during that time they would spend most of
    their time indoors as they were illegal  and  therefore  he  had  never
    claimed to have experienced  a  wider  life  in  Ethiopia  but  only  a
    secluded life there.  With regard to  his  claim  to  have  attended  a
    school run by Eritrean refugees on return to Sudan, it was difficult to
    accept why Eritrean teachers running a school in Sudan, presumably  for
    other Eritreans, would choose Amharic as the language of instruction or
    that other young Eritrean  refugees  attending  that  school  who  were
    inevitably all born post-independence would speak that language.

23.  The judge considered an expert report from Mr  John  Campbell  and  did
    not consider it to assist greatly.  Mr  Campbell's  central  conclusion
    was that Amharic was widely used  in  Eritrea,  particularly  in  Assab
    through the 1980s, and that the appellant's parents might  have  spoken
    Amharic  as  well  as  Tigrinya.   That  was  not  however,  the  judge
    commented, an issue in dispute.   Furthermore,  Mr  Campbell's  related
    findings that asylum claimants of mixed Ethiopian and Eritrean heritage
    might speak Amharic as their first or only language had no relevance to
    the facts of this case when the appellant's  parents  and  grandparents
    were Eritrean nationals belonging to  the  Tigrinya  ethnic  group  and
    speaking the Tigrinya language.

24.  The judge also took into account the statement from Mr Dawit who had  a
    telephone conversation with the appellant  on  12  December  2018.   Mr
    Dawit was not an expert witness and had not attended the  hearing.   Mr
    Dawit's opinion was that the appellant spoke Tigrinya a little but that
    his understanding of the Tigrinya language was  good  and  this  was  a
    consequence of his response to a majority of Mr Dawit's questions being
    somehow relevant to the subject matter he had been  asked.   The  judge
    commented that as the two languages are related it was  not  surprising
    that speakers would be mutually intelligible  to  each  other  to  some
    degree.

25.  Taking the evidence as a whole the judge concluded that  the  appellant
    had not shown that he was an Eritrean national.  He did  not  have  any
    documentary evidence that he was an Eritrean national and  nor  did  he
    speak the Eritrean language of Tigrinya or any other Eritrean language.
     The judge found he had not provided any plausible explanation for this
    and had therefore not discharged the evidential burden of demonstrating
    that he was an Eritrean national.  As  a  consequence  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

26.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal against the judge's decision on the basis first that the judge
    had failed to have due regard to relevant evidence when  assessing  the
    appellant's knowledge of Amharic and Tigrinya, and secondly that he had
    failed generally to have regard to evidence relevant to the core of the
    claim when making a holistic assessment of credibility.

27.  In her submissions Ms Stuart King  adopted  and  developed  the  points
    made  in  the  grounds.   She  argued  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    nationality had  been  treated  as  key.   The  claim  was  not  solely
    dependent on an acceptance of what he said as to  what  caused  him  to
    leave.  If he had left Eritrea unlawfully or that it was  so  perceived
    then he would be at risk regardless  of  other  factors  in  the  case.
    There was a dispute as to his ability to speak Tigrinya as  opposed  to
    speaking Amharic.  The judge had addressed the issue  of  detention  in
    Eritrea and also the language  point.   There  were  equally  important
    other elements.  Focusing on his account of what  happened  to  him  in
    Eritrea led the judge to focus excessively on that part of his claim.

28.  As regards ground 1 a plausible explanation for  the  appellant's  lack
    of Tigrinya was provided in the expert's  report  and  the  appellant's
    account of how this situation arose.  The  expert  had  considered  the
    explanation to be plausible.  The judge had not considered that between
    the ages of 3 and 7 the appellant was associated  with  other  children
    speaking Amharic and it would have been embedded during that time.  His
    account had been consistent.  It was unclear what the judge had made of
    the expert report and how much he  had  accepted  it.   He  had  rather
    ignored the conclusion that the account of the appellant was  plausible
    and consistent with  the  expert's  views  of  the  country  background
    situation.  The judge had erred in failing  to  look  properly  at  the
    appellant's evidence as to his background.

29.  As regards ground 2, the judge had focused on  a  limited  aspect,  the
    appellant's detention in Eritrea.  It was the case that his evidence on
    the point had varied in some aspects but, it was argued, not materially
    with regard to the length of his detention.   He  was  consistent  with
    regard to the events that had  occurred.   There  were  so  many  other
    aspects of his background in  the  evidence  that  the  judge  had  not
    considered and the grounds referred to this with regard,  for  example,
    to the consistency of the evidence that he had given as recorded by  Mr
    Amias and Ms Gillman.  The judge had not really considered Ms Gillman's
    evidence as to what the appellant had said  about  his  background  and
    there was the point about the views of the Eritrean foster family.   He
    had provided a consistent presentation since  arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom with being from an Eritrean background.   There  was  also  the
    evidence of Helen Tadese.  Written evidence had to be given some weight
    and the judge said it was given limited value but it did not form  part
    of his reasoning.  The analysis about detention had been at the expense
    of a holistic consideration of the case, including the positive matters
    and it was unreasonably limited to one point.

30.  In his submissions Mr Lindsay argued that the judge had considered  the
    evidence carefully and  thoroughly.   The  appeal  had  been  dismissed
    because of inconsistencies with regard to key aspects of the claim  and
    a lack of a credible explanation for the  failure  to  speak  Tigrinya.
    The judge was not obliged to give reasons for reasons or  to  refer  to
    every bit of evidence.  He had done as much as he could  reasonably  be
    expected to do.  He was entitled to conclude as he did about the extent
    to which the appellant up to the age of 3 would have had  a  foundation
    in Tigrinya and there was no challenge to that finding.  With regard to
    not considering the next years, in fact the judge had  noted  that  the
    language skills could be  lost  and  considered  whether  there  was  a
    credible explanation for losing the  language  skills  he  should  have
    acquired.  The decision was properly reasoned.

31.  With regard to ground 2 the judge was not required to refer to all  the
    evidence in the appeal and he had referred to  the  main  evidence  and
    matters of weight were for him.

32.  By way of reply Ms Stuart  King  referred  again  to  the  plausibility
    conclusion of the expert with regards to the appellant's explanation as
    to why he had little Tigrinya.  According to  Mr  Dawit  the  appellant
    could get by in Tigrinya.  The background evidence did not support what
    the judge had found to be the case.  Though it was true that the  judge
    did not have to mention every bit of the evidence, he needed to make it
    clear to the appellant why he had lost and it left open the question of
    why he did not accept Grace Gillman's evidence and the  consistency  of
    his accounts and the evidence of Ms Tadese.  These matters needed to be
    placed in the balance against the negative findings and the  judge  was
    guilty of "cherry picking".  There was  no  reasoning  with  regard  to
    evidence which assisted the appellant.

33.  I reserved my decision.

34.  The judge considered the  evidence,  of  which  there  was  a  lot,  in
    considerable detail.  The first issue which he considered in particular
    detail was that of the appellant's claimed  detention  at  an  Eritrean
    police  station.   He  had  provided  various  time  periods  for  that
    detention ranging between two days and about a month.  He was unable to
    give a  satisfactory  explanation  for  that  discrepancy.   The  judge
    considered in detail whether it could be explained by either his age or
    health issues and came to the entirely rational conclusion that neither
    of those could explain it and this went to a core issue of  the  claim.
    It was fully open to the judge to  consider  that  major  discrepancies
    regarding an essential issue of the account not  having  been  properly
    explained he did not accept the appellant's claim of  detention  at  an
    Eritrean police station.

35.  The judge then went on to consider, again in considerable  detail,  the
    reasons why the appellant spoke little Tigrinya.  His  conclusion  that
    he would have already developed significant language skills by the  age
    of  3  was  unchallenged.   He  accepted  that  language  skills  could
    subsequently be lost but he  was  living  with  both  of  his  Tigrinya
    speaking parents until 2016, he had attended a school run  by  Eritrean
    refugees on return to Sudan and there was no reason why they would  not
    have spoken Tigrinya rather than Amharic, and  there  was  no  evidence
    before the judge that people in Sudan  spoke  Amharic  as  their  first
    language.  As regards the time spent living in Ethiopia, the family had
    spent most of their time indoors as they were illegal and therefore  he
    had not experienced a wider life while in Ethiopia.

36.  The judge specifically considered the report of  Mr  Campbell  but  did
    not consider that it greatly assisted the appellant.  He accepted,  and
    it was indeed not an issue in dispute,  that  the  appellant's  parents
    might have spoken Amharic as well  as  Tigrinya,  and  as  regards  the
    likelihood of asylum claimants of mixed Ethiopian and Eritrean heritage
    speaking Amharic as their first or only language, it was of course  the
    case that on both sides of the appellant's  family,  including  parents
    and grandparents, all  were  Tigrinyan  and  therefore  that  piece  of
    evidence would not apply.  The judge also came to conclusions to  which
    he was entitled to come on Mr Dawit's evidence that the  appellant  was
    able to make a response to questions which were somehow relevant to the
    subject matter asked, bearing in mind the relationship between  Amharic
    and Tigrinya.  It was also open to the judge to attach  limited  weight
    only to the evidence of Helen Tadese who did not attend the hearing  to
    be cross-examined.  Her evidence was that she knew the appellant to  be
    Eritrean but the judge was entitled in the circumstances of her absence
    to attach the limited weight that he  did  to  her  evidence.   I  also
    consider that appropriate consideration was given to the evidence of Ms
    Gillman, which was noted and considered at paragraph 27  and  again  at
    paragraph 41.  Matters of weight are of course a matter for the  judge.
    In my view it cannot properly be said that the appellant could not know
    the reasons why his appeal was dismissed.  The judge made it very clear
    why on the one hand he considered that the appellant's credibility  was
    significantly  damaged  by  the  discrepancies  about  the  period   of
    detention, and why it was that he did not accept that the appellant was
    Eritrean given the lack  of  credible  reasons  for  his  very  limited
    ability only in Tigrinya.

Notice of Decision

37.  No error  of  law  in  this  decision  has  been  made  out  and  as  a
    consequence the appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 17 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
