
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08426/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 December 2017                     |On 5 January 2018                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                            alan khalidi mahmoodi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Palmer, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Alan Khalidi Mahmoodi, claims to be a  citizen  of  Iran
    and that his date of birth is 1 March 1998.  The  respondent,  however,
    considers that the appellant is a citizen of Iraq whose date  of  birth
    is 1 March 1991.  The appellant had applied for asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom but his application was refused by a decision of the respondent
    dated 27 July 2016.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge L K Gibbs) which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  2  May  2017,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. For the Upper Tribunal, Mr Palmer,  appeared  for  the  appellant,  and
    acknowledged that the grounds of appeal  are  somewhat  unfocused.   He
    submitted that there are, in essence, three grounds.  First, the  judge
    made no proper finding in  respect  of  the  appellant's  claimed  age;
    secondly, in particular at [24], the judge  had  not  given  sufficient
    reasons for finding the  appellant's  account  not  credible;  thirdly,
    there was no proper finding to support the judge's conclusion that  the
    appellant is a citizen of Iraq, rather than Iran.  Miss  Fijiwala,  who
    appeared for the respondent,  submitted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with findings which  were  open
    to the judge and which the judge had supported with  cogent  and  clear
    reasoning.

 3. I agree with Miss Fijiwala.  I find that the judge has reached findings
    of fact which were available to him on the evidence  and  that  he  has
    supported those findings with clear reasons.  At [18], the judge wrote,
    "I  am  not  satisfied  the  appellant  is  a  credible   witness   and
    consequently I am not persuaded that the date of birth provided by  him
    of 1 March 1999 is reliable."  Thereafter, the judge proceeds  to  give
    his reasons for finding that the appellant is not a  reliable  witness.
    Before he does so, he is careful [19] to emphasise that,  even  if  the
    appellant is (as he claims) a minor then the  judge  would  still  have
    found  that  his  youth  was  inadequate  to  explain  and  excuse  the
    inconsistencies in his evidence.  The judge describes  the  appellant's
    chronology of past events as "incoherent"  [20].   He  notes  that  the
    appellant claims to have left Iran on 25 December  2015.   However,  he
    subsequently told  the  Secretary  of  State's  officers  that  he  had
    obtained a passport less than two months before he left and that he had
    obtained the passport in Iraq where he  had  remained  living  for  two
    years.  The judge considered that this would mean  that  the  appellant
    left Iran by his own account in  or  around  May  2014.   In  his  oral
    evidence, the appellant had "become confused citing 25 December 2015 as
    the date when he left Iraq and Iran."  Mr  Palmer  submitted  that  the
    appellant had perhaps been guilty of one inconsistency and that such  a
    minor  error  could  not  amount  to  an  "incoherent  chronology."   I
    disagree.  The appellant has given a date on which he  claims  to  have
    left Iran that date simply cannot be reconciled,  even  remotely,  with
    the date which he claims to have left the country by reference  to  his
    other evidence.  The description of the chronology as "incoherent"  is,
    in my opinion, apt.

 4. The judge went on [21] to reject the appellant's  explanation  for  the
    inconsistencies in his account.  The appellant complained that  he  had
    not been "asked" about the details of his  journey  from  Iran  to  the
    United Kingdom.  I agree with the judge that the appellant was  obliged
    to provide evidence in support of his claim and with a view to  proving
    it to the appropriate standard.  The judge was  also  right  to  recall
    that the appellant had previously told the French authorities  that  he
    was a citizen of Iraq, not Iran.

 5. At [24], the judge found that it was not plausible that  the  appellant
    would have not himself been involved as a member or  supporter  of  the
    KDPI and yet would encourage other people to support the  organisation.
    I consider that to be an appropriate finding to make on the evidence.

 6. At [25], the judge concludes that the appellant is  not  a  citizen  of
    Iran but is a citizen of  Iraq.   He  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    removal to Iraq would not breach the United Kingdom's obligations under
    the Refugee Convention.  That again was a finding open  to  the  judge.
    The appellant has never claimed that he would be at any risk  in  Iraq.
    In that circumstance, there was no need for the  judge  to  search  for
    possible reasons why the appellant might be at risk in  Iraq  when  the
    appellant himself had never suggested that he would be at risk.   Quite
    properly, the judge has drawn attention to the fact that the  appellant
    had, by his own account, lived in Iraq "without incident."

 7. I agree with Miss Fijiwala that the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal amount to nothing more than a  series  of  disagreements  with
    findings which were available to the judge on  the  evidence.   In  the
    circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 3 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 3 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

