
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/08050/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 November 2020                |On 2 December 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     SM

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr K Khan, instructed by Kings Law Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is an Iraqi national with date  of  birth  given  as
    10.2.81, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 28.10.19 (Judge Smith),
    dismissing on all grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State, dated 2.8.19, to refuse his claim for international
    protection made in further submissions of 7.12.18.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 9.12.19, suggesting that the grounds merely sought  to
    reargue the appeal. However, when the application was  renewed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch  granted  permission  on
    27.1.20, on the basis that in reaching his decision the  judge  "failed
    to take into account relevant objective (evidence)  relating  to  blood
    feuds and honour crimes which would have provided a proper context  for
    this consideration of the evidence given  by  the  appellant.  He  also
    failed to take into account relevant country guidance when  considering
    the effect of returning the appellant to Iraq."  Although  Judge  Finch
    considered that there were errors of law in the  decision,  that  is  a
    matter for me to consider and permission is granted only on  the  basis
    that there is an 'arguable' error of law.

 3. The appellant's case was that for a number of years from 2008 he was in
    a clandestine relationship with a woman (Dereen) but that in  2011  her
    family refused to agree  to  his  family's  proposal  of  marriage.  In
    apparent consequence, it is alleged that she set  fire  to  herself  at
    home and died from her injuries a few days later. He claims that having
    discovered the extent of their relationship, her family blame  him  for
    her death and threatened to kill him. He also claimed an Article  15(c)
    risk of indiscriminate violence on return to Kirkuk.

 4. His claim first made in 2013 was refused the same year and certified as
    unfounded. He lodged further submissions in 2014 and twice in 2016, all
    refused without a right of appeal. A Settlement Protection  application
    was also refused in 2018.

 5. The most recent refusal decision of 2.8.19 was  the  only  occasion  in
    which  his  claims  were  subsequently  tested  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, on 25.10.19. Following a detailed consideration of  the  oral
    and documentary evidence in relation to alleged  arrest  warrants,  set
    out in the decision between [24] and [33] of the  decision,  the  judge
    reached the conclusion that the documentation was not reliable  and  in
    fact a fabrication, finding that the appellant was prepared to  provide
    false documents, thereby undermining  the  credibility  of  his  claim.
    After referring to previous rejections of the  appellant's  claims,  at
    [35] of the decision the judge  stated,  "I  do  not  accept  that  any
    reliable new material has been provided to the court which supports the
    fact that Dereen had been in a relationship with him or that  she  took
    her own life or that if she did die it was the result of any conduct by
    this appellant. I do not accept he has established even  to  the  lower
    level of proof that he has anything to fear returning to Iraq and would
    not be the subject of violence from the family of Dereen or the subject
    of an arrest."

 6. The grounds of application for permission  to  appeal  argue  that  the
    assessment  of  credibility  was  flawed,  the  approach  taken  as  to
    reliability  of  documentation  flawed,  and  the  decision  devoid  of
    adequate reasoning.

 7. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Mr  Khan  was  unable  to
    connect with the hearing by video but  was  content  to  continue  with
    audio-only by telephone. He relied on his skeleton  argument  and  made
    oral  submissions.  Mr  McVeety  also  referred  me  to   the   written
    submissions of Mr Clarke on behalf of the Home Office, dated 12.5.20.

 8. In large part the grounds are a disagreement with the decision,  making
    various assertions that the judge was wrong and asserting, for  example
    that the appellant was "rather credible in his accounts." These do  not
    disclose any error of law.

 9. Mr Khan's primary submission was that the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the objective evidence on blood feuds. I noted at  the  hearing
    that the appellant's bundle prepared for the First-tier Tribunal appeal
    hearing contained some 90 pages of  background  information  addressing
    honour-based violence in the  Kurdistan  region  and  the  respondent's
    CPINs on blood feuds, dated August 2017, and  on  internal  relocation,
    dated February 2019.

10. However, I accept Mr McVeety's submissions that in  the  light  of  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal, the blood feud background evidence
    was not material to the outcome of the  appeal,  which  turned  on  the
    credibility of the appellant's account. The judge did not make findings
    that there are no such blood feuds in Iraq but found the  core  factual
    claim simply not credible. In that light,  referencing  the  background
    information would have been pointless.

11. Given the detailed assessment of the various  arrest  documents,  which
    the judge pointed out  were  chronologically  inconsistent,  the  judge
    provided adequate  reasoning  to  justify  the  conclusion  that  these
    documents had  been  fabricated  to  support  the  appellant's  further
    submissions. In short, the claim was found not credible. As Mr  McVeety
    submitted, it would be difficult to conceive of a more  incoherent  and
    incredible account, where arrest warrants with an 'incorrect'  date  on
    were returned by the appellant's family years later for them to be  re-
    issued with the 'correct' date. The  judge  was  entirely  entitled  to
    reject the factual claim and therefore failure  to  reference  or  take
    into account the background material is  irrelevant.  Mr  McVeety  also
    pointed out that this complaint arises from the grant of permission and
    was not part of the grounds of application for permission.

12. Although he didn't mention the issue in his initial submissions, when I
    raised it with him Mr Khan  confirmed  that  he  also  pursued  alleged
    errors in the judge's assessment on documentation for  return  to  Iraq
    and relocation to the IKR.

13. In relation to return to Iraq, the refusal decision accepted  that  the
    appellant could not return to  Kirkuk  but  maintained  that  he  could
    relocate to the IKR. I note that whilst  the  appellant  was  born  and
    lived in Kirkuk, his mother is from Sulaymaniyah in the IKR,  where  he
    has uncles and other family members who would be able  to  support  his
    relocation there. The judge concluded that the  appellant  remained  in
    touch with family and friends in Iraq, who had  assisted  in  providing
    the supposed arrest documentation, and would be able to seek assistance
    from  his  brother  and   cousin   to   obtain   appropriate   identity
    documentation to enable his safe return to Iraq and relocation  to  the
    IKR.

14. In this regard, it is important that at [36] of the decision the  judge
    pointed out that neither in the grounds of  appeal,  nor  the  skeleton
    argument, nor in oral submissions, was the proposed relocation  to  the
    IKR challenged, the judge stating "This was not challenged before  me."
    At [43] of the decision the judge again  noted,  "This  appeal  focused
    upon the reliability of the appellant's new account and  documents  and
    it was not submitted that if it was rejected he  could  not  return  to
    Iraq."

15. Mr Khan referred me to the skeleton argument prepared  for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal appeal hearing which does, I accept  raise  issues  about
    relocation, but only to Baghdad or the South  of  Iraq.  The  issue  of
    relocation to the IKR is not addressed.

16. The grant of permission infers that the recent decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)  Iraq  CG
    [2019] UKUT 004100 (IAC), will have to  be  considered.  However,  that
    decision was promulgated only after the  impugned  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision. Despite that, the judge  did  consider  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC) and was  satisfied
    "having considered this appellant's circumstances and the fact he  will
    be able to seek assistance from his brother and cousin that he would be
    able to obtain appropriate documentation and can be returned to  Iraq."
    Given that the respondent was not suggesting return to Kirkuk and  that
    he could relocate to the IKR, it was  on  the  basis  that  the  appeal
    proceeded. That approach was, in any event, consistent with SMO.

17. I am satisfied that not having taken any  issue  on  documentation  for
    return to Iraq before the First-tier Tribunal and not having challenged
    the respondent's case that with the support of family  in  the  IKR  he
    could relocate there, the appellant cannot  now  raise  that  issue  on
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. No error of  law  is  disclosed  on  this
    ground of appeal.

18. In relation to article 15(c), there is no such risk in the IKR.

19. In all the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  so
    the decision must stand as made.

Decision

    The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed on all grounds.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       25 November 2020




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       25 November 2020

