
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number PA/08976/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
             Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 25th April 2018
               On 14th May 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     F Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton (counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant claimed to have entered the UK in January 2017 and to have
   claimed asylum in February 2017. That application was refused and the
   Appellant's appeal heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach at Taylor
   House on the 5th of December 2017 and dismissed for the reasons given in
   the decision promulgated on the 15th of January 2018.

2. The Judge found that the Appellant could be returned to Afghanistan
   without placing the UK in breach of its international obligations. The
   Judge did not accept that the Appellant had been forcibly recruited by
   the Taliban. The Judge found that the account was vague, with
   inconsistencies and not consistent with background evidence. The judge
   also found the Appellant's account of his escape was not credible and
   that he would not be of interest to the authorities if returned.

3. There are 4 grounds of appeal. The first was in relation to paragraph 25
   where the Judge had noted that the Appellant had not made further written
   representations after his asylum interview, the grounds noting that there
   was no requirement for him to do so. The second ground argues that in
   paragraph 26 the Judge was wrong to find against the Appellant on matters
   that were not put to him, thirdly the Judge had not considered all
   aspects of the background evidence and in paragraph 29 had not understood
   that the Appellant's escape was from a camp and not somewhere enclosed.
   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on the
   24th of February 2018. The Home Office rule 24 response was dated the 5th
   of April 2018.


4.  At the hearing both parties were represented, the submissions are set
   out in the Record of Proceedings and are referred to where relevant
   below. At the start of the hearing I raised with the Appellant's
   representative that the Judge's comments in paragraph 25 were in the form
   of an observation and were not a finding. The focus of Mr Eaton's
   submissions was on the nature of the account that the Appellant had given
   when interviewed and in his witness statement and the Judge's findings in
   respect of that.


5. In short Mr Eaton submitted that the Appellant's account was consistent
   with objective evidence given his account of the sympathy of his local
   tribal elders to the Taliban. References were given for the detail in the
   Appellant's account relating to his clothing, journey, food, training,
   weaponry details and the names of others in the camp with him along with
   the escape. If the Judge had issues he could have asked questions
   himself. It was submitted that the reasons given for rejecting the
   Appellant's claimed abduction were not sustainable.


6. For the Home Office it was submitted that there was no error and in the
   alternative it was not material, there were sustainable alternative
   findings. Although it was accepted that the Appellant had given details
   and it was clear why there was a challenge to the finding of vagueness
   there were discrepancies. It was the Appellant's claim to make out. There
   was only the Appellant's evidence of the authorities' interest in him and
   his answer at question 138 in the evidence was vague. It would have to be
   found that being coerced to train would mean that the authorities would
   have an interest in him and would come looking for him in Kabul and the
   evidence does not support that or that the Taliban would seek him there
   either. The findings in paragraph 32 and 33 could be ring fenced.


7. In reply it was submitted that the Appellant was not speculating in his
   evidence about the interest that would be shown in him.


8. The observations by the Judge in paragraph 25 that despite the
   criticisms of the interview the Appellant had not made further
   representations were simply that, an observation, and not a finding. The
   fact that the Appellant had taken the opportunity to make representations
   although his solicitors could have done so could undermine his claims but
   that appears to have been taken no further and the point made has no
   relevance.


9. The examples given by Mr Eaton in submissions relating to the details
   that the Appellant gave in interview and his witness statement suggest
   that more information had been forthcoming than might have been thought
   given the Judge criticisms. That however is part of the decision. The
   Judge considered the Appellant's claims in the alternative and found
   against him in respect of the Appellant being of interest to the Taliban
   or the government in Afghanistan.


10. So far as those findings are concerned the Judge's position was
   different. This involved taking the Appellant's account of recruitment,
   treatment and escape. Given that it was the Appellant's case that the
   elders in his home village were Taliban sympathisers it is difficult to
   see why he would have been informed on for having gone for training and
   the Judge observed that it could not have been known that the Appellant
   was at the camp. In paragraph 31 the Judge also referred to differences
   in the Appellant's evidence and the failure to mention the claimed visit
   to his uncle's house when interviewed or in his witness statement.


11. Equally the Judge was entitled to find that the Appellant would not be
   of interest to the Taliban on return to Afghanistan. The reasoning in
   paragraph 32 including the deaths of those who knew him and the time that
   the Appellant had spent away from Afghanistan were factors the Judge was
   entitled to consider. It was open to the Judge to find that the Appellant
   could safely return to Kabul where his brother lived having found that
   the Appellant was not of interest to either the government or the
   Taliban. Accordingly the findings on the alternative basis taking the
   Appellant's claims about his recruitment, training and escape as the
   starting point the Judge was entitled to find that he was not at risk and
   the decision is sustainable.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 which is
continued.

Fee Award

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's appeal
and so could make no fee award, in dismissing the Appellant's appeal to the
Upper Tribunal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 8th May 2018

