
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08147/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Leeds                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2020                            |On 26 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HTT
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Holt, instructed by Berwicks Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall refer to HTT  as
    "the appellant".

 2. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State  to  challenge  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  following  a  hearing  in
    Bradford on 27 September 2019, allowed the appellant's  appeal  against
    the refusal by the respondent of his protection claim.

 3.  The matter has a relatively long history.   The  appeal  came  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal as a result of fresh submissions having  been  made
    in 2019 on behalf of the appellant.  There had been  earlier  decisions
    of the Tribunal at both levels  in  his  case.   One  of  those  was  a
    decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Holmes who, in 2018, had  found
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error
    of law and set it aside, but then found that, on re-making, the  appeal
    should nevertheless be dismissed.

 4. Unfortunately, the Secretary  of  State  was  not  represented  at  the
    hearing in September 2019.  The Secretary of State sought to appeal the
    judge's decision on a number of grounds.  One of  those  was  that  the
    appellant's representative, it was said, had failed to disclose to  the
    court that the appellant's brother with whom he lives had been  granted
    asylum and then naturalised as a British citizen, on  the  basis  of  a
    claim that he was an Iranian national.  That  was  significant  because
    the  appellant's  claim  to  international  protection   involved   the
    assertion that he was a national of Iraq.

 5. Mr Holt, who appeared before the First-tier Tribunal, and appears today
    on behalf of the appellant, has put forward  evidence  pursuant  to  an
    application made under rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal  Rules,  which
    shows beyond doubt  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  incorrect  in
    asserting that the appellant's brother had been granted protection  and
    subsequently citizenship on the basis that he was an Iranian  national.



 6. Mr Diwnycz, who appears on behalf of the Secretary of State,  helpfully
    confirmed that no information to support the assertion in  the  grounds
    could be found.  It  is  plainly  extremely  unfortunate  that  whoever
    produced these grounds did not check the matter so as  to  ensure  that
    this obviously erroneous assertion did not  feature  in  them.   It  is
    particularly unfortunate, given that the way in which  the  ground  was
    fashioned amounts to an allegation of professional  misconduct  on  the
    part of those representing the appellant.  I therefore  consider  that,
    at the very least, the appellant's  representatives  should  receive  a
    written apology from the Secretary of State for this error.

 7. Another of the grounds of challenge of the Secretary of  State  relates
    to whether or not Najaf,  a  place  in  Iraq,  is  a  place  where  CAS
    documentation is handled in respect  of  those  emanating  from  Mosul.
    Again, it is now manifest from the Country Guidance that Najaf has been
    found by the Upper Tribunal to be a place where that  activity  occurs.
    It is also manifest that it is some 100 kilometres from Baghdad,  which
    is precisely what the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  described.   Again,
    therefore, there is no merit whatsoever in this ground.

 8. The sole surviving ground  of  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision is that the judge should have considered himself bound
    by the principle in Devaseelan to make  a  finding  compatible,  or  in
    line, with that of Judge Holmes regarding the issue of re-documentation
    in Iraq.  At paragraphs 22 and 23 Judge Holmes said this:-

         "22. Although the Judge's  decision  does  not  refer  to  it,  the
             Appellant accepted at interview [Q8] that  he  had  previously
             been issued with a legitimate Iraqi  passport.   There  is  no
             obvious reason on the Judge's findings why he would be  unable
             to approach the Iraqi Embassy  in  London  for  a  replacement
             since he could give both his  biographical  details,  and  his
             fingerprints to confirm who he is, and  to  allow  him  to  be
             matched to  the  biographical  details  already  held  by  the
             passport department of the Ministry.  Despite  the  fact  that
             there is no evidence that he has done so yet, I  am  therefore
             satisfied that his return is feasible, and, that  he  will  be
             able to return to Iraq upon a current legitimate passport,  if
             he were to co-operate with the Iraqi authorities.  It would be
             in his interests to do  so,  because  otherwise  he  would  be
             returned  to  Iraq  upon  a  laissez  passer  which  would  be
             confiscated upon return to Baghdad; AAH.

         23.  The Judge found that the appellant could obtain the issue of a
             CSID.  That finding is unchallenged.  It was open to the Judge
             to make such a finding because, even bearing in mind the  most
             recent country guidance of AAH the Appellant would be able  to
             obtain such a document either in the  UK  in  advance  of  his
             return to Iraq, or, immediately upon arrival in Baghdad, since
             he is able to obtain the issue of a replacement passport."

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in the present case conducted a long  and
    detailed analysis of the appellant's case, as it  was  before  him,  by
    reference to the relevant Country Guidance.  He concluded at  paragraph
    63 that the appropriate CSA office for the appellant was in Najaf, as I
    have said, and that that place was some 100  kilometres  from  Baghdad.
    The judge found that  the  appellant  would,  as  matters  stood,  have
    significant difficulties in achieving this  journey  without  the  CSID
    card to start with; and that although he may have some  money  provided
    by the Secretary of State for his return, this  would  be  limited  and
    helpful for only a few days.  The overall risks of travelling to  Najaf
    without the CSID card was a factor upon  which  the  appellant's  claim
    succeeded.

10. Mr Holt submits that  the  Devaseelan  principle  does  not  carry  the
    Secretary of State the requisite distance.  He points to paragraphs 173
    to 187 of AA (Iraq), where it was found that  the  Iranian  Embassy  in
    London cannot provide a replacement CSID for undocumented persons.   Mr
    Holt submits that the Country Guidance does not appear to  provide  any
    basis upon which the appellant could re-document himself as the  former
    holder of an expired passport.  The appellant's claim was  always  that
    the former passport was left behind in Iraq.

11. I find myself in agreement with Mr Holt on this issue.  The finding  in
    Judge Holmes's decision was not a pure finding of  fact  regarding  the
    appellant's history.  It was in large part an attempt to  prognosticate
    what the position might be in relation to re-documentation.   Paragraph
    22 of Judge Holmes's decision is, in my view, entirely about the  issue
    of obtaining a passport in order to return to Iraq.

12. The important issue of the CSID was  dealt  with  by  Judge  Holmes  at
    paragraph 23.  That finding, based as it was upon  the  conclusions  of
    the previous judge, is not one  which  sits  easily  with  the  Country
    Guidance as it was at the time of Judge Holmes's decision.   The  point
    is a narrow one but, nevertheless for this appellant, an important one.
     It is whether the fact that he had a passport in the past, which he no
    longer had, nevertheless means that he would be able to obtain  a  CSID
    card or some variant thereof in the United Kingdom, before he  returned
    to Iraq.  I am  satisfied  that  there  is  no  Country  Guidance  that
    specifically says  that  this  would  be  possible  in  the  particular
    circumstances of the appellant's  case.   The  judge  who  reached  his
    decision in October 2019 carefully considered all the relevant  Country
    Guidance.  I do not find  that  he  committed  an  error  in  terms  of
    Devaseelan in not finding  the  predictive  aspect  of  Judge  Holmes's
    decision, based as it was on the decision of the previous  judge.   The
    position would have been otherwise, of course, if those predictions had
    been more firmly rooted in Country Guidance; but,  for  the  reasons  I
    have given, they were not.

13. This meant, therefore, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  entitled
    to reach the conclusions he did  in  paragraphs  63  and  64.   He  was
    entitled on the evidence before him and on the  basis  of  the  Country
    Guidance to  conclude  that  there  was  a  real  likelihood  that  the
    appellant, even if returned to Baghdad, would have to find his  way  to
    Najaf in order to obtain a CSID card.  For the  reasons  he  describes,
    that would be seriously problematic for the appellant's safety.   Also,
    as matters stood at the time, the judge was entitled to conclude as  he
    did at paragraph 64, regarding the lack  of  feasibility  of  relatives
    being able to access Najaf on the appellant's behalf.   Although it  is
    not necessary for me directly to have  regard  to  the  latest  Country
    Guidance in SMO [2019] UKUT 400, it  is  noteworthy  that  the  Country
    Guidance in that case  points  to  the  Article  3  risk  that  may  be
    encountered by somebody, even with an Iraqi passport, making their  way
    to another place in Iraq in order to obtain a CSID or its ID successor.



14. For these reasons, the sole remaining ground of appeal by the Secretary
    of State does not have merit.  I do not consider that the Secretary  of
    State has shown that the First-tier Tribunal Judge committed  an  error
    of law such that I should set aside the judge's decision.   That  means
    that the decision  of  the  judge  allowing  the  appeal  in  terms  of
    humanitarian protection stands.

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date 21 February 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
