

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA087892016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 July 2017                       |On 14 July 2017                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AHS
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mrs Faryl instructed by Broudie Jackson and Canter
Solicitors


                       ERROR OF LAW FINDNG AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis  ('the  Judge')  promulgated  on  17
        February 2017 in which the Judge allowed the appellant's protection
        appeal on asylum and article 3 ECHR grounds.



Background


     2. AHS is a national of Iran who claimed asylum on the basis of a risk
        of persecution on return as a result of his conversion  from  Islam
        to Christianity.
     3. The Judge considered the evidence from all  sources  together  with
        the advocates submissions before setting out findings of fact  from
        [42] of the decision under challenge.
     4. At [57] the Judge finds:


             "57.     Applying the lower standard of proof I  am  drawn  to
                  the conclusion that whilst this appellant did not tell the
                  truth about what happened in Iran he  has  demonstrated  a
                  contrast interest in the church since  arriving  here.  He
                  has been baptised and he has been a  regular  attendee  at
                  both services, study groups and charitable  events  within
                  the church. The standard of proof is low and based on  the
                  evidence given by both  appellant  and  Reverend  Cotes  I
                  accept he is a convert and  that  he  is  genuine  in  his
                  faith. I am  satisfied  he  would  follow  that  faith  if
                  returned to Iran."


     5. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  asserting  the
        Judge failed to make any findings on whether the  appellant  is  an
        "ordinary" convert or someone who would evangelise  on  return  and
        thereby come to the attention of the authorities in line  with  the
        country guidance caselaw.
     6. The Secretary of State places reliance upon the decision in SZ  and
        JM (Christians, FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082  in  which
        reference is made to [138],  [140]  and  [148]  which  are  in  the
        following terms:




             "138.         We start by looking at whether the  Tribunal  in
                  FS and Others was justified in drawing a  distinction  (at
                  paragraph 173) "between the ordinary convert and those who
                  proselytise".  We readily accept the points made by  Canon
                  Coulton that all Christians for whom he  could  speak  are
                  required to spread the word and  to  evangelise.   He  was
                  speaking from  the  standpoint  of  the  Anglican  Church,
                  across which there is a broad spectrum of adherence.  Some
                  members are more evangelical than others.   Father  Basdon
                  also referred to  the  extent  that  Roman  Catholics  are
                  required to spread the gospel.  It is  self  evident  that
                  some  are  more  enthusiastic  or  serious   about   their
                  obligations than others,  and  the  point  has  been  made
                  throughout the evidence that the Iranian  authorities  are
                  particularly concerned with those who  do  proselytise  or
                  evangelise and attempt to convert  Muslims.   The  Canon's
                  view was essentially a theoretical, and aspirational, view
                  of the way Christians behave and he acknowledged that  not
                  everybody lived up to the ideal.  The empirical reality is
                  that not all come anywhere  near  to  the  ideal.   As  Mr
                  Desborough said "it is between an individual and God as to
                  whether to risk martyrdom".  The observations  in  FS  and
                  Others were, in our judgment,  sound  in  that  there  are
                  distinctions  between  the  ordinary   convert   and   the
                  proselytiser.  What needs to be looked at is not only  the
                  church to which an individual is an adherent, but the  way
                  in which that individual returnee  is  likely  to  behave.
                  When assessing that, it is right that it should  be  borne
                  in mind that the evidence of  Canon  Coulton  was  that  a
                  person who has come for himself, and by choice, to  a  new
                  religion is more likely to want to spread  the  word  than
                  someone who is second or later generation  and  born  into
                  it.  That is not a new concept, the zeal  of  the  convert
                  has been recognised in many different  contexts  over  the
                  years.  But that is not true of all  converts;  references
                  to generalisations of that kind are no substitute for case-
                  by-case assessment of the particular facts.


             139.     We had hoped that we would be able to include in this
                  determination clarification  of  the  precise  distinction
                  between evangelising and proselytising  because  this  has
                  exercised the Tribunal in  a  number  of  cases  involving
                  religious  persecution  (see,  for  example,  MJ  and   ZM
                  (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033 where  the
                  possible   distinction   was   between    preaching    and
                  proselytising).   On  the  basis  of  the   evidence   and
                  submissions that we have heard, we  are  not  able  to  do
                  that.  It is perhaps arguable that proselytising is a more
                  robust form of evangelising but the terms  should  not  be
                  used as terms of art and no conclusion can be drawn by the
                  use of one word in preference to the other.  The  Iranians
                  are unlikely to draw any distinction - the word  they  use
                  being Tabligh, the word for propaganda.   Subject  to  our
                  view that there  are  not  only  two  distinct  grades  of
                  convert, rather a spectrum of adherence, we have concluded
                  that the more accurate description of the  distinction  is
                  that between the ordinary convert and those who  undertake
                  'active evangelising'.  Canon Coulton  counselled  caution
                  in distinguishing between evangelical and evangelistic  as
                  mistakes have been made in the past.   evangelical  is  an
                  adjective meaning "a calling to the teaching of the gospel
                  or the Christian religion"  whereas  an  evangelist  is  a
                  person who seeks to convert others to the faith especially
                  by public preaching (Concise Oxford Dictionary).


             140. In conclusion, the question  of  whether  someone  is  an
                  "ordinary convert" in each case will  depend  on  its  own
                  facts.  There should not be findings based solely  on  the
                  denomination of the church  which  a  person  has  joined.
                  They must also be based on the  evidence  as  to  his  own
                  conduct as it will manifest itself in Iran.  When deciding
                  whether a convert is genuine, it is important to take care
                  because, as we set out earlier in this determination,  one
                  individual's view as to how another person  may  perceive,
                  or  practice,  or  understand  Christianity  may  be  very
                  different  from  the  reality  in  another   denomination,
                  country or community.   Insofar  as  it  is  necessary  to
                  consider whether it would  be  persecutory  to  expect  an
                  individual returning to modify his behaviour, the Tribunal
                  has  now   promulgated   HJ   (homosexuality:   reasonably
                  tolerating living  discreetly)  Iran  [2008]  UKAIT  00044
                  which deals with that issue.  The  Tribunal  identified  a
                  two stage approach.  The first is  to  decide  how  it  is
                  likely a possible returnee  will  behave.   That  question
                  must be decided from the evidence and facts of  each  case
                  including the way in which the person has behaved up until
                  the present.  It should not be based on how it is  thought
                  an individual should behave.   The  Tribunal  described  a
                  factual and not a normative approach.  The second stage is
                  a test to decide whether that  would  entail  that  person
                  having to live a life that  he  could  not  reasonably  be
                  expected to tolerate because doing  so  would  entail  the
                  suppression of many aspects of his identity (which  is  an
                  objective test).  In HJ it was the sexual aspects of  that
                  appellant's identity,  here  it  would  be  the  religious
                  aspects.  HJ was recently cited  without  comment  by  the
                  Court of Appeal in XY (Iran) v Secretary of State for  the
                  Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 911.


        ........


             148. It remains our view that for the ordinary convert (within
                  the meaning which we have slightly modified  from  FS  and
                  Others) that there is a risk, but  not  a  real  risk,  of
                  serious harm if returned to Iran.  We do  not  demur  from
                  the concept of the added risk factor as referred to in  FS
                  and Others."


     7. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on 13 March 2017. The operative parts of the grant are  in
        the following terms:


             "3.  The issue raised in the grounds was not mentioned in  the
                  refusal  letter  and  was   not   mentioned   in   closing
                  submissions for the respondent. Neither was  it  mentioned
                  in closing submissions for the appellant.  The  judge  was
                  therefore given no  assistance  by  either  side  in  this
                  respect, and the respondent is raising this issue for  the
                  first time in the grounds.


             4.   The above points would normally point to  a  refusal,  on
                  the basis that there will be no legal error in  the  judge
                  not dealing with a point not put before him,  but  I  have
                  decided to grant permission nevertheless. This is  because
                  country guidance cases have a special status, and the case
                  was included in the appellant's  background  bundle.  Even
                  where a relevant CG case  has  not  been  provided  it  is
                  arguable that a judge has a duty to consider it,  even  if
                  he has been let  down  by  both  representatives.  Current
                  country guidance should be raised  at  the  start  of  the
                  hearing, as it may inform  questioning  of  witnesses.  At
                  this hearing it appears that the distinction in SZ and  JM
                  was not raised at any point."



Error of law


     8. The lead case when  considering  an  appeal  by  Iranian  Christian
        converts is FS and others (Iran- Christian Converts) Iran CG [2004]
        UKIAT 00303 promulgated on 17 November 2004.   FS  is  intended  to
        provide the definitive approach  to  Iranian  Christian  cases  and
        reconcile the inconsistencies in earlier case law on  the  subject.
        In FS, the Tribunal made the following findings.


        (i)       At paragraph 153 the Tribunal indicated that  Christians,
             who were not converts, were at risk of discrimination but  not
             a real risk persecution.   ("The  evidence  shows  that  those
             Christians who are not converts from Islam and who are members
             of ethnic minority churches are not persecuted, at least as  a
             general rule."   The  Tribunal  accepted  that  they  suffered
             societal discrimination but did not accept that this  amounted
             to persecution.)


        (ii)      At paragraph 186 the Tribunal acknowledged the extent  of
             the discrimination faced  by  Christians  in  Iran  generally.
             ("All Christians suffer from  significant  legal,  social  and
             economic discrimination.  All known converts live in a society
             where these forms of discrimination are reinforced.  The legal
             regime, in theory, can be very harsh;  they  can  be  seen  as
             enemies of the theocratic state and their lives and  wellbeing
             can be threatened by  the  apparatus  of  the  state  and  the
             violent attentions of covertly sanctioned  religious  zealots.
             There is no state protection.   There  would  be  a  pervasive
             climate of fear, varying in degree, from  time  to  time,  and
             place to place.")


        (iii)     At paragraph 187 the Tribunal  found  that  the  ordinary
             convert would not be at a real risk of persecution. ("For  the
             ordinary convert, who is neither a leader,  lay  or  ordained,
             nor a pastor, nor a proselytiser  or  evangelist,  the  actual
             degree of risk of persecution or treatment breaching Article 3
             is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  the  protection  of   either
             Convention.  The reality is that a social  and  economic  life
             can  be  maintained;  Christianity  can   be   practiced,   if
             necessary,  cautiously  at  times,   by   church   attendance,
             association with Christians and bible study.  There  may  well
             be monitoring of services and identity checks.  They would  be
             able to practice, however, as most Iranian converts do. It  is
             realistic to expect that they may  sometimes  be  questioning,
             disruption, orders not to attend church, which may require the
             convert to stay away for a while.  But there is no evidence of
             a real risk of ill treatment during  such  questioning  or  of
             anything more than a  short  period  of  detention  at  worst.
             There is evidence of random or sporadic violence by the  likes
             of the Basiji, but at too infrequent a level to  constitute  a
             real risk  to  the  ordinary  convert.   The  longer  official
             questioning,  detentions  and  the  greater  risk  of  charges
             trumped up or menacingly vague or simply threatened are not  a
             real risk for the ordinary convert.")


        (iv)      At paragraph 189 the Tribunal found  that  proselytisers,
             evangelists and church leaders would be  at  a  real  risk  of
             persecution with the risk increasing the  higher  the  profile
             and role. ("We would regard the more active  convert,  pastor,
             church leader, proselytiser or evangelist as being at  a  real
             risk.  Their higher profile and role would be more  likely  to
             attract the  malevolence  of  the  licensed  zealots  and  the
             serious attention of the theocratic state when it  sought,  as
             it will do on occasions, to  repress  conversions  from  Islam
             which it sees as a menace and  an  affront  to  the  state  of
             God.")


        (v)  At paragraph 190 the Tribunal found that an  ordinary  convert
             with additional  risk  factors  may  be  at  a  real  risk  of
             persecution,   particularly   women.   ("Where   an   ordinary
             individual convert has additional risk factors, they  too  may
             be at a real risk.  We have already said that we  accept  that
             the conversions would become known  to  the  authorities,  but
             that is not of itself an additional factor because it  is  the
             very assumption upon which we are assessing risk.  These  risk
             factors may not relate to religious views at all.  It  is  the
             combination which may provoke persecutory attention where,  by
             itself, the individual conversion would have been  allowed  to
             pass  without  undue  hindrance.   A  woman  faces  additional
             serious discrimination in Iran, although  it  falls  short  of
             being persecutory merely on the grounds of gender.  But for  a
             single woman, lacking such economical social protection  which
             a husband or other immediate family or friends might  provide,
             the difficulties she faces  as  a  convert  are  significantly
             compounded.  Her legal  status  in  any  prosecution  is  much
             weaker; the risk  of  ill  treatment  in  any  questioning  is
             increased.   This  factor  tips  the  overall  nature  of  the
             treatment and risk into a real risk of persecution.")  By  way
             of further example, at paragraph 191 the Tribunal  noted  that
             FS had a past adverse political profile.  That profile was not
             one  which,   of   itself,   would   cause   any   significant
             difficulties.   However,  coupled  with  his  conversion,  the
             Tribunal concluded that  it  would  lead  the  authorities  to
             target FS for questioning and a higher  level  of  harassment,
             more akin to that which might be experienced by a proselytiser
             or evangelist,  generating  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
             treatment breaching Article 3.


        (vi)      At paragraph 192 the  Tribunal  said  that  fact  finders
             would have to decide how a convert was  likely  to  behave  if
             returned - cautiously and in a quiet way or  otherwise.  ("The
             issue  which  primary  fact  finders  will  need  to  consider
             carefully is the likely way in which a genuine  convert  would
             practice if returned.  It does not  follow  at  all  that  the
             particular practices adopted in the United  Kingdom  would  be
             those followed in Iran."  The  Tribunal  took  the  view  that
             primary fact finders should decide  whether,  in  practice,  a
             convert would behave cautiously on return or not.   Those  who
             behave cautiously and went about their Christianity in a quiet
             way were  unlikely  to  draw  the  adverse  attention  of  the
             authorities")


        (vii)     At paragraph 161 the Tribunal noted that there were those
             who, although not strictly proselytising, would be impelled to
             share or expound their beliefs with  those  who  had  not  yet
             received the Gospel. The Tribunal considered arguments on  the
             difference between proselytisation  and  "bearing  witness  in
             one's daily life" for want of a better expression.  The latter
             was covered by the Adjudicator's  reference  to  evangelising.
             The Tribunal said  "In  any  event,  the  distinction  between
             proselytising and bearing witness... is one which is likely to
             be lost on ... any suspicious or zealous Muslim.   Both  would
             be likely to be perceived by those in authority, the religious
             zealots, and those Muslims unaware of  the  distinction  ...as
             people  who  are  trying  to  persuade  the  hearer   of   the
             theological  correctness  of  Christianity  and  the  joy   of
             adhering to it. It is but a short step  from  proclaiming  the
             advantages and joy it has brought and suggesting  that  others
             should likewise benefit.   Neither  proselytising  or  bearing
             witness  or  evangelising  could  be  regarded   as   cautious
             approaches in Iran."


     9. In SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082
        the Tribunal held that conditions for Christians in  Iran  had  not
        deteriorated sufficiently to necessitate a change in  the  guidance
        in FS and others (Iran- Christian  Converts)  Iran  CG  2004  UKIAT
        00303.   For  some  converts  to   sacrament-based   churches   the
        conditions may be such that they could not reasonably  be  expected
        to return and their cases must be considered on HJ  (homosexuality:
        reasonably tolerating living discreetly) Iran  [2008]  UKAIT  00044
        grounds.
    10. The reference in SZ and JM to HJ (Iran) is to the decision  of  the
        Upper Tribunal. This case was appealed, eventually to  the  Supreme
        Court, and now carries the citation HJ (Iran) v Secretary of  State
        for the  Home  Department  [2010]  UKSC  31.  The  Supreme  Court's
        comments in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
        [2010] UKSC 31 arguably put a very different take on SZ and JM.
    11. It is important to consider the case law as a whole as well as  the
        specific findings made by the Judge. As shown  above  at  [57]  the
        Judge accepted AHS is a convert and  that  he  is  genuine  in  his
        faith. The Judge also found that he was satisfied  that  AHS  would
        follow that faith if returned to Iran. What the Judge does  not  do
        is provide further clarification on what is meant by AHS "following
        his faith".  Does this mean AHS will return to Iran and continue to
        attend church groups and church meetings without  proselytising  or
        attempting to convert others or does it mean that he will engage in
        activities designed to support or promote Christianity which  would
        bring him to the adverse attention of the authorities.
    12. Another question is whether it is in fact necessary to identify and
        make a finding concerning the conduct of an individual  on  return.
        The Judge refers to the decision in the case of FG v Sweden App  No
        43611/11 ECtHR Grand Chamber (2016) in which that Court noted  that
        the Swedish government accepted that  Christian  converts  were  at
        risk in Iran.
    13. It is also necessary to consider the  HJ  (Iran)  principles  which
        find that an  individual  cannot  be  expected  to  lie  about  the
        existence of a fundamentally held belief relevant to their personal
        identity if the reason for lying, and hence  denying  such  belief,
        would be to escape persecution. If AHS were to be returned to  Iran
        there is a possibility he will be questioned about what he has been
        doing in the United Kingdom. He cannot be expected to lie about his
        conversion from Islam to Christianity which will arguably place him
        at risk of ill-treatment amounting  to  persecution  sufficient  to
        engage the Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR.  If  AHS  is  not
        questioned on arrival but continues to follow his faith within Iran
        and is encountered and questioned by the authorities  whilst  doing
        so, he will again face a real risk of persecution or  ill-treatment
        sufficient  to  engage  Article  3  as  a  convert  from  Islam  to
        Christianity. If AHS follows  his  faith  in  Iran  in  a  discreet
        manner,  but  such  discretion  is  only  exercised  to  avoid  the
        persecutory consequences of being discovered by the authorities, it
        is arguable AHS is  entitled  to  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
        Convention in accordance with the HJ(Iran) v Secretary of State for
        the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 principle.
    14. Even if it is an arguable legal error for the  Judge  not  to  have
        considered the points raised by the Secretary of State there  still
        remains the question of whether any such error is material  to  the
        decision to allow the appeal. The basis of the appeal being allowed
        is the positive finding that AHS is a genuine convert from Islam to
        the Christian faith and  the  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-
        treatment arising from the same if  this  fact  was  known  to  the
        Iranian authorities. The country material relied upon by AHS  shows
        that even though the current President of Iran is  described  as  a
        "liberal" there has been  an  increased  level  of  repression  and
        arrests of Christians and followers of  other  minority  faiths  by
        those willing to prevent what they see  as  acts  contrary  to  the
        interests of Islam.
    15. Considering all the material relied upon by the parties, I find the
        Judges made no material error of law in allowing the appeal  as  it
        cannot be said that this finding is outside the range of reasonable
        findings open to the Judge  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  made
        available, the findings made, and country material.








Decision

    16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13 July 2017


