
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08230/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 April 2018                          |On 19 April 2018                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar, instructed by Malik & Malik solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Juss promulgated on 4 October 2017 dismissing her  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent of 10 August 2017 to  refuse  to
    grant her leave and to refuse to recognise her as a refugee.

 2. The appellant's case is that she arrived in the United Kingdom to  join
    her husband who is a Spanish national, their having been  married  some
    years previously.  She said she arrived on 7 April  2017  and  after  a
    week with her husband he left her in the house with somebody  known  as
    an Auntie Kalsoom and shortly after that a friend of her husband by the
    name of Faisal came to visit her and they started an affair.  This  was
    later discovered by the husband and by that  point  the  appellant  was
    pregnant.  It is her case that the child is not that of her  husband's,
    that he has divorced her under Islamic law, that he is not named on the
    birth certificate of the child  and  that  she  faces  difficulties  on
    return to Pakistan on the basis of being a lone woman with a child  the
    parentage of which is unknown.

 3. The judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  he  also  heard  from
    submissions from both Counsel for  the  appellant  and  the  Presenting
    Officer.  These are set out in some detail in his decision.

 4. The judge's decision on the facts is brief.  He concluded  first,  that
    it was not plausible that the applicant did not know the father of  her
    child given that she had entered on 7 May 2016.  Second,  that  he  did
    not accept that she had ever had a relationship  with  Faisal.   Third,
    that he did not accept that there was  any  pact  between  herself  and
    Faisal and this did not make sense.  Fourth, he  did  not  accept  that
    there were interpreting difficulties during  the  interview  which  had
    given reason to confusion about her answers and fifth he considered  it
    insignificant that the appellant and her  husband  were  still  married
    there being no explanation for that being offered.  The judge concluded
    that he did not accept that the appellant was a lone woman who would be
    returning to Pakistan without any male protection.  He  also  dismissed
    the appeal pursuant to Article 8.

 5. The challenge is brought on a number of grounds.  First, that there was
    a material error in that the applicant had clearly entered on  7  April
    2016 and that this had infected the remainder of the conclusion arising
    from that.  Second, that he had failed to give reasons as to why he did
    not accept that the appellant had never had sexual  relationships  with
    Faisal.  Third, that he  failed  to  give  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    account that there were interpreter difficulties and had failed to take
    into account  the  submissions  upon  that  point.   Fourth,  that  the
    decisions were perverse and fifth, he had failed to  consider  properly
    the position of the child having failed to  give  regard  to  her  best
    interests.

 6. I am satisfied that the judge did make a mistake of fact  with  regards
    to when the child had been born.  That was accepted  by  Mr  Walker  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.  The difficulty that then flows  from
    that, given the very limited reasoning in this decision, it that it  is
    the only reason given why the judge did not accept that the child could
    not have been that of her husband.  Indeed, her evidence had been  that
    she did not know that however the date is the  only  reason  given  for
    rejecting that.

 7. Second, there is no reasoning at all as to why the judge did not accept
    that there  were  interpreter  difficulties.   Whilst  there  are  very
    limited details given at paragraph 14(d)  of  the  appellant's  witness
    statement the matter was clearly raised in  cross-examination  and  was
    the subject of submissions by Counsel on behalf of the applicant.   The
    judge  should  have  explained  why  he  did  not  accept  there   were
    interpreter difficulties and said why he rejected the explanation given
    for the  apparent  inconsistencies  as  he  had  noted.   Further,  the
    reasoning in paragraphs 18 and 19 is such that it cannot  be  discerned
    why the judge reached his conclusions.

 8. Taking these reasons together and bearing in mind that the entirety  of
    the decision  is  based,  it  would  appear,  on  an  implicit  adverse
    credibility, the conclusion that the applicant  is  not  a  refugee  is
    unsustainable.  In the  circumstances  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to
    consider whether the judge erred in failing properly to have regard  to
    Section 55 of the UK Borders Act 2009.

 9. It follows for the reasons I have given for finding  an  error  of  law
    that the decision must be set aside.   It  also  follows  that  as  the
    errors in this case go to the core of the claim and are such  that  the
    credibility finding is unsafe, it therefore follows that  none  of  the
    findings of fact are safe or could be  preserved  and  accordingly  for
    these reasons I consider that it is appropriate,  given  that  all  the
    facts in this case would need to be remade, that the matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all  issues
    to be heard by a judge other than Judge Juss.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it to  make  a  fresh
    decision on all issues

 3. The new appeal must not be before First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss.

 4. The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal is preserved


Signed                                  Date:  19 April 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul






