
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08721/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2018                         |On 22nd January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    m a y
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Easterman, promulgated on 16th October 2018 following  a  hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 9th August 2018.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Kuwait (alleged), and was born on
    8th January 1985.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 2nd July 2018, refusing is  claim  for  asylum
    and for humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Essence of the Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is  that  he  is  an  undocumented
    Bidoon from Kuwait, such that were he to be returned back to Kuwait, he
    would be subjected to a risk of ill-treatment and persecution, contrary
    to the United Kingdom's international  obligations,  and  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.

The Judge's Determination

 4. In an extensive and well compiled determination, the  judge  considered
    the evidence before him, drawing attention to the country guidance case
    of NM [2004] UKIAT 00256  (see  paragraph  14  of  the  determination),
    before going on to consider at  considerable  length,  the  Appellant's
    case and arguments (see paragraphs 16 to 55).  The judge observed  that
    the Appellant claimed to be an undocumented Bidoon but that  "he  knows
    little about the history of Bidoons other  than  they  have  never  had
    documentation and have no rights in Kuwait" (paragraph 16).  The  judge
    also  observed  that  the  Appellant  claimed  to   have   attended   a
    demonstration only once and said that he was very scared  and  under  a
    lot of pressure being an undocumented Bidoon (paragraph 19).  The judge
    also heard evidence from  witnesses  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  (see
    paragraph 30 and paragraph 35).  Consideration was then  given  by  the
    judge to the identity  documents  that  the  Appellant  had  used  when
    visiting the Embassy in Jordan before coming to the UK.  The  Appellant
    had said that he had none.

 5. He was then asked how he  had  come  to  be  granted  a  visa  with  no
    documents and he said

         "He had no documents, and it was put to him that the documents were
         needed for a visa,  and  again  he  said  he  had  none,  no  birth
         certificate, no marriage certificate and he could not remember what
         documents his wife may have used.  He said he would not  have  been
         able to pick up his visa from Kuwait.  He was asked  what  document
         he had used to come  to  the  United  Kingdom,  whether  it  was  a
         passport or a travel document, it was almost impossible  to  get  a
         clear answer, but  eventually  he  said  it  was  a  paper  like  a
         passport, issued by the Embassy, which I indicated sounded  like  a
         travel document" (see paragraph 40).

 6. The judge heard from a third witness as well (see paragraph 46), before
    going on to hear submissions on behalf of the parties (paragraph 50 and
    paragraphs 69 to 79).

 7. In his conclusions, the judge was troubled by the  evidence  about  the
    Appellant's brother and how he came to the UK, as a result of his  wife
    coming to this country, and successfully claiming  asylum.   The  judge
    observed that,

         "No credible explanation was given to me about how it was  possible
         for an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon, to travel to Jordan,  and  then
         present himself to the British Embassy there, in order to  be  able
         to pursue his application for a spousal visa" (paragraph 88).

 8. The argument that it was for the Home Office  to  produce  evidence  to
    deal with these matters was not something  the  judge  was  happy  with
    (paragraph 89).  He also observed that it was very difficult to  accept
    an  argument  in  which  the  Appellant   constantly   reiterated   his
    illiteracy, his lack of knowledge, and an occasion when he  was  beaten
    up for working (paragraph 91).




 9. Eventually, the judge observed that the matter of "great  concern"  was
    "the Appellant's difficulty in  dealing  with  answering  a  number  of
    questions.  The reason he gave at one point was that it reminded him of
    the treatment he had from  the  Kuwaiti  authorities,  when  they  were
    questioning him, which brought back the memories of torture.  While  of
    course corroboration is not any sort of requirement,  and  it  will  be
    quite wrong to expect a person necessarily to be  able  to  corroborate
    their  account  with  external  evidence,  this  Appellant   has   been
    remarkably unspecific about the treatment he received  by  the  Kuwaiti
    authorities, other than saying that he was questioned, bad things  were
    said to him, and that he was beaten" (paragraph 97).

10. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the Appellant is an  undocumented
    Bidoon.  His witnesses at the hearing were his brother, his  sister-in-
    law, and others, some related to the Appellant, but  others  not.   The
    grounds state that the judge made a material error of  law  in  finding
    against the Appellant on a matter, the interview  shows  was  disclosed
    but not challenged in the refusal letter, of the Appellant's travel via
    Jordan.  The judge was also wrong to be so critical of the  Appellant's
    claim that he was able to convince the  Embassy  of  his  status  as  a
    spouse of an undocumented refugee without himself having documents.

12. On 8th November 2018 permission to appeal was granted  on  this  basis.
    It was stated that given that the Respondent Secretary of State did not
    challenge these matters, the Appellant was not able  to  address  them,
    not realising that they were in issue,  and  the  judge  arguably  made
    material speculative findings against the Appellant on these issues.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 18th December 2018, Mr Claire, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, had two fundamental submissions.

14. First, that, where it was the case that the judge had, in coming to his
    conclusions,  made  it  quite  clear  that  corroboration  was  not   a
    requirement with regard to  the  acceptability  or  external  evidence,
    (paragraph 97 - see above), nevertheless, in this case  the  judge  had
    then gone on to do exactly this.  This was clear from  what  the  judge
    said (at paragraph 98) following on from his initial statement, when he
    was dealing with  the  Appellant's  physical  scars  and  psychological
    scars, when the judge observed that

         "There is nothing to support his claim  to  mistreatment,  although
         one would have thought, if he had the sort of mental health  issues
         that were being suggested, someone might  have  taken  him  to  see
         either a doctor, or a psychiatrist, or referred him to one  of  the
         well-known organisations who assist those in positions such as  the
         Appellant" (see paragraph 98).

15. Accordingly submitted Mr Claire, the judge's eventual  conclusion  that
    he could not accept that  the  Appellant  had  been  mistreated  as  he
    claims, and that he was an undocumented  Bidoon,  was  wrongly  decided
    (paragraph 103), because it appears to have been a conclusion that  was
    based on the lack of corroboration in  relation  to  matters  that  the
    judge referred to (at paragraphs 97 to 98).




16. Second, the judge's observation that, that Appellant was able to appear
    at the Embassy in Jordan and satisfy them, that they were the spouse of
    a settled refugee, was also wrongly decided.  One only had to  look  at
    the Judge's comments:

         "While the Appellant's representative argued that it  was  for  the
         Home Office to produce evidence to deal  with  that  if  they  were
         unhappy  with   it,   the   reality   is   that   the   Appellant's
         representatives did not put their papers before the Tribunal  until
         a day before the hearing, having lodged the appeal in 2016.  I find
         it  very  hard  to  accept  that  somebody   without   any   formal
         identification document, would be able to appear at the Embassy  in
         Jordan and satisfy them, that they were the  spouse  of  a  settled
         refugee" (paragraph 89).

17. However, the comment in  this  regard,  submitted  Mr.  Claire,  was  a
    reference to the Appellant's brother, and how he had also come  to  the
    United Kingdom, and succeeded in lodging an asylum claim (see paragraph
    88).




18. Mr Claire submitted that there were  two  principal  difficulties  with
    such an observation.  First, it was irrational for the judge to look at
    the date of which the bundle  was  served  on  the  Tribunal  as  being
    relevant to assess the date when the Secretary of State ought  to  have
    produced their own evidence to rebut the Appellant's account.  This  is
    so because the Secretary of  State  would  have  been  aware  what  the
    Appellant's  transit  route  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  the   asylum
    interviews, or at the very least ought to have been aware of the  same.
    The second reason is that the judge reached speculative  findings  that
    the Appellant would not have been able to convince the Embassy  of  his
    status as the spouse of  an  undocumented  refugee,  and  had  done  so
    without any corroborative evidence, and  given  this  finding  made  in
    relation to the  brother,  the  Appellant  had  been  deprived  of  the
    opportunity  of  properly  having  the   Tribunal   address   his   own
    circumstances, in which he was similarly situated.

19. For his part, Mr Kandola submitted that a relevant question before  the
    Tribunal Judge below was how the Appellant had managed to obtain a visa
    to come from the British Embassy in Jordan to the United  Kingdom.   In
    that  regard,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  look   at   the   kindred
    circumstances of the Appellant's brother who  had  similarly  done  the
    same.  The judge had given proper reasons for why this was not credible
    (see paragraph 40),  when  the  judge  observed  how  despite  repeated
    questioning of  the  Appellant  to  provide  clarification,  the  judge
    frustratingly came to the conclusion that "it was almost impossible  to
    get a clear answer" (paragraph 40).

20. Second, in relation to corroboration, it was simply not the  case  that
    the judge had made his decision on the basis that there was a  lack  of
    corroboration from medical authorities and others in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claimed ill-treatment.  The  judge,  in  fact,  had  stated
    (paragraphs  97  to  98)  that  corroboration  "is  not  any  sort   of
    requirement, and it would be quite wrong to expect a person necessarily
    to give a corroborative account with external evidence".

21. However, this does not mean to say that the  judge  was  not  entitled,
    when considering the Appellant's claim that he  had  suffered  physical
    and psychological scars, to draw attention to the lack of  evidence  of
    any sort in relation to these  mental  health  issues  from  "either  a
    doctor, or a psychiatrist, or well-known organisations who assist those
    in positions such as the Appellant" (paragraph 98).

No Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   In  what  is  a
    detailed and thorough determination (running into 105 paragraphs),  the
    judge exhaustively embarks upon  a  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    claim, going through the various witnesses who attended on his  behalf,
    attempting painstakingly to ascertain the manner in which the Appellant
    claims to have come from Jordan to the United Kingdom.

23. Despite the fact, that this evidence was not  credible  (see  paragraph
    88), and despite it being  the  case  that  even  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claims of torture the judge found that "this Appellant  has
    been  remarkably  unspecific"  (paragraph  97),  the  judge   made   an
    independent finding that the evidence as put before him, was simply not
    credible.

24. The Appellant did not have evidence that persuaded the  judge  that  he
    had been subjected to ill-treatment.  The Appellant also did  not  have
    evidence that persuaded the judge that he had been simply able to go to
    a British Embassy in Jordon, like his father, and persuade them without
    any documentation, that he was a Bidoon, and then be able  to  come  to
    the United Kingdom.

25. It is not the case at all  that  the  judge,  having  directed  himself
    appropriately  on  the  issue  of  corroboration  of  the   requirement
    (paragraph 97) then went on to seek such corroboration.  What the judge
    was stating (at paragraph 98) was that "there is nothing to support his
    claimed mistreatment", and that in this regard one would  have  thought
    that "the sort of mental health issues that were being  suggested"  was
    such that these "might have taken him to see  either  a  doctor,  or  a
    psychiatrist, or referred him to one of the  well-known  organisations"
    (paragraph 98).  That was a conclusion that the judge was  entitled  to
    come to.  It did not amount to an attempt to seek corroboration.  There
    is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error.  The decision shall stand.

This appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th January 2019





