
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/08533/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |      Decision & Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 11th September 2017                   |      On 4th December 2017        |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr M Howarth; Counsel instructed by Rotherham
                  & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson; Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FIT") has made an anonymity order and  for
       the avoidance of any doubt, that order  continues.   AM  is  granted
       anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.  No   report   of   these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.    This
       direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
       being brought for contempt of court.


    2. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons by FtT Judge  Malik
       promulgated on 13th April 2017  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  an
       appeal against a decision made by the respondent on 26th  July  2016
       to refuse to grant asylum and Humanitarian  Protection.   The  Judge
       also dismissed the appeal on Article 2, 3 and 8 grounds.


    3. The appellant is a national of Malawi. Her  husband  and  their  two
       children (FM, born 14th April 2004 and VM, born 13th July 2012)  are
       dependants on her application. They are all nationals of Malawi.


    4. The background to the claim for asylum is that  the  appellant  fears
       return to Malawi because her eldest daughter is at risk  of  FGM  and
       initiation. The Judge of the FtT heard evidence  from  the  appellant
       and her husband. The appellant's case is set out at  paragraphs  [10]
       to [28] of the decision of the FtT Judge and I do not repeat it here.
        The Judge's findings as to the protection claim are to be  found  at
       paragraphs [31] to [35] of the decision. The Judge  found,  at  [33],
       that the appellant and her husband held no fear for  their  daughters
       and that they have fabricated their claim, having exhausted all other
       avenues to remain in the UK.  At paragraph [34], the Judge states:


             "Consequently, I find the appellant has  failed  to  discharge
             the burden upon her, I?find the appellant (and her husband) to
             be incredible witnesses and that the appellant has  fabricated
             her evidence to form what I find to be the basis  of  a  false
             asylum claim and I find the appellant's daughters would not be
             at risk for the reasons claimed."


       The findings and conclusions of the FtT Judge as to  the  asylum  and
       humanitarian protection claims are not challenged.


    5. The Judge then turned her attention to the  appellant's  claim  under
       paragraph 276ADE and Article 8.  The Judge found, at [36],  that  the
       requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the  immigration  rules  are  not
       met.  Adopting the five-stage approach set out in Razgar,  the  Judge
       found that the appellant and her family have established a family and
       private life in the UK.  She  was  satisfied  that  the  respondent's
       decision may have consequences of  such  gravity  as  potentially  to
       engage the operation of Article 8, that any such interference  is  in
       accordance with the law and has a legitimate aim.  The real issue  in
       this appeal was whether such interference  is  proportionate  to  the
       legitimate public end sought to be achieved.


    6. In reaching her decision, the Judge refers at paragraph [42]  of  her
       decision to the need to consider the best interests of  the  children
       and the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  -v-  SSHD
       [2011] UKSC 4.  The Judge also  refers,  at  paragraph  [43]  of  her
       decision, to s117B of the  2002  Act,  noting  that  the  appellant's
       eldest child is a qualifying child (she having been in the UK  for  a
       continuous period of 7 years) and that the issue is therefore whether
       it is reasonable for the  eldest  child  to  return  to  Malawi.   At
       paragraph [45], the Judge refers to the  decision  of  the  Court  of
       Appeal in MA (Pakistan) -v- Upper Tribunal &  Anor  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
       705, in which the Court considered how  the  test  of  reasonableness
       should be applied when determining whether or not it is reasonable to
       remove a child from the UK once he or she has been resident here  for
       seven years.  At paragraph [46] of her decision, the Judge states:


             "I accept the elder child having come to the UK at 4  years/10
             months has now been in the UK in excess of 7  years  and  that
             she  will  have  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  an  education  and
             inevitably made friends - but there is no reasonable  evidence
             before me to suggest she (nor her sibling) could not  continue
             with  their  education  in  Malawi,  commensurate  with  their
             abilities, just as their  parents  did,  surrounded  by  their
             family there - and make new friends and take up new interests.
              Whilst the appellant said her children do not speak Chichewa,
             there is nothing to assume with the support of  their  parents
             that they will be unable to acquire it  and  English  is  also
             spoken in Malawi...Whilst I accept there will be some  initial
             upheaval for the elder child, having lived the majority of her
             life in the UK, having considered her family and private life,
             of which there is only evidence of  her  schooling,  her  best
             interests (and that of her  younger  sibling),  which  in  the
             absence of evidence to the contrary will  be  to  remain  with
             their parents and to grow up in her home country, I find there
             are powerful reasons to satisfy me to  the  required  standard
             that it would not be unreasonable to expect her to  leave  the
             UK and return to Malawi  now.  This  equally  applies  to  her
             sibling. For the same reasons, I further  find  the  appellant
             (nor her husband) can meet  the  requirements  of  the  parent
             route, having found it would not be unreasonable to expect the
             elder child to leave the UK."


    7. At paragraph [47] of her decision, the Judge refers  to  the  matters
       that she is required to  consider  as  part  of  the  proportionality
       assessment under s117B of the 2002 Act.  The  Judge  noted  that  the
       appellant does not meet the requirements of the immigration rules and
       that the appellant, her husband, and their children would be returned
       to Malawi together.   The  Judge  was  satisfied  that  it  would  be
       reasonable for the appellant and her  husband  to  return  to  Malawi
       having made the prior finding that it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
       appellant's eldest daughter to return.


    8. At paragraph [48], the Judge concludes that  the  appellant  and  her
       husband have established a  private  life  in  the  UK  whilst  their
       immigration status has been  precarious.  She  also  noted  that  the
       appellant did not seek to regularise her presence  in  the  UK  until
       some 6 years after she became (sic)  appeals  rights  exhausted.   At
       paragraph [49], the Judge states:


             "Thus in determining  whether  the  respondent's  decision  is
             proportionate, I find the facts underpinning the  appellant's,
             her husband's and their children's family and  private  lives,
             taken either singularly or cumulatively, do not  outweigh  the
             legitimate purpose of immigration control.


    9. In the grounds of appeal advanced by the appellant  it  is  contended
       that appellant's eldest child arrived in the UK aged 4 years  and  10
       months, and she has now lived in the UK for 8  years  and  2  months.
       The appellant contends that more weight should have been have been to
       the private life established by the eldest child, especially  as  the
       FtT Judge had accepted that the eldest child is a  qualifying  child.
       The appellant contends paragraph 276ADE was included in the rules for
       good reason and when a child has lived  in  the  UK  for  over  seven
       years, just to over-ride the rule and simply say it  is  'reasonable'
       for the child to relocate with the parents, is not good enough.


   10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 4th
       July 2017. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not  the
       decision of the FtT Judge involved the making of a material error  of
       law, and if the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


   11. Before me, Mr Howarth submits that the fact of 7 years  residence  in
       the UK accumulated by the appellant's eldest daughter must  be  given
       "significant weight", and that there would need to be strong  reasons
       for leave not to be granted in such circumstances.  He  submits  that
       at paragraph [46] of her decision, the Judge did not attach,  as  she
       was required to, significant weight to the fact that the  appellant's
       eldest daughter had been in the UK for over seven years.  He  submits
       that the eldest child  has  put  down  roots  and  developed  social,
       cultural and educational links in the UK, such that it will be highly
       disruptive if she is required to leave the UK. He submits that it  is
       in the child's best interests to remain in the UK  and  the  findings
       made by the Judge do not support the conclusion that it is reasonable
       to expect the appellant's children to return to Malawi.


   12. In reply, Ms Peterson submits  that  the  Judge  considered  all  the
       evidence before her, and the findings and conclusions reached by  the
       Judge were open to her. She submits that the Judge correctly directed
       herself  to  the  relevant  statutory  framework,  and  the  material
       authorities.  Ms Peterson submits that at paragraphs [43] to [46]  of
       her decision the Judge adequately addressed the  real  issue  in  the
       appeal.  Having accepted at paragraph [43] of her decision, that  the
       eldest child is a 'qualifying child', the question for the Judge  was
       whether it is unreasonable to expect the eldest child  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom.   The  Judge  found,  for  the  reasons  set  out  at
       paragraphs  [45]  to  [46]  in  particular,  that  it  would  not  be
       unreasonable, to expect her to leave the UK  and  return  to  Malawi.
       That was a finding, on the evidence, that the Judge was  entitled  to
       reach.


DISCUSSION


   13. I remind myself that in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,
       the Court of Appeal held that a finding might only be set  aside  for
       error of law on the grounds of perversity if  it  was  irrational  or
       unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.


   14. It is common ground that  in  the  assessment  of  the  appeal  under
       Article 8, the best interests of  the  children  must  be  a  primary
       consideration. That meant that they  must  be  considered  first.  At
       paragraph [42] of her decision, the Judge noted that she is  required
       to consider the best interest of the children and that she has  taken
       into account the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania).  The
       Judge noted that the  best  interests  of  a  child  are  "a  primary
       consideration"  but  that  is  not   the   same   as   "the   primary
       consideration" and  still  less  "the  paramount  consideration.   At
       paragraph [45] of her decision, the FtT Judge refers to the  decision
       of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan).  She noted that the Court of
       Appeal held that the fact that a child had been in the UK  for  seven
       years should be  given  significant  weight  in  the  proportionality
       assessment.


   15. The Tribunal must "have regard" to  the  considerations  set  out  in
       section 117B of the Nationality,  immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       (section 117A).  The Judge properly identified that in  this  appeal,
       by operation of s117B(6) of the 2002 Act the public interest does not
       require a person's removal where, (a) the person has  a  genuine  and
       subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and (b)  it
       would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom.


   16. At paragraph [46], the Judge notes from the outset  that  the  eldest
       child came to the UK aged 4 years and 10 months, and that she has now
       been in the UK for  a  period  in  excess  of  7  years.   The  Judge
       addressed the question of whether it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
       children, and in particular, the eldest child, to  return  to  Malawi
       before turning to the wider proportionality assessment.  In  reaching
       her decision the Judge noted that there was no evidence before her to
       suggest that the children could not continue with their education  in
       Malawi.  The Judge noted that the children  do  not  speak  Chichewa.
       The Judge refers to the health of the children  and  having  rejected
       the account given by the appellant and her husband that the husband's
       family wish to subject the children to FGM, the Judge found that  the
       children would also be able to benefit from growing up surrounded  by
       their extended family in their home country.  The Judge accepted that
       there will be some initial upheaval for the  eldest  child,  who  has
       lived the majority of her life in the UK.  However, the  Judge  found
       that having considered her family and private life, of which there is
       only evidence of her schooling, her best interests, and that  of  her
       younger sibling in the absence of evidence to contrary,  will  be  to
       remain with their parents and to grow up in their home country.


   17.  Having  considered  the  best  interests  of  the  children,  in  my
       judgement, it was open to the Judge, on the evidence, to find that it
       would not be unreasonable to expect the eldest child  in  particular,
       to return to Malawi. The judge took into account the  best  interests
       of the children, and found that it was in  their  best  interests  to
       continue to live with those who cared for them namely, their parents.
       When considering the childrens'  circumstances,  she  considered  the
       length of time that they had spent in the UK,  their  education,  and
       the Judge noted that they could access education  and  healthcare  in
       Malawi.  The Judge noted the initial upheaval that would be caused to
       the eldest  child  in  particular.   The  judge  applied  the  public
       interest considerations under section 117 and in particular  S117B(6)
       on the basis that the eldest child had been in the UK for a period in
       excess of 7 years and she addressed the crucial question  of  whether
       it would be unreasonable to expect the eldest child in particular  to
       return to Malawi.


   18. In light of her findings at paragraph [46],  the  Judge  applied  the
       decision in MA (Pakistan) and had regard to the wider public interest
       in reaching a decision on the question of reasonableness  of  return.
       MA (Pakistan) concludes that the reasonableness test in this  context
       is wide ranging, effectively bringing back into play all  potentially
       relevant  public  interest  considerations,  including  the   matters
       identified in section 117B. The Judge placed in the balance, the fact
       that the appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  immigration
       rules either for asylum or for leave  on  the  basis  of  family  and
       private life. She found that the private life had been established at
       a time when the appellant's, and her husband's status in the  UK  was
       precarious.


   19. Having considered all relevant matters,  the  Judge  found  that  the
       facts  underpinning  the  appellant's,  her  husband's,   and   their
       children's family and  private  lives,  taken  either  singularly  or
       cumulatively, do not outweigh the legitimate purpose  of  immigration
       control.


   20. The decision of the FtT Judge  must  be  read  as  a  whole.  I  have
       carefully read the paragraphs that the appellant seeks  to  criticise
       and the decision as a whole. I am satisfied that it was open  to  the
       Judge on the evidence before her, to have reached the conclusion that
       it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave  the  UK.   It
       was open to the Judge to reach the conclusion  that  the  appellants'
       removal was proportionate having regard to all the circumstances. The
       Judge took into account the best interests of the children which  are
       a  primary  consideration  and  the  public  interest  in   effective
       immigration control. The Judge did not find  that  the  circumstances
       were  such  that  they  were  outweighed  by  the   public   interest
       considerations that she had identified. In my judgement, it was  open
       to the Judge to dismiss the appeal on the material  that  was  before
       her, for the reasons that she has given.


   21. Here, it cannot be said that the Judge's analysis of the evidence  is
       irrational  or  perverse.  The  Judge  did  not  consider  irrelevant
       factors, and the weight that she  attached  to  the  evidence  either
       individually or cumulatively, was a matter for her.  I  am  satisfied
       that the Judge's decision is a sufficiently  reasoned  decision  that
       was open to her on the evidence.


Notice of Decision


   22. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date       20th November 2017



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



FEE AWARD


The appeal is dismissed and there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date     20th November 2017


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




