
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08832/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Heard on 8th of May 2017                 |on 26th of May 2017               |
|Prepared on 10th of May 2017             |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                               MR AKHTAR SAEED
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jaffar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 31st of March 1986.  He
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Paul
      sitting at Taylor House on 11th of  January  2017  who  dismissed  the
      Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated  7th  of
      August 2016. That decision  was  to  refuse  to  grant  the  Appellant
      asylum.


   2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on a  student  visa  valid
      until 30th of October 2013. He then made a number of applications  all
      of which were refused by the Respondent. On 30th of  October  2013  he
      applied for Tier 4 leave which was refused on  10  December  2013.  In
      January 2014, he again applied for Tier 4 leave to  remain  which  was
      rejected on 28th of March 2014.  He  then  repeated  this  application
      which was refused with no right of appeal on 8th April 2014.  On  11th
      of May 2015, he applied  for  an  EEA  residence  card  but  this  was
      rejected on 26th of June 2015. The application was repeated on 16th of
      July 2015 and again rejected this time on 10th of  December  2015.  On
      20th of January 2016 he was arrested by  the  police  for  immigration
      offences and claimed asylum on 12th  of  February  2016.  It  was  the
      refusal of that claim for asylum which has given rise to  the  present
      proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The Appellant claimed to be at risk upon return to Pakistan because he
      had had some form  of  friendship  with  his  female  cousin  and  her
      immediate family objected to this. They  attacked  him  co-opting  the
      local police  into  ill  treatment  of  the  Appellant.  These  events
      occurred in or about 2009 before the  Appellant  came  to  the  United
      Kingdom. The  Judge  noted  the  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
      account  for  example  that  he  was   attacked   in   October   2009,
      alternatively December 2009 and by his cousin and  3  police  officers
      alternatively 6 men with 3 police officers. He had  been  hit  with  a
      hockey stick alternatively a scaffolding pole. The cousin had fired at
      him with an AK-47 automatic rifle  alternatively  only  one  shot  was
      fired. The Appellant was able to escape from the roof which  separated
      the houses of the 2 families because his  father  was  in  the  middle
      which was why he the Appellant was not shot. He was unable to  explain
      how the place had fled to had been located. He had been found in  that
      in a house alternatively by the side of the road.


The Decision at First Instance


   4. At paragraphs 25 onwards the Judge dealt with the credibility issue in
      the case. The Appellant had waited nearly 5 years  before  making  his
      asylum application. He had argued that the delay was  because  he  the
      Appellant did not know the asylum procedure but it was clear from  the
      Appellant's history of applications that the Appellant was well  aware
      of immigration procedures and that he had rapidly developed a facility
      for the making of applications. The Judge found no good reason for the
      late application for asylum  which  thus  undermined  the  Appellant's
      credibility.


   5. Although the Appellant had produced witness  statements  none  of  the
      makers  had  given  any  direct  evidence  (that  is  from  their  own
      knowledge) as to what had happened to  the  Appellant.  The  documents
      were mostly in the form of depositions from friends who had helped the
      Appellant  in  2009  and  were  accompanied   by   translations.   The
      depositions were briefly summarised  at  paragraphs  6  to  9  of  the
      determination. The Judge also referred to a deed of renunciation  made
      by the Appellant's father which was attached to the depositions.  This
      complained that the Appellant  had  disgraced  the  family  honour  by
      developing relations with a daughter  of  the  father's  brother.  The
      documents were  submitted  at  the  time  of  the  Appellant's  asylum
      interview 6 months after the Appellant had made his initial claim  for
      asylum. The purpose of the renunciation by the Appellant's father  was
      to make it plain the state of family affairs.


   6. Having dealt with the section 8 point (delay in claiming) and the lack
      of direct evidence the Judge gave his conclusions on the documents  at
      paragraph 28 saying that they had been put together for  the  purposes
      of the appeal and made several years after the event. They  could  not
      be relied on and adopting the principles of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT
      439 he placed no weight on the documents. At paragraph  29  the  Judge
      considered the Appellant's answers in the course of  cross-examination
      at the hearing  before  him.  The  answers  were  evasive,  vague  and
      unhelpful. The Appellant's excuses were in the Judge's view conclusive
      proof the Appellant was not  giving  a  truthful  account.  The  Judge
      finally came to the view at paragraph 30  that  no  such  incident  as
      complained of by the Appellant had ever taken place and there  was  no
      risk of persecution if the Appellant were to be returned to  Pakistan.
      He dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

   7. The Appellant appealed against that decision on three grounds  arguing
      firstly that the Judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  why  he
      rejected the Appellant's evidence. Secondly the Judge  had  taken  the
      wrong approach by placing no weight on the documents produced  by  the
      Appellant. If the Appellant's documents had no weight why  should  his
      passport have been considered genuine or his visa application  or  his
      nationality? The 3rd ground was that citizens were bound  in  Pakistan
      to follow the law but in some areas the authorities would not take any
      legal action against honour killing which would pose a  risk  for  the
      Appellant upon return.


   8. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Baker on 8th  of  November  2017.  In
      refusing permission to appeal she  found  that  the  Judge  had  given
      adequate reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account. The background
      material had been noted by the Judge  but  it  was  not  necessary  to
      specify elements of it. He plainly had taken it into account and there
      was no arguable error of law in rejecting the  whole  account  of  the
      Appellant. The Judge correctly identified the standard  of  proof  and
      applied the principles of Tanveer Ahmed in relation to the  documents.
      The issue of internal  relocation  (to  avoid  the  threat  of  honour
      killing) was  not  material  in  the  light  of  the  Judge's  adverse
      credibility findings.


   9. The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal to  the
      Upper Tribunal concentrating on the documentary side of  matters.  The
      grounds complained that the Judge had  said  the  documents  submitted
      were made several years after the event but that could not be  proved.
      I  pause  to  note  that  this  is  a  strange  submission  since  the
      depositions and the deed of renunciation were all  dated.  Continuing,
      the grounds argued that the documents were strong evidence  which  had
      not been  given  due  consideration  by  the  Judge.  In  finding  the
      Appellant's statement to  be  evasive  with  discrepancies  the  Judge
      failed to appreciate that the Appellant had made his statement 7 years
      after the events. The Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom  since
      2013 and had adapted to British culture and life. He  had  invested  a
      lot of money and time to study in this country and make his career.


  10. The renewed application came before Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley  who
      granted permission to appeal finding it  properly  arguable  that  the
      Judge may [his emphasis] have misapplied Tanveer Ahmed at paragraph 28
      of the determination (see paragraph 6 above) the Upper Tribunal  Judge
      granted permission on that issue only. In response  to  the  grant  of
      permission, the Respondent wrote to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  13th  of
      April 2017 pursuant to rule 24 saying that paragraph 28 needed  to  be
      read together with the other paragraphs of the determination at 25  to
      29. The Judge had considered all of the Appellant's  evidence  in  the
      round and none in isolation before coming to  the  decision  directing
      himself appropriately.

The Hearing Before Me

  11. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by counsel  who
      relied on his skeleton argument which stated that the  First-tier  had
      given two reasons for rejecting the Appellant's documentary  evidence:
      the timing of the claim and that the evidence was not  contemporaneous
      but hearsay. Both section 8 and the doctrine in Tanveer Ahmed required
      a global assessment of all  the  evidence.  In  this  case  there  was
      crucial evidence in the form of a corroborative medical report but the
      Judge made no findings on that. Even if the statements had  been  made
      several years afterwards, the Tribunal was not bound by  strict  rules
      of evidence and was entitled to have regard not only to direct witness
      evidence but an array of other statements and documents.  The  correct
      approach to determine a materiality of error of law was that  even  if
      the Tribunal had not made the error  as  to  the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant would it inevitably have reached the same conclusion?


  12. In oral submissions counsel argued that the Judge should have  carried
      out a global assessment  of  all  of  the  evidence.  The  Appellant's
      strongest point was this failure to make such a global assessment. The
      medical evidence showed that the injuries, cigarette burns on the left
      upper arm, were consistent with the Appellant's account of torture.


  13. For the Respondent, the Presenting Officer argued that the  Judge  had
      to start somewhere when setting  out  his  findings.  The  immigration
      history was the logical place to start. There had been a 5 year  delay
      in claiming. The documents, depositions before the Notary Public, were
      then put together but they could not be relied upon. All the Judge was
      saying was that they were made so long after the event  he  could  not
      place weight on  them.  The  Judge  also  considered  the  Appellant's
      demeanour when giving evidence and  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
      Appellant had given him a truthful account. Finally in  reply  counsel
      argued that the Judge had not taken account of all of the evidence.

Findings

  14. For the hearing before the Judge at first instance the  Appellant  had
      filed a 57-page bundle as well as a skeleton argument. In so far as it
      is relevant the bundle consisted of a statement of the Appellant dated
      6th of January 2017 and a series of exhibits at pages 36 to 57 of  the
      bundle. These were as described by the Judge, a number of  depositions
      made before a  notary  public  on  27th  of  July  2016  with  English
      translation, the deed of renunciation and photocopies of the  identity
      cards of the persons making the depositions.


  15. The Judge was not obliged to accept the veracity  of  the  documentary
      evidence but in the event that that evidence was  rejected,  which  in
      this case it was, the  Judge  was  obliged  to  give  reasons  why  he
      rejected the evidence. The Judge was concerned about  two  aspects  of
      the documents in particular. The first was  that  the  statements  had
      been made approximately 6 years after the events in question  and  the
      2nd aspect was that for the most part the statements  makers  repeated
      what they had been told by the Appellant as opposed to what they  knew
      from their own knowledge.


  16. It is fair to say  that  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  documentary
      evidence was concise.  He  could  for  example  in  the  case  of  the
      affidavit made by Mohammed Tariq query why the maker of that affidavit
      had said that the Appellant's attackers had  a  deep  influence  in  a
      political party without saying what political party that was meant  to
      be (particularly as the Judge was aware the Appellant claimed to  fear
      the Pakistan Muslim League). That the Judge did not go into that level
      of detail is not of itself a criticism as long as it is clear that the
      Judge did take into account all relevant  matters  and  gave  adequate
      reasons for his decisions.


  17. It is well established that a Judge is not obliged to set out each and
      every piece of evidence in  a  case.  The  Judge's  treatment  of  the
      statements is located in the  middle  of  his  conclusion  section  on
      credibility. I do not interpret paragraph 27 as being a  rejection  of
      the documents per se but rather that the Judge was indicating he could
      give little weight to them because they were not direct evidence  that
      the witnesses themselves had observed. As the witnesses' evidence  was
      based on what they had been told by the Appellant their  evidence  was
      only as good as the Appellant's evidence.  If  the  Appellant  was  an
      unreliable witness then unless in July 2016 it could be said  that  he
      had had a sudden rush of reliability  there  was  little  weight  that
      could be placed on what he had told his  witnesses  to  say  in  their
      statements.


  18. The Judge noted the reference to Tanveer Ahmed in the  refusal  letter
      at paragraph 22 thereof in which the Respondent stated that the effect
      of Tanveer Ahmed was that  it  was  for  the  Appellant  to  show  the
      documents he relied on to support his  case  could  indeed  be  relied
      upon. The Respondent did not simply  dismiss  the  documents  at  that
      point but went on to say at paragraph 24 of the  refusal  letter  that
      Home Office contacts in Rawalpindi stated that an affidavit had to  be
      backed up by a police report and registered in court. The stamp  paper
      was available for purchase from the court and for an additional fee  a
      person could  get  this  notarised  without  it  being  read.  As  the
      Appellant had not filed a case with the police the  Respondent  placed
      little weight on the documents which were described as subjective  and
      self-serving.


  19. To a certain extent all evidence presented by a party is  self-serving
      but what it appears the Respondent means in this  context  is  as  the
      Judge put it that the documents had been put together for the purposes
      of this appeal rather than some form  of  contemporaneous  account  of
      matters for example to  assist  a  police  investigation.  It  is  not
      entirely clear from the permission to appeal what the Upper Tribunal's
      criticism of the Judge's application of Tanveer Ahmed  is.  The  Judge
      was adopting the (legally correct) reasoning contained in the  refusal
      letter. Furthermore, the  Judge  was  not  viewing  the  documents  in
      isolation. As was submitted to  me  the  Judge  had  to  set  out  his
      conclusions in some form of order which meant making  an  analysis  of
      parts of the evidence before making an analysis of the  remainder.  It
      did not mean he was jumping to conclusions before making  his  overall
      conclusions. I find that the Judge did indeed consider the evidence in
      the round as can be seen from the order in which he took the evidence.


  20. Importantly,  the  documents  were  not  found  by  the  Judge  to  be
      impressive and it is difficult to  argue  with  that  assessment.  The
      plain fact of the matter was they were made several  years  later  and
      not contemporaneous to the events thus they relied heavily on what the
      Appellant had told the witnesses before they made the depositions. The
      Appellant was himself an unreliable witness,  the  documents  produced
      simply did not take the case any further.


  21. The renunciation document is also an  unimpressive  document.  Leaving
      aside the Respondent's complaint that the document  was  a  copy  only
      what clearly concerned the Judge was that this document too was made 7
      years after the events. Why would the Appellant's father make  such  a
      declaration so many years after what had happened particularly as  the
      deed of  renunciation  itself  refers  to  "from  today  onwards  [the
      Appellant] shall be responsible for his acts and deeds"? The documents
      simply raised far too  many  questions  to  be  a  reliable  piece  of
      evidence. I do not find therefore that there has been any error of law
      material or otherwise in the way that the Judge has  dealt  with  this
      case or in the determination. The evidence project  presented  by  the
      Appellant was unreliable.


  22. Whilst the Appellant produced a medical report  showing  that  he  had
      marks on him, the best that that medical report could do  was  to  say
      that the marks were consistent  with  the  Appellant's  account.  They
      could have been consistent with any number of other explanations.  The
      burden was on the Appellant to  show  that  his  explanation  was  the
      correct one. The Judge did not find the Appellant  to  be  a  credible
      witness  and  did  not  accept  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
      complaints, see paragraph 30 of the determination. The  appeal  before
      me is no more than a disagreement with the result. The  Appellant  was
      an unreliable witness and the Judge rejected the Appellant's  evidence
      and gave cogent reasons why  documentation  produced  to  support  the
      Appellant's case undermined it rather than the reverse.


  23. The Appellant had substantially delayed his claim for asylum and could
      give no good reason for that delay. The series of applications made by
      the appellant belied his claim not to know how to claim asylum as  the
      Judge pointed out. The delay in claiming also fed into  the  delay  in
      making the statements further undermining their reliability.


  24. Although the Appellant's onward grounds of appeal  make  reference  to
      the time he spent in the United Kingdom, no mention of any claim under
      Article 8 was made in the skeleton argument submitted to the Judge  at
      first instance nor from reading the determination does it appear  that
      any submissions were made in relation to Article 8 at the hearing.  No
      submissions were made to me in relation to Article  8.  This  must  be
      right, the appellant had been in the United Kingdom without leave  for
      a number of years while he made a series of meritless applications. It
      is difficult to see on what basis the appellant could have argued that
      he should be granted leave to  remain  under  Article  8  outside  the
      Immigration Rules. No such argument was made  at  first  instance  and
      therefore did not fall to be dealt with in the Judge's  determination.
      I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed


I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 10th day of May 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 10th day of May 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

