
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08136/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 March 2020                     |On 19 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     AKA
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr I Majid, instructed by Minority Development &
Advocacy
For the respondent:    Mr a McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Brookfield  promulgated  3.12.19,  dismissing  on  all
    grounds his appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    dated 5.8.19, to refuse his claim for international protection made  on
    the basis of a well-founded fear of  persecution  or  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm arising out  of  activities  as  a  smuggler  (Kolbar)  of
    illicit goods, including alcohol and tobacco, across the  Iraqi/Iranian
    border. He claimed to have been ambushed and his uncle injured but that
    he escaped. He also claimed that he did not attempt to  get  status  in
    Iran because of his father's involvement with the KDPI.

 2. Judge Brookfield found the  appellant's  factual  claim  not  credible,
    concluding that he had fabricated the account and was not at risk  from
    the Iranian authorities on return, being no more than a failed  Kurdish
    asylum seeker with no political profile.  The  appeal  was,  therefore,
    dismissed.

 3. In essence, the grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
    in law in relation to the issue of the appellant's nationality and  his
    sur place political activities,  attending  demonstrations  and  making
    Facebook posts.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne granted permission to appeal  on  all
    grounds on 15.1.20, find it arguable that the judge failed  to  make  a
    specific finding on the appellant's nationality which was identified in
    the refusal decision as a matter in dispute.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 6. I confirmed at the outset of the hearing that it  was  the  appellant's
    case that he is a de facto Iranian national but without  documentation.
    Mr McVeety confirmed that although the respondent did not  accept  that
    he was Iranian, on his claim to be so, he would be returned to Iran. It
    was also confirmed that his family, including his mother  continues  to
    reside in Iran. His father passed away some years ago.

 7. In relation to nationality, the appellant claimed that his mother is an
    Iranian national but that he was unsure of his father's nationality. He
    claimed to have been born in Iraq and that he and  his  family  members
    all had Iraqi ID documents. However, his family relocated to Iran  when
    he was 7  years  of  age.  He  claims  that  because  of  his  father's
    involvement with the KDPI, the family did not attempt to get status  in
    Iran.

 8. At [26] of the refusal decision, it is pointed out that  to  obtain  an
    Iraqi ID card one of the parents has to  be  an  Iraqi  national;  CSID
    cards are only issued to Iraqi nationals. That would  suggest  that  at
    least one of his parents is Iraqi. The respondent gave consideration to
    whether the appellant was an Iranian national because of  his  mother's
    claimed Iranian citizenship.  At  [32]  of  the  refusal  decision  the
    respondent concluded that "it is considered that your  claimed  Iranian
    nationality is in (sic) unknown." Mr McVeety accepted it was left up in
    the air without a positive assertion that the appellant is of any other
    nationality. At [33]  it  was  not  accepted  that  he  is  an  Iranian
    national, although at [36] it  was  accepted  that  he  is  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity. At [55] the respondent concluded  that  his  nationality  is
    unknown and at [62] it was not accepted that he is a national of Iran.

 9. The primary ground is that the judge should have resolved the issue  of
    disputed nationality. At [2] the grounds  assert  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to make a clear determination on the  appellant's
    nationality, which, it was submitted, "is a crucial point in this  case
    and formed the  main  basis  on  which  the  Home  Office  refused  the
    appellant's claim for asylum". The appellant had relied  on  an  expert
    report as to nationality, which does not appear to have been  addressed
    in the First-tier Tribunal decision. Mr McVeety accepted that the judge
    should have made a finding on nationality but argued that  the  failure
    to do so was not in fact material to the outcome of the appeal.

10. It is clear from a  reading  of  the  decision  that  Judge  Brookfield
    proceeded throughout on the assumption that the appellant is an Iranian
    national and would  be  returned  to  Iran,  finding,  for  example  at
    [11(xx)] that there would be no risk on return to  Iran  and  that  his
    family would be able to have Iranian documentation issued for  him  and
    forwarded to him in the UK, which would in turn enable  him  to  obtain
    either a laissez-passer, or an Iranian passport, and that he would  not
    be at risk of persecution or serious harm on return to Iran.

11. As set out  above,  the  refusal  decision  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant was a national of Iran  and  found  that  he  had  failed  to
    establish a real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  in  Iran.  His
    nationality was found to be unknown. However, at  [63]  the  respondent
    proceeded to consider the appellant's claim on the basis of a  risk  on
    return to Iran, "as this is the country of which  you  claim  to  be  a
    national, the Home Office will argue that you are  not  a  national  of
    that country, so the appeal must fail." At [64]  the  refusal  decision
    states, "Notwithstanding that conclusion,  if  the  Tribunal  considers
    that you are in fact a national of Iran and that there is  no  risk  on
    return, you will be returned to Iran."

12. As stated above, the First-tier Tribunal Judge proceeded on  the  basis
    that the appellant will be returned to Iran, which is  the  nationality
    he claimed in his screening interview. For the cogent reasons  set  out
    in the decision, the claim of a well-founded fear of persecution  or  a
    real risk of serious harm on return to Iran, which was the entire basis
    of the appellant's claim, was rejected and there  has  been  no  appeal
    against the adverse credibility findings. Thus,  if  the  appellant  is
    returned to Iran, where he says he has lived since the  age  of  7  and
    where his family  continue  to  reside,  he  will  not  face  any  risk
    entitling him to international protection.

13. Whilst the judge did not resolve the issue of  nationality,  the  judge
    proceeded on the basis of the appellant's claimed Iranian  nationality,
    accepting that he had at present no Iranian ID documentation.  Although
    the respondent did not accept his claimed  nationality,  there  was  no
    counter-claim or assertion that he was of any  other  nationality.  The
    appellant's case was therefore taken by the Tribunal at its highest, on
    the basis of return to Iran. If the appellant claims to be Iranian, the
    Home Office has confirmed that he will be returned to Iran,  where  his
    family  live.  However,  he  will  face  no  risk  entitling   him   to
    international protection. In the circumstances, it cannot be a material
    to fail to decide the issue of nationality. In essence, by default, the
    judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  accepting  the  claimed   Iranian
    nationality. It follows that there can be no material error of  law  in
    this regard.

14. The other grounds relate to whether  the  appellant  could  delete  his
    Facebook account and be safe on return and his sur place attendance  at
    demonstrations. It is argued that the fact  that  the  appellant  is  a
    'Facebook activist' is sufficient to put him at risk on return as a low-
    level activist. It is asserted that the appellant cannot be required to
    delete his Facebook account. This ground has no merit in the  light  of
    the judge's rejection of his political activism as being  not  genuine.
    The appellant failed to provide evidence as to whether his account  was
    set for private viewing by friends only or were in the  public  domain.
    At [11(xviii)] the  judge  pointed  out  that  Facebook  posts  can  be
    manipulated, including the dates of posting, and the  appellant  failed
    to produce a copy of his activity log. Further, if the appellant has no
    genuine political interest, as found by the judge, he is  not  entitled
    to be protected in  a  lie  and  there  is  no  reason  why  he  cannot
    permanently delete his account, or individual postings,  before  return
    to Iran. Mr McVeety pointed out that the case law is to the effect that
    there is no risk to low-level attendees at meetings  or  demonstrations
    unless they are already known to the authorities. However, there was no
    evidence that the Iranian authorities were aware of him or  his  posts,
    which seemed unlikely to the judge, given that he has no formal Iranian
    status and there was no evidence that the Iranian authorities were  now
    or ever had been aware of his former presence in Iran, or that  he  was
    resident  in  Iran,  given  his  claimed  lack  of   Iranian   identity
    documentation.

15. The same point relates to sur place  participation  at  demonstrations;
    there is no reason for the Iranian authorities to link the appellant as
    a person of adverse interest, as the judge found at [11(xiii).  On  his
    own account he cannot be known to the Iranian  authorities  as  he  has
    never been documented in Iran. It was for those reasons that the  judge
    was entitled to conclude at [11(xix)] that the appellant would be of no
    adverse interest to the Iranian authorities as a result  of  sur  place
    activities in the UK. There is no error of law in this regard.

16. For the reasons set out above, none  of  the  grounds  demonstrate  any
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.








                    Signed


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated 12 March 2020
