
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08626/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 April 2019                     |On 18 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                             HANG THI THANH BUI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Quadi, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff).
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Vietnam.  She was  born  in  June  2001.
    She came to the United Kingdom in December 2016 in order to undertake a
    years' study at EF Academy Language School in Torquay.  She was to live
    with an English host family.  The expenses of her travel and her course
    fees and maintenance during the year-long course were provided  by  her
    family; they also provided her with pocket money.  On 7 June  2017  she
    claimed asylum.   After  investigation  of  her  claim  the  respondent
    refused it on 6 December 2017.   For some reason of which  we  are  not
    aware, that decision was not served on her until  25  June  2018.   The
    appellant appealed against the refusal.  A  hearing  was  fixed  for  8
    August 2018.  The appellant's  representative,  Migrant  Legal  Project
    (Cardiff) sought an adjournment to obtain expert evidence.  They  asked
    for a hearing date after 7 September 2018.  The hearing  was  then  re-
    fixed for 10 September 2018.  On receipt of the notice of that hearing,
    the representatives wrote again.  They complained that they  had  asked
    for an adjournment until a date after 25 October.  They included a copy
    of an adjournment request, referring  to  the  appellant's  substantive
    hearing date "currently  set  for  8  August  2018".   The  adjournment
    request is dated 23 July 2018.  It does indeed request  an  adjournment
    until after 25 October 2018.  That however, we should  make  clear,  is
    not the document actually  sent  to  the  Tribunal  on  23  July  2018.
    However, the Tribunal appears  to  have  accepted  what  Migrant  Legal
    Project (Cardiff) said.  A further adjournment was granted.  A new date
    fixed was 26 October 2018.  The hearing appears to have taken place  on
    that date, before Judge Boyes (although his determination  indicates  a
    hearing date of 16 October 2018).  Judge Boyes  dismissed  her  appeal.
    Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was sought and was granted  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge on 27 November 2018.

 2. There were two substantive elements to the claim before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The first was that the appellant fears persecution as a  Hoa
    Hao Buddhist if she is returned to Vietnam.  The  second  is  that  she
    says that she has lost contact with her parents and if she is  returned
    to Vietnam she will be homeless and at risk of being  trafficked.   The
    grounds of appeal  to  this  Tribunal  take  issue  with  Judge  Boyes'
    findings on each of those points, and raise two  further  issues.   The
    first is that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  medical  evidence
    properly in terms of the appeal as a whole but  instead  committed  the
    "Mibanga error" of reaching a finding  on  credibility  without  taking
    into account medical evidence that might reflect on  credibility.   The
    second is that the judge failed to take into  account  the  appellant's
    age and its effect on her ability  to  give  cogent  and  comprehensive
    evidence.  We have born  in  mind  those  two  grounds  throughout  our
    consideration of this appeal, because of the effect  that  concerns  of
    that sort have on  the  judge's  primary  findings  of  fact.   It  is,
    nevertheless, right to start with the  material  that  was  before  the
    judge.

 3. The position of Hoa Hao Buddhists in  Vietnam  is  complex.    For  the
    present purposes the following simplified account will serve.  Hoa  Hao
    Buddhists as a whole are  subject  to  some  suspicion  and  occasional
    investigation by the Vietnamese state.  There is a state-approved  part
    of the sect.  Some followers, however,  have  declined  to  give  their
    allegiance to the state-approved part.   The factions  or  sects  which
    they follow have been subject to action by  the  government  which  may
    sometimes amount to persecution.  Again for present purposes  only,  we
    are content to assume, as appears to have been assumed by the judge and
    both parties before us, that the appellant may have a well-founded fear
    of persecution if, but only if, she is a follower of the  part  of  Hoa
    Hao Buddhism that is not approved by the State.

 4. The appellant's claim for fear of persecution on  grounds  of  religion
    was not part of her original claim.  By the time of her interview,  she
    had added it as a factor causing her fear of return, and she was asked,
    and answered, questions about her religious affiliations and  practice.
    These began with the exchange:

         "Q. 89.  Have you had any problems  because  of  your  religion  in
             Vietnam?


         A.        A bit because I know with this religion,  Vietnam  banned
             this religion."


 5. At questions 117-18 she said that a typical  religious  ceremony  would
    require an altar and incense  and  prayer;  they  were  quite  low  key
    "because it's banned in Vietnam".   At  131  the  appellant  said  that
    because the religion was banned in Vietnam you have to  do  it  quietly
    and not let the police know, because if  the  police  know  they  would
    arrest people.  She said that she was "warned" in 2015.   There  was  a
    celebration in a "secret place".  Police came and arrested some people.
     They took her into a room and questioned her.  They told  her  not  to
    participate in other  ceremonies.   She  attributed  her  inability  to
    remember very much about the basis and practice of her religion to  the
    fact that she had had a car accident and hurt her head  in  2016.   She
    said that she had not  mentioned  any  of  these  difficulties  in  her
    written statement, because the interpreter was "a bit  young"  and  the
    appellant did not want not to be liked.  She  would  not  practice  her
    religion openly if she went back to Vietnam, because "it is banned".

 6. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant's case was  supported  by
    an opinion prepared on her behalf by Anh Tran.  This, we understand, is
    the report which was going to be available by 31 August: it is in  fact
    dated 8 October 2018.  The author of the report was asked to comment on
    the appellant's general account of events whether she has practiced  or
    is practising as a Hoa Hao Buddhist  as  claimed.   She  met  with  the
    appellant for two hours in September  2018,  the  appellant's  guardian
    (who, other evidence shows has attempted to encourage her  to  practice
    her religion in the United Kingdom) was also present.   Anh  Tran  sets
    out matters relating to the practice of Hoa Hao  Buddhism  in  Vietnam.
    She indicates clearly, however, that the appellant "does not know which
    branch of the Hoa Hao Buddhist sect, the "registered one" under the law
    on religion of Vietnam, or the pure Hoa Hao" she belongs  to,  although
    her answers are wholly consistent with her following Hoa Hao Buddhism.

 7. The particular difficulty that the evidence  does  not  show  that  the
    appellant has any allegiance  to  the  unauthorised  part  of  Hoa  Hao
    Buddhism does not appear to be the subject of  any  submissions  in  Ms
    Quadi's skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It  is
    obviously a major difficulty for the appellant.  It does not appear  to
    us that any  concerns  about  the  appellant's  memory  (in  particular
    ability to recall traumatic events) or maturity can fill the  gap:  the
    position was that, when  talking  to  a  supportive  expert,  with  the
    support of her foster carer, she did not say anything which enabled the
    expert to conclude that she would be in the religious group that is  at
    risk of persecution.  In these  circumstances  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the appellant had failed to discharge the burden of proof, even to
    the appropriate low standard, is far from surprising.  Indeed it is not
    easy to see the basis upon which he  could  have  rationally  concluded
    that the appellant followed unregistered Hoa Hao Buddhism.  As we  have
    said, all Hoa Hao Buddhism is the subject of some  suspicion  from  the
    authorities, and all that the appellant could say was that the practice
    of what  she  remembered  so  little  was,  she  understood,  "banned".
    Indeed the grounds of appeal to this Tribunal do not raise  any  direct
    challenge to the judge's findings on  this  point.   Instead,  under  a
    heading "Failure to Consider Age", where  Ms  Quadi  asserts  that  the
    judge "fails to consider A's age and its effect on her ability to  give
    cogent and comprehensive evidence" there is this:

         "It is arguable that Judge Boyes' failure to properly consider  her
         age/maturity inhibited a fair finding of whether A was part of  the
         unregistered Buddhist sect.  In addition, A's evidence in  relation
         to conduct and practice of her religion clearly indicated that  she
         was part of the unregistered sect."

 8. That appears  to  us  to  be  merely  disagreement  with  Judge  Boyes'
    conclusions on the evidence before him.  Besides, it is perfectly clear
    from what the experts said that the material deriving from  A  did  not
    demonstrate that she  was  part  of  the  unregistered  sect.   It  was
    equivocal.

 9. It seems to us that Judge Boyes made no error of law in his  assessment
    of the evidence on this point.  In any event, however, it is  not  easy
    to see how  the  risk  claimed  by  the  appellant  could  arise.   Her
    knowledge of Hoa Hao Buddhism does not seem to be such that  she  would
    have any desire to practice anything other than the state approved form
    of it.  There is no evidence of  the  persecution  of  children  merely
    because they have been brought up in the unregistered sects.  Thus,  on
    her return, persecution would arise neither from her past nor from  her
    present activities.  Be that as it  may,  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude as he did.

10. So far as the appellant's links with  her  family  are  concerned,  the
    appellant's evidence was that she was regularly in  touch  with  family
    members during most of her course, but towards the end of it  she  lost
    contact  with  her  parents.   Her  last  communication  was  with  her
    grandmother who appeared unwilling to discuss very much, but said  that
    her parents were bankrupt  and  her  father  had  been  arrested.   Her
    written statement in support of her asylum claim, prepared in  her  own
    time and dated 17 August 2017, confirms that the full  account  of  why
    she is claiming asylum is that she feared that: "I will be homeless and
    forced to work to pay my parent's debt if I return to  Vietnam.   There
    were some problems going on with my  family  even  before  I  left;  my
    mother used to shout at me and sometimes hit me.  I  don't  think  they
    want me there.  They have abandoned me here.  I think  they  owe  money
    for sending me to the UK."  When she  was  interviewed  on  31  October
    2017, she said again that her mother had sometimes slapped her and used
    a cane when she was young.  She said that in April 2017 she had  called
    her parents and asked for some money and they said they are busy.  That
    was the last time  she  spoke  to  them.   Her  conversation  with  her
    grandmother was in May.  She had not been able to reach her grandmother
    after that.  She gave the interviewer her grandmother's number  so  far
    as she could remember it as  [~].   She  then  explained  how  she  had
    reached the view that she would  be  in  danger  on  return.   She  had
    reasoned that if the family had gone bankrupt she would have  no  house
    and nowhere to stay; that they would owe money to the mafia or  to  the
    banks.  She did not know whether there had been any  contact  with  the
    mafia.  She thought that the banks would make her repay the debt.   She
    said she did not want to live with her grandmother.  The appellant  has
    also said that she does not want to get in contact  with  her  parents,
    because she thinks they do not want her.

11. Also before the judge was  a  certain  amount  of  background  evidence
    relating to the appellant's own ability to be contacted.  She  had,  as
    we have said, set off from Vietnam with  the  scheme  of  being  looked
    after by an English family while she undertook her studies.  On the day
    that she went to Croydon for her first interview, 7 June 2017, she lost
    her phone.  After she made her claim she was taken into local authority
    care, so she changed  her  address  on  15  June  2017.   There  is  no
    suggestion that the appellant has ever sought to get in touch with  her
    family by letter.

12. The respondent, however, did make investigations.  It raised an inquiry
    through the appellant's school, EF Academy,  and  they  made  inquiries
    through their Vietnam office.  The result was, in due course, an  email
    dated 5 December 2017 from EF Academy in Torquay, reading as follows:

         "I can confirm we received confirmation, through a colleague in our
         EF Academy Vietnam Admissions Office, from the  Students'  Province
         Peoples Committee that [the  appellant's]  parents  have  not  been
         arrested nor are there any political or religious issues of concern
         to report and  this  information  was  provided  to  ...  the  Home
         Office."

13. That email is referred to in the letter refusing the appellant's claim.
     It was available to the appellant and those advising her from, at  the
    latest, the time when the decision refusing her claim was served on her
    in June 2018.  The notice of appeal, dated 9 July 2018, raises no issue
    about it.  It was before the judge.  The judge's  conclusions  on  this
    issue are set out in paragraphs 33  and  34  of  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "33. I turn to the issue in relation  to  the  appellant's  parents
             which is the second distinct issue in this case.  Having given
             the matter some careful thought and consideration I am of  the
             view that the appellant is neither credible or  believable  in
             relation to her claims made about not being  able  to  contact
             her parents, her grandmother, that they have been arrested and
             all made bankrupt or that she will  be  sent  into  penury  if
             returned to Vietnam.

         34.  The letter produced by the Home Office at pages H1 and  H2  of
             the  respondent's  bundle  is  telling.   EF  Academy,  I   am
             satisfied, have no axe to grind in relation to this  appellant
             and no reason whatsoever to lie to the Home Office in relation
             to the welfare of her parents.  The  information  provided  is
             clear, unambiguous and it is in direct contradiction to  those
             claims  made  by  the  appellant.   The  appellant  has  never
             presented any evidence other than her  oral  claims  that  her
             parents  have  been  arrested,  made  bankrupt,  or  had  been
             involved with Mafia-type organisations such  that  would  lead
             the appellant to be placed in dire or grave  circumstances  on
             her return.  The appellant has only challenged  this  document
             by way of comment in saying one does not know  the  extent  of
             the enquiries made.  To that remark, the answer is we do know.
              They have conducted a sufficient enquiry so as to be able  to
             tell a Government Department and ultimately a Court that there
             is nothing wrong or has happened to the appellant's parents."

14. We need to set out Ms Quadi's ground of appeal in full:

         "Ground 3: Undue weight given to EF Academy letter

          9.  Judge Boyes gave undue weight to a letter  which  claims  that
             "everything is fine" without any consideration as to how  this
             was determined and what investigations were undertaken by  the
             academy.  Judge Boyes explains that he is "satisfied" that the
             academy would have no  "reason  whatsoever  to  lie",  however
             fails to consider whether the checks undertaken by the academy
             in concluding that everything was "fine" were adequate.

         10.   Country  expert  Anh  Tran,  provided  her  opinion  on   the
             reliability of the letter.  However, despite being  instructed
             prior to the hearing she was unable to  formulate  a  response
             until after the hearing as she was traveling.  She  states  as
             follows:

                  "Regarding the email from  EF  Academy  Vietnam  Admission
                  Office informed that they have contacted with the  student
                  home province council committee who  have  confirmed  that
                  everything is fine back home and the  appellant's  parents
                  have not been arrested nor are they having any problems on
                  account  of  their  politics/religion,  I  would  like  to
                  present my opinion on this information as follow:

                  According to  the  Criminal  Procedure  Code  of  Vietnam,
                  Vietnam citizen only are determined as guilty or innocence
                  by the Court.  If any citizen  is  suspected  that  he/she
                  would violate the state law,  they  might  be  questioned,
                  arrested,  and  detained  by   the   police.    If   after
                  investigating the matter the police believe that there are
                  enough evident to prosecute this person, they  will  refer
                  the matter to the Prosecution  Office  for  charges.   The
                  Court will ultimately determine guilt or innocence of  the
                  suspected persons.

                  According  to  the  appellant's  claim,  her  parent  have
                  conducted some religious activities  which  expressed  the
                  opposing political opinion but if her parent would not  be
                  yet  determined  by  the  court  as  guilty,   under   the
                  Vietnamese criminal law, the appellant parent: "are normal
                  and everything is fine" is  consistent  with  the  country
                  practice.

                  Full Criminal procedure code of Vietnam can be viewed at

                  http://noip.gov.vn/noip/resource.nsf/vwResourceList/3457A77
                  11572E0534725767200203DDA/$FILE/CRIMINAL%20PROCEDURE%20CODE
                  .pdf

                  In addition, in my view the religious/political matter has
                  been  considered  as  "sensitive   matter"   in   Vietnam.
                  Furthermore, the  information  which  EF  Academy  Vietnam
                  Admission Office has  asked  in  relates  to  the  foreign
                  diplomatic issue (Vietnamese student in  the  UK).   As  a
                  result, the local authority would not willing to  disclose
                  details of the case by simple response  as  the  appellant
                  "are normal and everything is  fine"  to  the  EF  Academy
                  Vietnam  Admission  Office  to  avoid  further   sensitive
                  diplomat correspondences."

         11.  It is submitted that the weight attached  to  this  letter  by
             Judge Boyes was undue and Ms Tran's further opinion should  be
             considered in light of the following:

             a.   NIAA 2002 s. 84(4): On  an  appeal  under  section  82(1)
                  against a decision  the  Tribunal  may  consider  evidence
                  about any matter which it thinks relevant to the substance
                  of the  decision,  including  evidence  which  concerns  a
                  matter arising after the date of the decision;

             b.   The very greatest care must be taken before  refusing  to
                  admit late evidence (AK  (admission  of  evidence  -  time
                  limits) Iran [2004] UKIAT 00103 at [13]);

             c.   "Apart from circumstances where lateness of the  evidence
                  means it is unfair to receive it, issues of unfairness  to
                  the weight to be attached to evidence, not  admissibility"
                  (MB (admissible evidence, interview records)  Iran  [2013]
                  UKUT 119 at [31])."

15. The first thing to say is that there is still no evidence on this issue
    from Anh Tran, and there was no application to adduce such evidence  at
    the hearing before us.  The suggestion made  in  paragraph  11  of  the
    grounds that the issues raised in  paragraph  10  ought  to  have  been
    regarded by the judge as  late  evidence  is  entirely  without  merit.
    There is no reason to suppose that the judge was aware of this issue at
    all.  Ms Quadi told us that the judge had  her  submissions.   We  have
    studied her skeleton argument, it raises no issue about the content  of
    the email, but argues instead that the respondent should have  enquired
    whether the presence of the appellant's own family at home amounted  to
    adequate reception arrangements for her.

16. It is because of this particular ground of appeal that we set  out  the
    chronology leading up to the hearing before  Judge  Boyes.   There  was
    ample time before the hearing for  any  question  to  be  raised  about
    whether the content of the email was trustworthy.  No  such  issue  was
    raised either before the hearing or at  it.    Only  when  Judge  Boyes
    makes a decision actually based on the evidence before him is  there  a
    complaint that he has preferred what appeared to him to be  objectively
    verifiable evidence over the  appellant's  unsupported  statements  and
    speculation.  It was for the judge to determine what weight  should  be
    given to the various items of evidence before him.  It does not  appear
    to us that there is any sustainable ground for criticising the  choices
    he made.  In any event, the position was that it  was  the  appellant's
    own movements that had made it impossible for  her  family  to  get  in
    contact with her; she had chosen not to get in contact with her family.
      It is not clear that the telephone number given as her  grandmother's
    even could be a Vietnamese telephone number.   She  reported  what  she
    claimed her grandmother had  said  to  her  and  built  a  mountain  of
    speculation  upon  it.   The  only  other   evidence   was   apparently
    dispassionate evidence that her family were  not  in  the  difficulties
    that she claimed.  It is not at all surprising that the  judge  reached
    the conclusion he did and, certainly, he committed no  error  in  doing
    so.

17. In  that  context,  Ms  Quadi's  submissions  that  are  based  on  the
    acceptance of the appellant's account and of her speculations simply do
    not bite.  There was no reason for the judge  to  suppose  and,  indeed
    there is no reason for us to suppose other than that the appellant,  if
    returned to Vietnam, will be returned to her family.

18. We have dealt with the two substantive issues before the  judge  first,
    because it is important to identify what the evidence was.  It is right
    to say as Ms Quadi does say, that the appellant giving evidence  before
    the judge was still a  minor,  and  that  there  was  evidence  from  a
    psychologist about her mental state.  The  psychologist  diagnoses  the
    appellant as  suffering  from  Alexithymia,  which  is  a  "personality
    construct" occurring in about 10% of the population.  She also has what
    the psychologists call variously an "avoidant attachment disorder"  and
    an "avoidance attachment disorder",  which  means  that  she  is  self-
    contained and does not show outward desires for closeness or love.  The
    psychologist says firmly that the appellant's head injury and  the  car
    accident in 2016 has not had any lasting effect, but  is  able  to  say
    that the appellant's memory is bad.

19.  Despite  our  best  endeavours  we  are  unable  to   see   what   the
    identification of those conditions, or the appellant's age,  could  add
    either to the evidence she gave or to the process by which it should be
    analysed.  The judge was concerned to determine whether the appellant's
    claimed fear of persecution  was  well-founded.   In  relation  to  her
    religion he found, as the country expert whose report  was  adduced  on
    her behalf had found,  that  it  was  not  possible  to  say  that  she
    identified with the unregistered sect.  In relation  to  her  claim  to
    have lost contact with her parents, her own evidence was that  she  had
    chosen not to be in touch with them.  The evidence that the judge  took
    into account, and the conclusions he reached, appear to be  exactly  in
    line with what the authors of the reports said.

20. It is true that there are passages in the determination which might  be
    subject to criticism.  There  are  numerous  typographical  errors  and
    other infelicities: we have already pointed out that the  determination
    starts with an error in the date of the hearing.  There is  what  might
    be regarded as an unnecessary rant in  relation  to  the  psychological
    evidence, and the judge  perhaps  grasps  too  readily  the  Presenting
    Officer' suggestion that the appellant had failed exams and was  afraid
    of going home.  No doubt the determination would have been better,  and
    perhaps could have been more readily accepted by the appellant,  if  it
    had not had those features.  But, at its heart, it seems to us that the
    judge took into  account  all  the  evidence  before  him  and  reached
    conclusions which are not only in line with that evidence but  are,  so
    far as we can see, virtually inevitable  on  the  evidence  as  it  was
    presented to him.  The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  do  not
    disclose any error of law by him.  We accordingly dismiss this appeal.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 11 September 2019
