
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/08074/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                        |     Decision Promulgated        |
|On 12 March 2018                          |     On 13 March 2018            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     GH
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Semega-Janeh, instructed by UK Law
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shore promulgated 1.12.17, dismissing on all grounds his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 9.8.17, to
    refuse his protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Birrell  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.12.17. Thus the matter came before me on 12.3.18 as an appeal in the
    Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

 3. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision should be set aside.

 4. In essence, the grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
    in that his findings in relation to the core of  the  appellant's  case
    that he was at risk on return  because  of  his  association  with  the
    political group G7, were inadequate.

 5. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Birrell considered it  arguable
    that the judge only assessed the appellant's claim by reference to  the
    screening interview (SI) and failed to engage with the asylum interview
    and oral evidence.

 6. Up to [94] of the decision the judge made  a  detailed  report  of  the
    evidence and submissions taken  into  account  in  the  making  of  the
    decision.  The  appellant's  case  is  adequately  summarised,  and  no
    complaint is made in that regard.

 7. The basis of the protection claim was that the appellant's brother  was
    a member of the political activist group in Ethiopia known  as  G7  and
    PG7. The appellant also became a supporter.  Whilst  attending  a  cell
    meeting in 2016 the police surrounded the building. Whilst his  brother
    was arrested the appellant  managed  to  evade  detention,  as  he  was
    visiting the toilet at the time. However, his jacket containing his  ID
    was seized, so that he fled Ethiopia in fear of his life.

 8. It was common ground that if the  appellant  was  genuinely  affiliated
    with G7 he would be at risk of persecution and mistreatment  on  return
    to Ethiopia. This was accepted by the judge at [98]. The appeal  turned
    on the credibility of his claim that  he  was  sufficiently  associated
    with G7 to put him at risk.

 9. At first sight, the way in  which  [99]  of  the  findings  is  drafted
    suggests that  the  judge  assessed  the  appellant's  case  solely  by
    reference to the SI and ignored the AIR and his witness  statement  and
    oral evidence.

10. As is clear from the SI pre-printed questions, he was  asked  to  state
    briefly all of the reasons why he cannot return to his home country. He
    stated, "The government is not happy I am not a member of any politics.
    There is no peace. The government I am in fear. Why? If I go back  they
    will kill me because of racists." Earlier in the SI when asked  why  he
    had come to the UK, he said, "Because there is no peace in Ethiopia.  I
    have to come here."

11. The SI is not  intended  to  be  a  full  account  of  the  appellant's
    protection claim, but he is expected to be truthful and can  reasonably
    be expected to raise the core basis of his asylum  claim.  However,  as
    the judge noted at [99],  there  was  no  reference  to  any  political
    involvement. More than, that the appellant specifically stated that  he
    was not  a  member  of  any  political  group;  that  only  became  the
    appellant's case in his later accounts. Such a  positive  assertion  of
    belonging to no  political  group  is  absolutely  clear  but  entirely
    inconsistent with the claim made in the substantive interview.

12. In assessing what weight to give to the SI, the judge took into account
    that the appellant might be nervous and at [96] specifically took  into
    account that a person fleeing political persecution in fear of his life
    may  be  daunted  and  intimidated  when  questioned  by  a  government
    official. The judge did not find  it  implausible  that  the  appellant
    would not find it easy to  trust  and  be  entirely  open  in  the  SI.
    However, after taking those considerations into account, the judge went
    on to explain at [99] that he could not accept that  if  the  appellant
    had fled Ethiopia because of his association  with  PG7  he  would  not
    simply have stated that in the SI.

13. It is important to observe that the SI in this  case  was  rather  more
    substantive than answers to pre-printed questions. I note that  in  the
    handwritten supplementary questions in the SI, the appellant was caught
    out in a lie, having claimed to have flown directly from Sudan  to  the
    UK. Further detailed questioning followed. When asked again what it was
    he feared from Ethiopia, he replied that the government would kill him.
    It was suggested that nothing had happened to him. He replied only that
    he didn't believe in a separate racial government. Asked if he had been
    hurt or injured by the government, he said that no one touched him.  It
    is clear that he had every opportunity to set out his claimed political
    involvement. It is also clear that he was quite  capable  of  answering
    questions.

14. The judge found that the failure to mention  political  involvement  in
    the SI undermined the credibility of the later claims. Effectively, the
    judge has concluded that this was because he only invented that  claim,
    raised 4  months  subsequently  in  the  substantive  interview.  I  am
    satisfied that it is not the case that the  judge  simply  ignored  the
    other evidence. Having given a careful account of that evidence in  the
    earlier part of the decision, the judge took all of the  evidence  into
    account, in the round before making his findings.  Indeed  within  [99]
    the judge  referred  to  the  SER,  AIR,  witness  statement  and  oral
    evidence. He made some findings in the appellant's favour but found him
    a vague and ultimately unreliable witness. A  reading  of  the  judge's
    account of his oral evidence explains that finding. It  is  also  clear
    that the judge took into account in this same assessment  the  evidence
    relating to the appellant's Facebook activity and the alleged  warrant.



15. In summary, the judge concluded that little weight could  be  given  to
    the appellant's subsequent witness evidence, primarily because  he  had
    so comprehensively undermined his case at the start, i.e. in failing to
    mention political activity within the SI. I am satisfied that this  was
    a conclusion open to the judge and for which, however  brief,  adequate
    and cogent reasons have been provided.

16. I have  taken  into  account  Mr  Semega-Janeh's  submissions  that  an
    examination of the AIR demonstrates good reasons  for  the  appellant's
    failure to mention political involvement in his SI. At  Q8  he  claimed
    that he struggled to understand and that he was scared  and  tired.  In
    later answers he also mentioned having a headache  and  having  hearing
    loss. However, these submissions were in effect an attempt  to  reargue
    the appeal. I also note that the appellant did not appear to  have  any
    difficulty in hearing, understanding or answering the questions.

17. Complaint is also made that the judge wrongly required corroboration of
    the appellant's account. However, within his findings, the  judge  made
    it clear that in asylum cases corroborative documentary  evidence  will
    not always be  available.  In  essence,  the  judge  is  self-directing
    himself that the absence of corroboration is  not  undermining  of  the
    claim.

18. There was potentially some corroboration of the appellant's case in the
    form of the purported arrest warrant. This was considered at  [100]  to
    [101], where the judge found the document unreliable, applying  Tanveer
    Ahmed. The judge gave perfectly good reasons for this  finding,  noting
    that it was not credible (unlikely) that an official  document  from  a
    government department would have a Yahoo email  address.  That  finding
    was entirely open to the judge on the evidence. Whilst the judge  there
    (at [101], mentioned that there was no other corroborative evidence  of
    the appellant's version of events in Ethiopia, this was not the  making
    of an adverse finding because of the lack of corroboration. Mr  Semega-
    Janeh submitted that the judge should have given greater weight to  the
    arrest warrant. Again, this is an attempt to reargue  the  appeal.  The
    judge gave cogent reasons for the findings, including  for  discounting
    the  arrest  warrant  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  failed   to
    demonstrate that it was a reliable document.

19. The judge also dealt with the Facebook evidence in the context  of  the
    appellant's claimed association with PG7 in the UK, at [103]. The judge
    noted that whilst he was on Facebook, he had made no  attempts  to  use
    this social media to find his brother. The judge took into account that
    he may not wish to implicate his friends on  Facebook  as  possible  G7
    supporters but pointed out that he could have  communicated  with  them
    through Facebook in a  "subtle"  way.  In  his  submissions,  Mr  Bates
    pointed  out  that  individuals  can   make   Facebook   postings   and
    communications private including by messages and  by  applying  privacy
    settings to  his  Facebook  page.  Given  that  the  appellant  claimed
    involvement with G7 in the UK  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  him  to
    produce some evidence of that but none was produced.

20. I am satisfied that it is clear that it was only after considering  all
    of the evidence that the judge concluded, at [104], that even  applying
    the lower standard of proof, the appellant failed to  demonstrate  that
    he was involved with G7 as claimed. At [107] the judge  confirmed  that
    in assessing the evidence he had taken the findings of fact and applied
    the relevant country evidence. In the circumstances I conclude that  no
    material error of law has been disclosed in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Conclusion & Decision

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.  Breach  of  this
direction may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


