
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08908/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2020                    |On 07 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     AJ
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms P Solanki, instructed by Kalsi Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DIRECTIONS ON ADJOURNMENT

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herwald  promulgated  24.10.19,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  29.8.19,  to
    refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manuel  refused  permission  to
    appeal on 4.12.19. However, when the application  was  renewed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  granted  permission  on
    9.1.20. Judge Coker considered it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal
    "failed to have adequate regard to the position of the two children and
    their  access  to  potential  identity  documents  and  the   differing
    situation the applicant would be in as a  lone  woman  with  two  young
    children."

 3. It is not entirely clear what the basis of the remainder of  the  grant
    of permission was and  at  an  earlier  hearing  on  12.3.20  Ms  Patel
    confessed to being confused by it. It may be that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    was referring to the recent decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  on  Iraqi
    documents in SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq  CG
    [2019] UKUT 004100 (IAC), though that is not made clear.

 4. The matter was listed before me at Manchester Civil Justice  Centre  on
    12.3.20 for an error of law hearing.  Ms  Patel,  who  represented  the
    appellant at the First-tier Tribunal, also appeared  as  representative
    before the Upper Tribunal.

 5. Amongst a number of preliminary issues, I  raised  with  Ms  Patel  the
    assertion at [9] of the grounds that at [17] of the decision the  Judge
    misreported the evidence of the appellant's supporting witness, Mr  DA.
    The Judge there recorded that when asked whether it would be  safe  for
    the appellant to return (go) to the IKR, he said that  "it  might  well
    now be safe for her." It appears that the judge relied on this piece of
    evidence as undermining the credibility of the appellant's claim.

 6. The grounds assert that what the witness actually said in reply to  the
    question was, "I do not know anything about her circumstances, it might
    not be safe for her." Ms Patel informed me that  the  grounds  on  this
    issue are based on her detailed note of the evidence at the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing. However, I pointed out that she could not be a
    witness in this matter whilst still representing the  appellant  before
    the Upper Tribunal. I asked her to consider whether she needed to  rely
    on that point or whether she was content to rely on the  other  pleaded
    grounds of appeal. After due consideration, Ms Patel told me  that  the
    point was central to the appellant's case on appeal. I  explained  that
    if she pursued the matter, she would have to become a witness,  make  a
    witness  statement,  and  could  no   longer   continue   to   act   as
    representative, which she should have known. I also explained that  the
    discrepancy as to what was said would have to be put to  Judge  Herwald
    for his consideration and response, and thus the matter would  have  to
    be adjourned. Ms Patel then made the adjournment application, which  Mr
    McVeety did not oppose. He informed the tribunal  that  there  were  no
    notes from the presenting officer on the Home Office case file.

 7. I noted that there were handwritten notes from the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing within the Tribunal's case file, which to my  reading  appeared
    to be consistent with that recorded at [17] of the decision.

 8. In the circumstances, I granted the requested  adjournment  and  issued
    directions on 17.3.20, providing for Judge Herwald to  be  offered  the
    opportunity to comment on Ms Patel's assertions and  for  Ms  Patel  to
    provide and serve a witness statement and exhibits as to what was  said
    by the witness at the hearing.

 9. A copy of Judge Herwald's ROP and notes of hearing was forwarded by the
    Tribunal to the appellant's representatives under cover of email  dated
    17.3.20. A further copy was sent under cover of  email  dated  10.8.20.
    Judge Herwald replied  to  the  query  directed  to  him,  stating  "My
    recollection is that the witness said as I have recorded."  As  stated,
    this appeared to be consistent with the judge's handwritten notes.  The
    information  referred  to  above  was  conveyed  to   the   appellant's
    representatives by post sent on 13.5.20.

10. By 3.6.20, there had  been  no  response  from  the  appellant  and  in
    particular, no witness statement  from  Ms  Patel  had  been  provided,
    either within the time limit given in the directions or at all. In  the
    circumstances, I issued further directions for the  appeal  to  be  set
    down for hearing of the error of law issue.

11. On 14.7.20, the Upper Tribunal received a letter from  the  appellant's
    representatives seeking further time to respond  to  my  directions  of
    17.3.20. It appeared that the representatives did not seem to be  aware
    of the further directions I had issued in June 2020 on the  failure  to
    comply with the directions issued in March 2020. Given the likely delay
    there would be in fixing a hearing date  because  of  the  difficulties
    caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, I refused an  extension  of  time  but
    pointed out that the remote hearing would likely not take place  before
    1.8.20, so that there would, in fact, be ample time to comply with  all
    directions. This response was sent to the  appellant's  representatives
    by email on 15.7.20.

12. Under cover of letter dated 21.7.20, the Upper  Tribunal  received  the
    appellant's consolidated bundle,  including  Ms  Patel's  statement  of
    20.7.20, together with  a  copy  of  her  handwritten  notes  from  the
    hearing, which I have carefully considered and taken  into  account.  I
    note that the version  of  the  evidence  asserted  in  the  ground  is
    consistent with Ms Patel's handwritten notes of the hearing,  although,
    because of the poor copying process, not all of the  crucial  statement
    has been copied.

13. On 1.10.20 I received the skeleton  argument  drafted  by  Ms  Solanki,
    which I have carefully considered and taken into account, together with
    the oral submissions made to me at the hearing.

14. Ms Patel attended at the outset of the remote hearing but as neither Ms
    Solanki nor Mr Tan  sought  to  ask  any  questions  of  her,  she  was
    released.

The Grounds

15. The first ground relates to the alleged mistake of  fact  in  recording
    the evidence of the supporting witness, which has been the  subject  of
    much correspondence and Ms Patel's witness statement. As stated  above,
    he judge has now had the opportunity  to  look  at  his  note  and  has
    confirmed that his recollection of what was said is as recorded at [17]
    of the decision.

16. I do not agree with the submission made to me that  the  judge's  notes
    "potentially" reads as 'it not now be  safe  [for]  her'.  In  the  way
    transcribed by Ms Solanki, the note  makes  little  grammatical  sense.
    What the judge recorded in answer to the question how safe is the  IKR,
    was " i.d.n. I do casually travel but ? kno her circs. It  mt  now  be
    safe 4 her." The ?  symbol  is  a  designation  of  not  equal  to  and
    evidently was used by the judge throughout his record as shorthand  for
    'not'. The judge underlined this answer twice in red ink. If the  judge
    had intended to record a 'not' in the answer, I am satisfied  he  would
    have used the same ? symbol, as appears to be his habit.  I  find  that
    the handwritten note and what is recorded at [17] of  the  decision  is
    consistent. What the witness stated was qualified and couched in  terms
    that he first said in answer that he did not know (i.d.n.), and that he
    did not know the appellant's circumstances.

17. Ms Patel's account, based on  her  witness  statement  and  handwritten
    notes is that the witness stated, "I do not  know  anything  about  her
    circumstances, it might not be safe for her." This is what is  recorded
    in handwriting, though the bottom part of the sentence has been  missed
    off in the copying process. I note that there is no statement from  the
    witness himself as to what he said.  Ms  Solanki  referred  me  to  the
    witness' statement, dated 2.2.19, contained in the respondent's bundle,
    asserting that he was asserting there that it  was  not  safe  for  the
    appellant to return. However, it is impossible to separate  out  within
    this statement the issue as  to  whether  it  would  be  safe  for  the
    appellant to return to the IKR, from his assertion that she would be at
    risk of an honour killing if returned, a claim entirely rejected by the
    First-tier Tribunal.

18. In summary, I accept that Ms Patel's notes accord with what the grounds
    assert the witness stated but also find that the judge's  notes  accord
    with what is recorded at [17] of the decision as to  what  the  witness
    stated. I accept that both Ms Patel and the judge have  recorded  their
    accounts in good faith, believing  that  is  what  they  heard  stated.
    However, both cannot be accurate.

19. It is possible that either the  Judge  or  Ms  Patel  could  have  been
    mistaken as to what was said but, as Ms Solanki accepted, the burden is
    on the appellant  to  demonstrate  that  what  the  judge  recorded  is
    inaccurate. Having taken account of the evidence as a whole,  including
    that of Ms Patel, I am persuaded by the judge's contemporaneous  record
    and role as independent arbiter to record the evidence. I conclude that
    Ms Patel is mistaken in what  she  heard,  although  recorded  in  good
    faith, and find that the witness did state that it might  now  be  safe
    for the appellant in the IKR. That seems to be consistent with not only
    the judge's handwritten notes but the context of  the  other  questions
    and answers relating to that issue. I  conclude,  therefore,  that  the
    appellant has failed to demonstrate that there  was  any  "fundamental"
    mistake of fact as Ms Patel has asserted.

20. The only remaining issue was the ability of the appellant to return  to
    Iraq, which the judge addressed from  [21]  onwards  of  the  decision,
    accepting that return to Diyala, a former contested area, was not safe.
    However, this appellant was educated and worked in the IKR for a number
    of years before leaving Iraq. The judge considered AAH (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC), noting  that  the
    appellant had an Iraqi national identity card, and was  satisfied  that
    she had extensive family in Iraq, members of which  would  be  able  to
    support  her  with  family  registration  details  and,  if  necessary,
    relocation to the IKR. Specifically, the judge found  that  there  were
    male family members who would be able and willing to attend  the  civil
    registry, if necessary. She had been able to travel with  ease  in  and
    out of the IKR in the past and the judge concluded  from  the  witness'
    own account of travel to and from the IKR  that  relocation  there  was
    feasible for her, based on his experience. The judge also took  account
    of updated evidence since the Country Guidance that direct  flights  to
    the IKR were available.

21. The second ground alleges  a  failure  to  consider  material  matters,
    namely that the children are without  documentation;  that  the  family
    originate from Diyala, a former contested area, and may not be able  to
    assist the appellant to obtain registration documentation; and that the
    appellant's ability to earn a living would be severely affected by  her
    now being a single widowed mother of two young children.

22. Whilst it is argued in the skeleton argument  that  the  appellant  "is
    unlikely to be willing to approach" her husband's family  members,  the
    findings of the judge were that there was  not  a  real  risk  that  an
    attempt would be made by the family of her deceased husband  to  remove
    the children from her. It follows from the findings that the  appellant
    will be able to use family  members  from  both  sides  to  obtain  all
    necessary documentation, even though  her  own  family  originate  from
    Diyala, outside the IKR, and that she would not be at  risk  of  having
    her children removed from her by her husband's family.

23. The argument that the judge ignored that as a single mother  and  widow
    the appellant's ability to earn a living would be  impaired,  fails  to
    acknowledge the finding of the judge that she  would  have  support  to
    relocate to the IKR from her own  family.  The  judge  also  considered
    other relevant factors, including that she is  a  highly  educated  and
    skilled woman who was previously able to live and work in the IKR.  The
    judge considered the  appellant's  circumstances,  noting  that  whilst
    there may be difficulty obtaining work, she will have voluntary  return
    financial assistance and at  the  least  would  be  able  to  access  a
    critical shelter or an IDP camp. The judge  was  not  ignorant  of  the
    challenges and accepted that the situation may be  difficult,  but  not
    such as to infringe Article 3 ECHR. In reality,  the  various  concerns
    raised by this ground were fully taken into account by the judge and  a
    careful assessment made of all relevant circumstances.  The  ground  is
    little more than an attempt to reargue the point.

24.  The  third  ground  asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to  assess  the
    appellant's claim in line with AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)
    Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC) and to take into account that she would
    be returned to Baghdad rather than the IKR, and would be returning as a
    lone female. It is argued that the judge failed to consider  whether  a
    camp or critical  shelter  would  accept  the  appellant.  It  is  also
    submitted that the judge erred in concluding that the  appellant  could
    apply for voluntary assistance, when she does not wish  to  voluntarily
    return.

25. Once again, this ground is an attempt to reargue the appeal. The  judge
    found at [21] of the  decision  that  it  was  possible  for  an  Iraqi
    national to obtain a CSID card in the UK, which was the effect  of  the
    then current country guidance in AA. She had a national  identity  card
    and family in Iraq to assist her and her children's return.  With  that
    assistance, she would be able to obtain CSIDs to be able to  return  to
    Iraq and travel between Baghdad and the IKR. Whilst Ms  Solanki  argued
    that the judge did not consider the  difficulties  there  may  be  with
    getting CSIDs for the children, one of whom was born in  the  UK,  that
    was not raised as a difficulty at the  appeal  hearing  and  the  judge
    specifically found that the appellant would have the assistance of  her
    family with registration details.

26. In relation to voluntary return, the judge was entitled to take account
    of the availability of  this  significant  financial  assistance  which
    would help her secure accommodation  and  to  maintain  herself  for  a
    temporary period. This also has to be considered in the  light  of  the
    judge's finding that she is well-educated and was  previously  able  to
    work in the IKR,  and  has  the  assistance  of  her  extended  family.
    Contrary to the argument in the grounds, the reference  in  TD  and  AD
    (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC)  does  not  establish  as
    either a ratio of that case or as a precedent that  assisted  voluntary
    funds are to be excluded from consideration where an individual refuses
    to accept them. The fact that the appellant declares  an  intention  to
    ignore available assistance is irrelevant. If the appellant closes  her
    eyes to AVR, it does not mean that it no  longer  exists. She  can  be
    assumed to  act  reasonably  when  considering  the  reasonableness  of
    relocation to the IKR. No error of law is disclosed.

27. The fourth ground is a clear attempt  to  reargue  the  appeal,  making
    reliance on the appellant's case that her husband's  family  wanted  to
    remove the children, when the judge had already rejected that aspect of
    the appellant's claim. The  grounds  state  that  the  appellant  "also
    wishes to highlight other evidence which was in the bundles before  the
    Tribunal and has not been considered by  the  Tribunal."  However,  the
    judge is not required to detail all of the evidence or make findings in
    respect of every item of evidence. As drafted, this ground is vague and
    insufficiently particularised so as to demonstrate any error of law.

28. Reliance is also made in the grounds on the changes in Country Guidance
    in SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity  documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]
    UKUT 004100 (IAC), which was not promulgated at the time of the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision promulgated in October 2019. These arguments are
    not relevant to the issue as to whether there was an error  of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

29. On reading the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I am satisfied that
    the judge took account of all relevant information provided and made  a
    detailed and careful assessment. At [15]  of  the  decision  the  judge
    confirmed that he had taken into account all  the  background  material
    submitted by the parties and made specific reference to  the  CPIN  and
    the Country Guidance authorities.  The  judge  then  went  on  to  cite
    considerable extracts from the country background information. At  [16]
    the judge confirmed that he had given careful consideration to all  the
    documents put before him  and  had  considered  the  relevant  evidence
    before making any of his findings.

30. In all the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be  set
aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

     Signed DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 2 October 2020

































