
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08771/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2019                   |On 06 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                          Mr ARI TAHIR ABDULRAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bass, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow
Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iraq,  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Lloyd of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  10
    October  2018  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  by   the
    respondent dated 24 May 2018 to refuse to grant protection.

2.   The appellant's two main grounds allege that the  judge  erred  in  law
    in:

    (1)   making  a  perverse  finding  on  credibility  by  employing   an
         unreasonably high threshold  considering  that  the  appellant  was
         unrepresented; and

    (2)   failing  to  provide  reasons  for  his  findings  regarding  the
         appellant's claim to fear honour-based retribution from his  wife's
         family.

3.   I express my gratitude to both representatives for their submissions.

4.   Ground (1) falls well short of  establishing  a  perversity  challenge.
    At paragraph 76 the judge reminded himself of  the  lower  standard  of
    proof applicable in asylum cases and there is nothing to indicate  that
    he applied a higher standard.  At paragraph  14  the  judge  considered
    whether it was fair to proceed with the hearing,  notwithstanding  that
    the appellant was unrepresented, stating:

         "14.  His  appeal  has  already  been  adjourned  on  one  previous
             occasion, and I do not consider it is fair or  appropriate  to
             either side that it is adjourned again.  With the  Appellant's
             approval, therefore, I have  proceeded  to  hear  this  appeal
             without a professional representative appearing on  behalf  of
             the Appellant.  I am satisfied that I have heard his appeal in
             those circumstances in a fair and balanced manner and  he  has
             been put at no prejudice by the absence of a legal adviser".

5.   The first ground takes particular issue with the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 69:

         "69.  The  account  on  which  he  squarely  relies  is  one  which
             fundamentally  lacks  credibility.   I  believe  that  such  a
             conclusion has been emphasised not least by his production  of
             a translated arrest warrant which appears to  be  somewhat  at
             odds  with  the  timescales  which  he  gave  in  his   asylum
             interview.  Also, I accept the line of questioning pursued  by
             the Presenting Officer to the effect that it is illogical  and
             irrational that his wife's family should be pursuing him as  a
             potential honour retribution when it is his wife  who  is  the
             deserting party and has formed  a  relationship  with  another
             man".

6.   The judge had earlier noted that the arrest warrant bore  the  date  20
    August 2015 and that the appellant had  said  at  Q101  of  the  asylum
    interview that his problems started  from  20  June  2015  because  the
    arrest warrant was made on that date (paragraph 41).  The  judge  noted
    that this inconsistency was put to the appellant and  that  the  latter
    sought to explain it in terms of interpreter error (paragraphs  41  and
    42).  The judge further noted  in  paragraph  42  that  the  Presenting
    Officer put to him that he had never made any previous complaint  about
    the quality of interpretation even though he had solicitors acting  for
    him at that time.  The claim regarding the arrest warrant  was  clearly
    central to the appellant's case since it was said  by  him  to  be  the
    reason why his problems began and why he  had  fled  Iraq.   A  further
    consideration in the judge's mind was that the arrest warrant  had  not
    been produced by the appellant  until  the  appeal  hearing.   In  such
    circumstances, for the judge to  treat  this  inconsistency  as  highly
    material was entirely reasonable.  Mr Bass submitted that the fact that
    the appellant got right the day and the  year  of  the  arrest  warrant
    should have been seen to excuse his mistake about the  month,  but  the
    appellant in his asylum interview could not have been clearer that  his
    troubles started with the arrest warrant in June 2015.

7.   Mr Bass, by reference to the written  grounds  and  skeleton  argument,
    sought to argue that the judge's approach wrongly failed to  note  that
    the appellant had met all the conditions set out in paragraph  339L  of
    the Immigration  Rules.   Leaving  aside  that  this  paragraph  (which
    mirrors Article 4(5) of the Qualification Directive) is a rule  limited
    to the issue of  corroboration  (it  is  not  a  set  of  criteria  for
    establishing the credibility of an account), the judge cannot  be  said
    to have offended it since on the judge's findings at least two  of  the
    (cumulative) conditions were not met: paragraphs 339L(iii) and (v).

8.   Mr Bass's skeleton argument said that the  "scant  evidence"  presented
    at the hearing was not the appellant's fault as his representatives did
    not adequately prepare his bundle and withdrew a mere seven days before
    the hearing; but the appellant had several weeks before then  in  which
    to ensure he had produced all relevant evidence and, in any event,  the
    judge permitted him to adduce an arrest warrant on the morning  of  the
    hearing.

9.   Turning to ground (2), I cannot agree that the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for concluding that the appellant's account of why  he
    was at risk lacked plausibility.  It is clear first  of  all  that  the
    judge properly understood the  appellant's  claim  as  being  that  his
    wife's family blamed him for his wife having left him for another  man.
    The judge noted at paragraph 65 that their hostility arose because they
    considered that he had not acted with sufficient resolve in  trying  to
    trace her (paragraph 65).  It is also  clear  that  the  appellant  was
    challenged by the Presenting Officer about this aspect  of  his  claim.
    The judge noted at paragraph 38:

         "38. The Presenting Officer challenged the Appellant's story as not
             credible.  His account that he was in mortal danger  from  his
             wife's family did not sit  easily  or  consistently  with  the
             narrative that she had deserted him for another man and  that,
             moreover, the Appellant had been his wife's chosen  suitor  in
             preference to the new lover some years ago".

    It was open to the judge to  find  this  claim  not  credible  for  the
    reasons given.  At paragraph 65 the judge noted that on the appellant's
    own account he  had  been  the  preferred  suitor  some  years  ago  in
    preference to her new lover.  At paragraph 30 the judge recorded:

         "30.  The  Appellant  appears  to  base  his  account   on   family
             retribution against him by virtue of the marital misconduct of
             his wife rather than himself.  Simply,  the  account  that  is
             before me is that the Appellant's  wife  rekindled  a  romance
             with  an  old  flame  and   deserted   the   Appellant.    The
             Respondent's assertion in cross-examination of  the  Appellant
             is that the  wrath  of  the  wife's  family  would  surely  be
             directed at the new lover rather than the  Appellant  himself.
             If the Appellant's account has any truth in it at all  -  that
             is to say if his wife has left  him  for  another  man  -  the
             account  fails  upon  close  analysis.   Moreover,  there   is
             evidence that the 'old flame' was erstwhile  rejected  by  the
             wife's family whilst the Appellant himself was approved  as  a
             suitable marriage partner".

    It was entirely within the range of reasonable responses for the  judge
    to consider that this account was implausible.  Mr Bass sought to argue
    that the judge's assessment  at  this  juncture  evinced  an  error  in
    failing to consider appropriate contextual background because the  CPIN
    provided by the respondent confirmed that honour crimes can be directed
    against males.  However, the passage he relies on  at  paragraph  7.1.3
    supports the judge's assessment in that whilst it did not exclude  that
    "occasionally" males are also the victims of honour crimes, such crimes
    are  "overwhelmingly  perpetrated  against  female  relatives".    This
    background evidence also gives the lie to Mr Bass's suggestion that the
    judge's decision demonstrates  a  failure  to  take  account  of  local
    cultural norms relating to honour killings.

10.  Mr Bass submitted that the judge's decision erroneously relied  on  one
    inconsistency, relating to the date of the  arrest  warrant.   However,
    first of all the judge did not rely solely on this  inconsistency.   He
    also relied on the appellant's lack of a satisfactory  explanation  for
    it and the implausibility of the appellant's account.  It would  appear
    the late production of the arrest warrant was also a factor.

11.  The appellant's ground queried the fact that the judge had  dealt  with
    the issue of returnability before  addressing  the  issue  of  risk  on
    return.  That is true, but the judge made clear at the  outset  of  his
    assessment of both issues  that  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    narrative was  "a  basic  one  in  this  appeal"  (see  paragraph  49).
    Further, there is nothing to suggest that this ordering impacted on the
    judge's assessment of credibility  or  indicated  that  a  non-holistic
    approach was taken.  Clearly, the judge had in mind that  if  satisfied
    that the appellant could not obtain a CSID, he  would  be  entitled  to
    succeed in his appeal.

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 28 February 2019

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
