
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08035/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Monday 10 February 2020           |On Monday 2 March 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     W P
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Howorth, Legal Representative, Westkin
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
appeal involves a protection claim. Accordingly, it is appropriate  to  make
an anonymity direction.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family. This direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge D  Ross  promulgated  on  22  October  2019  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing her appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  2
       August 2019 refusing her protection and human rights claims.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Namibia.  She was born in April  2001
       and is therefore now aged nearly nineteen years.  She came to the UK
       in December 2016 and was granted leave to enter as a  visitor  until
       29 June 2017.  She overstayed and claimed asylum in April 2018.  Her
       asylum claim was  predicated  on  a  sexual  assault  which  she  is
       accepted to have suffered as a child at the  hands  of  her  cousin.
       She says that the abuse occurred while she lived with her aunt,  the
       mother of the cousin in question.  The Appellant's father died  when
       she was aged two.  Her mother died in 2010  after  contracting  HIV.
       It was just before her mother's death, when the Appellant  was  aged
       eight or nine, that she was sent to live with the aunt in  question.



    3. Since coming to the UK, the Appellant has resided with  one  of  her
       other aunts, [E]. The Appellant's human rights claim is based on the
       situation which would face her on return to Namibia and  the  family
       life which she has formed with [E] and [E]'s family.

    4. As a result of her past experiences, the  Judge  accepted  that  the
       Appellant should  be  treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness  and  that
       questions about her time in Namibia should be avoided  ([8]  of  the
       Decision).

    5. The Judge concluded that there was no Refugee Convention reason  for
       the protection claim ([19]).  He did not accept that  the  Appellant
       would face Article 3 mistreatment on return to Namibia  ([20]).   He
       accepted that the Appellant could not be expected to return to  live
       with the aunt whose son had abused her but  found  that  there  were
       other family members with whom she could live in Namibia ([23]).

    6. Although the Appellant by her ground  four  challenges  the  Judge's
       failure  formally  to  dismiss  the  protection  claim,  Ms  Howorth
       sensibly did not  pursue  that  ground.   It  is  evident  when  the
       Decision is read as a whole that  the  Judge  intended  to  and  did
       reject the protection claim for the reasons given.  The fact that it
       is  not  included  in  the  Notice  of  Decision  appears  to  be  a
       typographical error as the human rights appeal is  dismissed  twice.
       Since ground four is the only ground of challenge in relation to the
       protection claim, I need say no more about it.

    7. Turning then to the human rights claim and the Article 8 issue,  the
       Judge, for the same reasons as in relation to the  Article  3  claim
       rejected  the  suggestion  that  there  would  be  very  significant
       obstacles to the Appellant's return to Namibia.   In  terms  of  the
       Article 8 claim based on the Appellant's life in the UK,  the  Judge
       did not accept that the Appellant enjoyed family life with  [E]  and
       [E]'s family.  He did however accept that the  Appellant  enjoyed  a
       "strong private life" in terms of her relationship with [E]  ([25]).
       The Judge carried out an assessment of the Article 8 claim  at  [29]
       and [30] of the Decision but concluded that the decision  to  refuse
       the claim was proportionate.

    8. The Appellant challenges the Decision in relation to the  Article  8
       claim on three grounds as follows:

       Ground 1: The  Judge  failed  to  consider  all  the  evidence  when
       reaching  the  conclusion  that  there  were  not  very  significant
       obstacles to integration in Namibia.
       Ground  2:        The  Judge  misdirected  himself   in   law   when
       considering whether family life exists  between  the  Appellant  and
       [E]/[E]'s family in the UK.
       Ground  3:  The  Judge  failed   to   take   account   of   material
       considerations when carrying out the proportionality assessment  and
       had taken account of irrelevant factors.

    9. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Resident  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge R C Campbell on 24 December 2019 in the following terms so far
       as relevant:


            "... 2.    In the grounds it is contended that the judge failed
           to  assess  the  appellant's  private  life  case  against   the
           requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  rules  in  the
           light of the evidence showing the  extent  of  her  mental  ill-
           health and concluded, against the weight  of  the  evidence  and
           guidance given in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630, that the appellant,
           an orphan, does not enjoy family  life  with  her  aunt  in  the
           United Kingdom.
             3.    It  is  arguable  that  in  comparing  the   appellant's
           circumstances (which include a recent attempt at  suicide)  with
           what many 18-year-olds do, as at paragraph 29 of  the  decision,
           the judge may  have  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  conduct  a
           proportionality assessment focussed on the  particular  evidence
           before the Tribunal.
            4.   It is also contended that the  judge  failed  to  properly
           decide the asylum ground of appeal, as it is  not  mentioned  at
           the end of the decision.  This ground has little merit  in  view
           of the clear adverse findings at paragraphs 19 and 20.
            5.   Permission to appeal is granted."


   10. The matter comes before me to decide whether  there  is  a  material
       error of law in the Decision and, if I so find, to either remit  the
       appeal to the First-tier Tribunal or re-make the  Decision  in  this
       Tribunal.  For the reasons which follow, I indicated at the  end  of
       the hearing that I proposed to find an error of law in particular on
       ground three.  Following discussion, it was agreed that I should re-
       make the decision based on the  written  evidence  and  Judge  Ross'
       record of the evidence.  The facts are not in dispute.


      ERROR OF LAW


   11. I would not have found an error of law in relation to ground one.  I
       will need to consider the medical evidence when I  come  to  re-make
       the decision and so I say little about it now.  However, I accept Mr
       Tufan's submission that the evidence is of poor  quality.   Although
       there is reference in the papers, as  Judge  Campbell  noted,  to  a
       suicide attempt by taking an overdose of paracetamol and  there  are
       also references in the medical records to referrals to mental health
       services, the only reports in that regard  are  one  from  a  Mental
       Health Liaison Nurse following the overdose ([AB/48]) and one from a
       Ms Karen Staff of Norfolk and Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust who  does
       not give her qualifications  ([AB/64-65]).   Ms  Staff  provides  no
       formal diagnosis, other than to refer in the management plan to  the
       Appellant's depression and  anxiety  following  her  past  traumatic
       experiences and abuse. Read in that light, there is no error in  the
       Judge's conclusion following analysis of the evidence at [14] of the
       Decision that "[t]here was no evidence of acute mental illness".


   12. It is appropriate thereafter  to  consider  grounds  two  and  three
       together.  In essence, the Appellant's complaint is that  the  Judge
       has erred in his overall assessment.  Whether her relationship  with
       [E] and [E]'s family is categorised as family life or private  life,
       there can be no suggestion that it would meet  the  requirements  of
       the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").


   13. Ms Howorth's only complaint in relation to the finding that there is
       no  family  life  but  only  strong  private  life  based   on   the
       relationship in the UK is that  family  life  could  be  given  more
       weight in the overall assessment of proportionality having regard to
       Section 117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("Section
       117B") whereas private life can  be  given  only  little  weight  if
       formed whilst a person is in the UK unlawfully  or  with  precarious
       status as here.


   14. However, that submission in my view misses the point.  Although  the
       Judge was required to and did  have  regard  to  Section  117B,  the
       weight to be given to the interference with  an  appellant's  rights
       whether those are categorised as family life or private life has  to
       be based on the strength as shown by the evidence albeit balanced by
       the public interest  inherent  in  the  appellant's  status  at  the
       relevant time.


   15. Turning then to the way in which the Judge assessed proportionality,
       that is to be found at [29] and [30] of the Decision as follows:


            "29. I must apply the balance sheet approach  setting  out  the
           factors which I consider relevant on both sides of the argument.
            So far as the appellant is concerned,  she  has  established  a
           close relationship with her aunt in the UK,  and  she  has  been
           traumatised by her experiences in  Namibia,  in  particular  the
           sexual assaults she experienced.  If she returns to Namibia  she
           will face considerably more difficulties than she would face  if
           she was allowed to remain in the UK she is now 18 years old, and
           therefore is no longer a child, and I do not  have  to  consider
           therefore her best interests as a primary consideration  as  set
           out in the well-known case of ZH Tanzania  2011  UKSC  4.   This
           case determined that  in  relation  to  children  I  must  first
           consider the child's best interests which means  whether  it  is
           reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK.   However,  in
           this case the appellant turned  18  in  April,  and  it  is  not
           unreasonable to expect a young person of that age to establish a
           degree of independence.  Many  18-year-olds  leave  the  UK  and
           study abroad or engage in gap years, which illustrates the  fact
           that it is normal and expected that 18-year-olds should start to
           leave the family home.  I therefore consider that the fact  that
           she is still young is a factor which I have to take into account
           but is not a primary consideration.  The fact that the appellant
           will have more opportunities if she remains in the  UK  is  also
           not a factor to which I can give much weight,  bearing  in  mind
           that she is not a British  national,  and  is  not  entitled  to
           remain in the UK or to receive education and health care in  the
           UK.
            30.  On the other side of the balance sheet, I must  take  into
           account that the appellant came to the UK for temporary reasons,
           and she had no right to remain in the UK after the  end  of  her
           visit.  Although I bear in mind that the appellant has given  an
           explanation for why she remained  in  the  UK,  which  has  been
           accepted by the respondent as true and correct.   I  must  apply
           Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
           which states  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
           controls is in  the  public  interest.   It  is  in  the  public
           interest and in particular the economic  well-being  of  the  UK
           that persons who seek to enter or remain in the UK are  able  to
           speak English and are financially independent.  In this case the
           appellant  can  speak  English,  but  she  is  not   financially
           independent.  In addition little weight should  be  given  to  a
           private life which is established by a person at a time when the
           person is in the UK unlawfully  or  her  immigration  status  is
           precarious.  Clearly in this case the appellant has remained  in
           the UK unlawfully and at a time when her immigration status  was
           precarious, and I therefore can give little  weight  to  private
           life established in this period of time."


   16. I attach little weight  to  what  the  Judge  says  about  financial
       independence.  As Mr Tufan accepted, the fact that the Appellant  is
       supported  independently  of  State  support  means  that   she   is
       financially independent but that is in any event a  neutral  factor.
       There are however three reasons why I conclude that  the  assessment
       conducted contains errors of law.


   17. First, the Judge's reference to  what  "many  18-year-olds"  may  be
       capable of entirely leaves out  of  account  this  Appellant's  past
       experiences.  In that regard, the Appellant's mental health, however
       poorly  evidenced  was  relevant.   Similarly,  this  analysis  sits
       uneasily with the Judge's finding at [8] of the  Decision  that  the
       Appellant is vulnerable to the extent that she should not  be  asked
       questions about her experiences in Namibia.


   18. Second, and  leading  on  from  this,  the  assessment  contains  no
       reference to the impact on the Appellant of  returning  to  Namibia.
       The Judge accepted that she had been abused in the past.  The  Judge
       went so far  as  to  find  that  there  would  be  very  significant
       obstacles to her returning to that country if she was forced  to  go
       to live with the same aunt as previously.  I do not accept that  the
       Judge's finding at [23] of the  Decision  that  there  are  no  very
       significant obstacles is flawed as asserted by the Appellant in  her
       ground one - as I have already explained, the  medical  evidence  is
       thin and the Judge was entitled to take into account that she  would
       have other family members with whom she could live.  That  does  not
       mean however that the impact on the Appellant of return  should  not
       form part of the overall assessment.  Other than  reference  to  the
       traumatic experiences as being accepted at  [29]  of  the  Decision,
       that factor does not figure in the balance thereafter.


   19.  Third,  and  similarly,  although  the  Judge  does  refer  to  the
       Appellant's close relationship with [E] at [29] of the Decision, the
       Judge had found at [25] of the Decision  that  this  amounted  to  a
       "strong private life".  Even if Mr Tufan  is  right  that,  in  that
       paragraph, the Judge was addressing his mind to  whether  Article  8
       was engaged at all, the Judge still needed to factor in that  strong
       relationship, whether as part of the  Appellant's  private  life  or
       family life in the assessment which follows.


   20. For those reasons, I accept that the  Decision  contains  errors  of
       law.  I preserve the Judge's findings in relation to the  protection
       claim.  For the reasons given,  the  protection  claim  is  formally
       dismissed. I also see  no  reason  to  interfere  with  the  Judge's
       recitation of the evidence or other findings at [9] to [17] and [19]
       to [24] of the Decision.  I set aside only paragraphs [25]  to  [31]
       of the Decision.


    RE-MAKING OF DECISION


   21. I turn then to the only issue which remains for me to decide, namely
       whether the decision to refuse the  Appellant's  claim  is  unlawful
       under the Human Rights Act 1998 as contrary to Article 8 ECHR.


   22. The Appellant does not argue that she can meet the Rules in relation
       to family life.  She has no relationship with a partner or child  in
       the UK.  I will come below to whether the relationship with [E]  and
       [E]'s husband can give rise to family life.


   23. The Appellant previously submitted that she could satisfy the  Rules
       in relation to her  private  life  as  she  faces  very  significant
       obstacles to integration in Namibia.  The Judge's findings  in  this
       regard were as follows:


            "23. The appellant has not lived in the UK for seven years.  As
           I have already indicated, I accept  that  there  would  be  very
           significant obstacles to her returning to Namibia, if she was to
           go back to live with the aunt  that  she  had  previously  lived
           with, but there are other members of the family, and it has  not
           been established that she cannot return to Namibia and live with
           one of them, bearing in mind the social norms in Namibia,  which
           are that the family is expected to look after family orphans.  I
           therefore consider that  the  appellant  faces  difficulties  on
           return to Namibia, but these  do  not  amount  to  very  serious
           obstacles."


       I have already indicated that I did not find any  error  of  law  in
       this finding.  I therefore adopt what is there  said.  I  also  take
       into account the evidence set  out  at  [30]  below  taken  from  an
       assessment conducted by Social Services.


   24. It must be remembered that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Rules  is
       directed at obstacles to integration  and  not  necessarily  impacts
       such as fear  of  return,  except  where  such  fear  would  prevent
       integration.  The Court of Appeal in Kamara v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813  explained  the  test  as
       follows:


           "14.   In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
           "integration" into the country to which it is proposed  that  he
           be deported, as set out  in  section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
           399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to
           find a job or to sustain life while living in the other country.
           It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject
           to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a  court  or
           tribunal simply to direct itself in the  terms  that  Parliament
           has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for  a  broad
           evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual will
           be enough of an insider in terms of understanding  how  life  in
           the society in that other country is carried on and  a  capacity
           to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity  to
           be accepted there, to be able to operate on a  day-to-day  basis
           in that society and to build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a
           variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
           individual's private or family life."


       Adopting Judge Ross's reasoning as set out above,  the  evidence  of
       the Appellant's continued association with her language and  culture
       and applying that test, I conclude that the evidence does  not  show
       that there are such very significant obstacles. Again, though,  that
       does not mean that  I  leave  out  of  account  the  impact  of  the
       Appellant's past experiences when I come to assess  whether  removal
       is disproportionate.


   25. I turn then to the evidence about the impact of the Appellant's past
       experiences on her mental state.   The  Appellant  was  referred  to
       children's mental health services in February 2017. She was assessed
       by telephone and placed on a waiting list for  therapeutic  support.
       She was seen by Ms Staff to whose report I have already referred  in
       March 2017.  She denied any thoughts of suicide  or  self-harm.  The
       Appellant was referred to "Point  1"  to  help  her  to  manage  her
       "Depression and Anxiety".  I have already noted  that  there  is  no
       formal diagnosis of mental illness.   It  was  also  said  that  the
       Appellant would be referred to  the  Sue  Lambert  Trust  to  access
       support in relation to her past traumatic experiences.   It  appears
       that efforts were made by Point 1 to contact the Appellant to  offer
       counselling in June 2017, but her case was closed  in  January  2018
       after she failed to respond.


   26. The Appellant took a deliberate overdose of paracetamol on 9  August
       2019  and  was  taken  to  A&E  by  her  aunt.   This  followed  the
       Respondent's  decision  refusing  her  claim.   The  Appellant   was
       assessed by a Mental Health Liaison Nurse.  It is  there  said  that
       the Appellant had received counselling at school but  had  not  been
       able to engage with the Sue Lambert Trust due  to  school  pressures
       but was willing to engage.  The nurse concluded that there  was  "no
       evidence of acute mental illness ... [n]o mental capacity concerns".
        The overdose was attributed to the removal threat.   The  Appellant
       was  said  to  suffer  from  low  mood,  which  might  benefit  from
       psychological intervention.   She  was  referred  to  Wellbeing  for
       psychotherapy and MIND for "brief support and  interventions".   The
       Appellant's GP was asked to follow up therapy with the  Sue  Lambert
       Trust.  I can see no further evidence in that regard.


   27. The evidence indicates that the  Appellant  is  naturally  concerned
       about return to Namibia but has not been diagnosed  with  any  acute
       mental health issues.  I take into account also Judge Ross' findings
       that the Appellant is vulnerable and in particular is  reluctant  to
       discuss her past experiences in Namibia.


   28. Turning then to the Appellant's situation  in  the  UK,  Ms  Howorth
       directed my attention to a Social Work Assessment which  appears  at
       [RB/F] ("the Report").  The Report was prepared it appears  to  deal
       with  potential  safeguarding  issues.  I  do  not  repeat  what  is
       contained in the Report concerning the Appellant's interaction  with
       mental health services nor her background.


   29. The Appellant is said to be doing well at  school.   The  school  is
       providing extra support with the Appellant's  English  and  although
       previously unaware of the  Appellant's  past  experiences  indicated
       that they would be willing to offer pastoral support.  The Appellant
       is said to enjoy school.


   30. The Report deals with the Appellant's relationship with her aunt  in
       the UK.  Some concern is expressed by [E] that the  Appellant  often
       displays no emotional reaction but then flares up  when  challenged.
       The social worker also expresses some concern that the "huge  change
       in culture and environment could affect [W]'s developing  identity".
       However, that could be overcome in the social worker's view with the
       assistance of [E] who grew up in Namibia and  shares  her  religion,
       ethnicity and culture.  The Appellant and [E] are said to  speak  in
       their native language and [E] has  arranged  for  the  Appellant  to
       attend church.   [E] is also supporting the Appellant  to  adapt  to
       the culture in the UK.


   31. In terms of the family circumstances in the UK, [E] lives  with  her
       husband, [J] and [J]'s son from a previous relationship who was then
       aged 17 years.   No  concerns  were  expressed  by  Social  Services
       concerning the living arrangements in the UK.


   32. The Appellant's own statement is at [AB/6-9].  I do not need to deal
       with the Appellant's family background or past  experiences  as  the
       facts of those are all accepted.  As to her circumstances in the UK,
       she says this:


            "8.  I am still at school, doing my 'A'  levels.   I  have  met
           lots of new friends, and I am  enjoying  school.   My  favourite
           subjects are science and history.   I  am  studying  health  and
           social care at school.  After  that,  I  would  like  to  go  to
           University and study Nursing.  I want to become a  nurse,  as  I
           like to help people.
            9.   I found it hard to fit in in the UK at first.  I could not
           cope with the weather to start with, as it is  so  different  to
           Namibia.   I  also  struggled  with  English  language  at   the
           beginning, as I was not used to British  accent,  this  made  it
           hard to understand what other people are saying at  times.   The
           food is also different but I feel safe in the  UK,  and  I  feel
           that I am looked after.  I am living with  my  auntie  [E],  who
           looks after me.  I am happy living with  her,  as  this  is  the
           closest that I could get to being with my mother."


   33. Although I  do  not  depart  from  Judge  Ross'  findings  that  the
       Appellant could go to live with  other  family  members  in  Namibia
       (which findings were not challenged), I note what the Appellant says
       at [10] of her statement about her inability to cope on her own  and
       her need to be looked after.  That is reflected in the statement  of
       [J].  He has a daughter aged 19 years and therefore  much  the  same
       age as the Appellant. His son is also of a similar age. He says that
       although the Appellant is eighteen "she comes across like a 14-year-
       old to me.  She is very immature for her  age  and  still  acts  and
       thinks like a child".  [E] confirms this and describes the Appellant
       as "very fragile".


   34. [E] says that she treats the Appellant as  her  daughter.  There  is
       limited  evidence  otherwise  about  the  relationship  between  the
       Appellant, [E] and [J].  However, the Appellant has, since coming to
       the UK, confided in them about the past abuse which  demonstrates  a
       trust and emotional attachment.


   35. There can be no issue in this  case  concerning  the  engagement  of
       Article 8 ECHR whether that be by way of a family life or a  private
       life.  Nor is there any issue that removal will interfere  with  the
       Appellant's right to respect for that  life.   The  interference  is
       however lawful and necessary  subject  only  to  proportionality.  I
       therefore turn to assess the proportionality of the interference.


   36. I begin by considering the interference with the Appellant's rights.
        The question whether the Appellant enjoys family life with [E]  and
       [J] is a fact sensitive assessment based on the  evidence.   As  the
       Appellant is not a child, the question is whether  the  relationship
       is one which involves  more  than  normal,  emotional  ties  between
       family  members  (Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
       Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31).  It  must  be  a  relationship  with
       entails "real" and "effective" support.


   37. There are some unusual facts in this  case  which  lead  me  to  the
       conclusion that family life does exist between the Appellant and [E]
       and [J] notwithstanding the lack of detailed evidence.   First,  [E]
       says that she treats the Appellant as if she were her  daughter  and
       the Appellant in turn says that [E] is "the closest that [she] could
       get to being with [her] mother".  In other cases that might  not  be
       enough.  However, in this case, the Appellant lost her  mother  when
       she was just a  child.    That  is  therefore  a  potent  sentiment.
       Second, the Appellant has disclosed her past abuse to [E]  and  [J].
       It is evident that she does not do so lightly as she  was  unwilling
       to discuss her experiences with the mental health  professionals  or
       with her school.  That she did so to [E] and [J] shows a  trust  and
       strong, emotional attachment.  Finally, there is evidence  that  the
       Appellant is immature and remains child-like.  This is commented  on
       in particular by [J] who has  a  daughter  of  similar  age  to  the
       Appellant albeit she does not live with the family.  [J] also has  a
       son who is of a similar age and I  therefore  place  weight  on  his
       evidence in this regard.


   38. I give weight to the family life as set  out  above.   I  also  give
       weight to the Appellant's private life.  The Appellant very  frankly
       accepts in her statement that she did not find  it  easy  to  settle
       into life in the UK at first.  I accept that there is also  evidence
       in the Report from the social worker which indicates that the impact
       of the Appellant remaining in the UK might not be  wholly  positive.
       However, the Appellant has now progressed, is doing well at  school,
       is taking (or has taken) her  A  levels  and  wishes  to  go  on  to
       University and to pursue a career as a nurse.


   39. That is a far cry from the life which the Appellant had in  Namibia.
       Leaving aside the past abuse, the Appellant told the  social  worker
       who prepared the Report that she was treated like a slave.  That  is
       said to be common for children in Namibia although I note  that  the
       Appellant was still able to and allowed to go  to  school.   I  also
       accept that the Appellant's wish to have a better life in the UK  is
       not reason  to  find  the  Respondent's  decision  disproportionate.
       However, her background and, in particular the trauma  she  suffered
       in Namibia is relevant to the degree of  interference.   Although  I
       have accepted that the evidence does not make out a case that  there
       are  very  significant  obstacles   to   integration   in   Namibia,
       nonetheless, it is clear that removal to that country with  all  its
       memories would be traumatic for the Appellant.  That is demonstrated
       by the Appellant's taking  of  an  overdose  when  her  claims  were
       refused by the Respondent.


   40. I recognise that Section 117B permits me to give only little  weight
       to  the  Appellant's  private  life  due  to  her  unlawful   and/or
       precarious  status.   However,  the  degree  of  weight  within  the
       spectrum of what is little weight is higher in  this  case  for  the
       reasons I have given.  Section 117B does  not  require  me  to  give
       little weight to family life formed between the  Appellant  and  [E]
       and [J] and I give that the weight it deserves based on the  reasons
       why I have found family life to exist in this case.


   41. I turn then to the public  interest.   That  is  in  this  case  the
       maintenance of effective immigration control (Section 117B(1)).  The
       Appellant came to the UK to visit [E].  She overstayed and  did  not
       claim asylum until nearly a  year  after  her  leave  expired.   [E]
       explains though that the Appellant told her and [J] about the  abuse
       within a month of arrival and Social Services then became  involved.
       Due to the Appellant's experiences, [E] and [J]  understandably  did
       not wish to send the Appellant back  to  Namibia.   Their  delay  in
       seeking to regularise the Appellant's stay  is  unexplained,  but  I
       infer from their statements that the reason was that  they  did  not
       know what to do and were then unable to pay  a  lawyer  for  advice.
       That does not excuse their conduct.  The  Appellant  was  herself  a
       child at that time and would have relied on adults  in  what  was  a
       strange country to make decisions for her.  Although the conduct  of
       [E] and [J] is not to be condoned, I accept their  reasons  for  not
       wishing to send the Appellant back and  their  explanation  for  the
       delay in taking action.   Although  I  give  weight  to  the  public
       interest, I give it less weight for those reasons.


   42. Balancing the interference with the Appellant's family  and  private
       life against the public interest, I therefore reach  the  conclusion
       that the Respondent's decision is  disproportionate.   It  therefore
       breaches the Appellant's Article 8 rights and  is  for  that  reason
       unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998.

      DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision contains a material error  of  law.  I
    set aside paragraphs  [25]  to  [31]  of  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D Ross promulgated on 22 October 2019.  I  preserve  the
    other findings and record of evidence.  Those include the dismissal  of
    the Appellant's protection claim.
    I re-make the decision on human rights grounds  (Article  8  ECHR).   I
    allow the Appellant's appeal on the basis that removal of the Appellant
    would breach  the  Appellant's  Article  8  rights.   The  Respondent's
    decision is for that reason unlawful under the Human Rights  Act  1998.




    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).


    Signed [pic] Dated:  12 February 2020
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
