
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08277/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the                  |Decision & Reasons           |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008|Promulgated                  |
|                                              |On 02 July 2020              |
|On 23 June 2020                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                   F.M.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


   Decision made under rule 34 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
                                 Rules 2008


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

0. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier
   Tribunal Devlin ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 20 November 2019 by
   which the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to
   refuse to grant him international protection was dismissed.

0. Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted permission to appeal on all grounds.

 'Rule 34'

0. This decision is made without a hearing under rule 34 of the Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules').

0. In light of the present need to take precautions against the spread of
   Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed at rule 2(1) of the 2008
   Rules, and also at rule 2(2)-(4), I indicated by a Note and Directions
   sent to the parties on 21 April 2020 my provisional view that it would be
   appropriate to determine the following questions without a hearing:

         i)  Whether  the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
            involved the making of an error of law, and if so

        ii) Whether the decision should be set aside.

0. In reaching my provisional view I was mindful as to the circumstances
   when an oral hearing is to be held in order to comply with the common law
   duty of fairness and also as to when a decision may appropriately be made
   consequent to a paper consideration: Osborn v. The Parole Board [2013]
   UKSC 61; [2014] AC 1115.

0. Both parties consented to the proposed approach as to the consideration
   of this hearing.

0. I am grateful to Mr. K Iqbal, Solicitor at Primus Solicitors, on behalf
   of the appellant and Mr. S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer, on behalf
   of the respondent, for filing their written submissions, dated 6 May 2020
   and 4 June 2020 respectively.

Anonymity

0. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction despite this being a
   matter in which the appellant has sought international protection.  I am
   mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No 1 concerning anonymity directions and I
   note that the starting point for consideration of anonymity directions in
   this chamber of the Upper Tribunal, as in all courts and tribunals, is
   open justice. However, I observe paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note where
   it is confirmed that it is the present practice of both the First-tier
   Tribunal and this Tribunal that an anonymity direction is made in all
   appeals raising asylum or other international protection claims. Pursuant
   to rule 14 of the 2008 Rules I make an anonymity direction in order to
   avoid the likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the
   contents of his protection claim becoming known to the wider public.

0. The direction is detailed at the conclusion of this decision.

Background

0. The appellant is accepted by the respondent to be a citizen of Iraq and
   is presently aged 41. He asserts that he is ethnically Kurdish and the
   Tribunal notes that he was interviewed by the respondent in the Kurdish
   Sorani language. Though the respondent does not expressly accept the
   appellant's ethnicity by means of her decision letter, she proceeded to
   consider the appellant's return to Iraq on the basis that he speaks
   Kurdish Sorani.

0. The appellant asserts that Iraqi troops, supported by Shi'a militia,
   attacked his village in October 2017. There was fighting with members of
   the Peshmerga and the Iraqi troops retreated. A few days later, members
   of the Shi'a militia confronted the appellant in his field and asked him
   why he had not left the area. He was threatened with weapons, but the
   militia left when his wife started to scream. The appellant asserts that
   he was targeted on another five or six occasions, with livestock stolen
   and crops burnt. Bullets were fired at the side of his house.

0. In 2019, the situation deteriorated as the militia started to burn
   houses and farms in the locality. They also threatened to kill people if
   they did not leave the area by a certain date. The appellant and his
   family left their home in May 2019. The appellant subsequently secured
   the services of an agent and he left Iraq, travelling to the United
   Kingdom via Turkey. He claimed asylum in this country in June 2019.

Hearing before the FtT

0. The appeal came before the Judge sitting in Manchester on 30 October
   2019. By means of a decision and reasons, running to 237 paragraphs over
   27 pages, the Judge did not find the appellant to be a credible witness
   and dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Appeal

0. The appellant relies upon four grounds of challenge, which can be
   briefly detailed as:

         1. When considering internal relocation, the Judge materially erred
            in law by failing to consider that the applicant does not
            possess relevant ID documents, nor does he enjoy family ties or
            an income.

         2. As to credibility, the Judge materially erred in law by failing
            to assess the appellant's evidence in a holistic manner. There
            was a failure to consider the appellant's evidence from Q40
            onwards of his interview.

         3. The Judge materially erred in law by reaching conclusions based
            upon implausibility.

         4. At para. 227 of the decision and reasons, the Judge's decision
            was based upon an assumption as to whether the appellant would
            be accommodated by locals upon his return to Iraq.

0. In refusing permission to appeal to this Tribunal, Designated Judge of
   the First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft observed that the long determination
   'could perhaps have been more clearly laid out'.

0. UTJ Coker granted permission to appeal by a decision dated 20 February
   2020, reasoning:

         1. It is arguable the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to
            adequately consider the factual practicality of the appellant's
            return to Iraq, irrespective of the findings he made as to the
            credibility of the appellant's claim.

         2. As commented upon by Judge Woodcraft, the First-tier Tribunal
            judge's decision could have been more clearly laid out. I grant
            permission on all grounds.

         3. It will assist the Upper Tribunal in hearing this appeal if the
            parties can refine and set out the actual findings of the judge
            that are and are not in context.

Decision on Error of Law

0. A difficulty arises in this matter. By means of his written submissions,
   Mr. Iqbal on behalf of the appellant unfortunately addresses issues by
   means of the order of paragraphs in the Judge's decision and reasons,
   rather than in accordance with the grounds of appeal upon which
   permission was granted. Having adopted such approach, which is unhelpful,
   he submits, inter alia:

         "5.  The appellant does not agree with the Judge's finding at para
             180 that he has a brother in Iraq. The appellant clearly stated
             in his witness statement at para 12 that his brother married an
             Arab woman and moved to Chiman village, close to Kirkuk. He
             stated that his brother became disabled in 1989 and he lost
             contact with him since 1991."

0. The relevant paragraph of the Judge's decision is para. 180 which
   details:

         "180.    I have noted that, apart from his wife, the appellant has
             a brother in Iraq. In addition, his uncle's friend, whom he
             claims arranged and paid the smuggler, also lives there. All of
             these people should be able to speak to one or more of the
             above matters."

0. To what fact(s) or issue(s) the Judge is referring in his reference to
   'above matters' is not clearly identified. The preceding paragraphs
   running from para. 142 to para. 179 address several elements of the
   appellant's purported history under the titles 'sufficiency of detail',
   'internal consistency' and 'external consistency', though the latter two
   sections primary detail a lack of consistency as to historical events
   and, at para. 178, the Judge expressly identified nine specific instances
   of personal history in relation to which the appellant 'failed to produce
   any independent evidence'. Upon careful consideration, the Tribunal is
   satisfied that the only reasonable reading of para. 180 is that it
   constitutes a criticism by the Judge as to the failure by the appellant
   to produce corroborative evidence from persons in Iraq to support his
   claim. I observe that a judge is not required to leave out of their
   assessment the absence of documentary evidence which could reasonably be
   expected and is relatively easy to secure: ST (Corroboration - Kasolo)
   Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119. The Court of Appeal held in TK (Burundi) v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 40; [2009] Imm
   AR 488 that where there are circumstances in which evidence corroborating
   the appellant's evidence was easily obtainable the lack of such evidence
   must affect the assessment of the appellant's credibility. However, the
   Judge failed to provide any reasoning as to why evidence from the
   appellant's wife, brother and the friend of his uncle was reasonably
   capable of being secured from Iraq, and if he did not undertake the step
   of considering the reasonableness of the appellant securing such evidence
   he should not have adversely relied upon a failure to provide
   corroboration from such sources.

0. No doubt mindful of relevant precedent as to the appropriateness, or
   otherwise, of a judge relying upon the failure of an appellant to secure
   corroborative evidence in the assessment of credibility Mr. Walker, by
   means of his written submissions dated 4 June 2020, confirmed that after
   consideration of the further submissions submitted on the appellant's
   behalf, the respondent conceded that at para. 180 of his determination
   the Judge had made a material error of law. On behalf of the respondent,
   Mr. Walker conceded that as a material error of law was established there
   was no requirement for an error of law hearing.

0. Unfortunately, by means of the approach adopted by Mr. Iqbal, the
   submission at para. 5 of his written submissions does not relate to any
   of the four grounds of appeal upon which permission to appeal has been
   granted. It is further noted by the Tribunal that paras. 6 and 9 of the
   written submissions also identify issues not addressed by the grounds of
   appeal.

0. I have considered the respondent's position, fairly and appropriately
   confirmed by Mr. Walker. I observe that it is reasonable to expect
   professional representatives to set out appeal grounds on behalf of an
   appellant with an appropriate degree of particularity and legibility and
   the Tribunal should be hesitant in forensically examining the decision to
   identify grounds beyond those advanced by a professional representative.
   However, there remains a duty to consider the points that are 'obvious':
   see R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Robinson
   [1997] 3 WLR 1162. The Tribunal enjoys a power to consider any other
   point arising from a decision if the interests of justice so require.

0. In this matter, the respondent accepts that the reliance in the
   credibility assessment upon a failure to provide corroborative evidence
   originating from witnesses present in Iraq establishes a material error
   of law and therefore I consider that it would be in the interests of
   justice for the Tribunal to consider this obvious issue. Consequently,
   for the reasons detailed at para. 19 of this decision, above, the
   erroneous approach to corroboration in the credibility assessment
   constitutes an error of law. Because it is not possible to identify the
   significance the Judge gave to the failure to provide corroborative
   evidence, in circumstances where he provided little, if any, reasoning at
   para. 180 of the decision, I am satisfied that the error infected the
   credibility reasoning as a whole and so establishes a material error of
   law. In such circumstances, as agreed by the respondent, the decision of
   the Judge must be set aside.

Remaking of the decision

0. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of
   the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of
   appeals in this Tribunal and I am satisfied that the nature or extent of
   any judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the decision in
   the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard to the overriding
   objective in rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
   2008, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of decision

0. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
   on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 20
   November 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and
   Enforcement Act 2007.

0. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
   before any Judge other than the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devlin.



0. No findings of fact are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

0. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of
   these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or
   indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies to, amongst
   others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure to comply with this
   direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 23 June 2020

