
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/08627/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 4 September 2017                   |          On 12 September 2017        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     DM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, instructed by Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 17 November 1972.


2. The appellant entered the UK in 2015 and after being apprehended applied
   for asylum in February 2016. The reason he gave for his application was
   that he was at risk in Albania because of a blood feud which had been
   ongoing since 1997 when his brother killed someone. The respondent did
   not accept he was genuinely at risk because of a blood feud and rejected
   the application.


3. The appellant appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal. In a decision
   promulgated on 16 March 2017 his appeal was dismissed by Judge
   Heatherington. The appellant is now appealing against that decision.


4. Judge Heatherington did not find the appellant credible. His primary
   reason for this was the information that emerged at the hearing about a
   previous application for asylum made by the appellant in 1999.


5. In his asylum interview, dated 11 May 2016, the appellant referred to
   his previous application in 1999 for asylum. In response to a question
   about why he made that application, his answer was that he came to the UK
   for the same reason (ie because of the blood feud) but he reported
   himself as Kosovan on the advice of an interpreter. He stated that he
   withdrew his claim and returned to Albania because one of the people
   threatening him came to the UK.

6. Judge Heatherington, at paragraph 1.5 of the decision, stated that on
   the morning of the hearing the Home Office Presenting Officer provided a
   copy of the determination by Judge O'Malley of the appellant's appeal
   heard in Nottingham on 20 February 2001. This appeal relates to the
   appellant's 1999 asylum application. The appellant's case at the 2001
   hearing, as set out in the determination of Judge O'Malley, was that he
   was from Kosovo and feared the Kosovo Liberation Army ("KLA") because
   they wanted him to join them. He referred to his father being killed and
   said it could have been by Serbs, KLA or other Kosovans. There is no
   mention in the decision of a blood feud. Judge O'Malley dismissed the
   appeal, describing the claim to fear the KLA as "plainly an invention".


7. At paragraph 8.1 Judge Heatherington stated:


    "He arrived at the hearing today intending to claim that in 1999 he
    entered the UK because of a blood feud declared in 1997. That was
    entirely untrue. The 2000 [sic] determination makes it clear the then
    asylum claim had nothing to do with a blood feud."


8. The judge proceeded to consider other aspects of the appellant's claim.
   At paragraph 8.5 he commented that the appellant failed to claim asylum
   at the first opportunity and only submitted a claim after being arrested.
   At paragraph 8.7 the judge noted that there was no evidence to support
   the appellant's claim to have been beaten up in 2007, including an
   absence of scarring. At paragraph 8.8 the judge found that the
   appellant's claim to have been confined to his home was undermined by his
   claim to have been with his wife and family in the village centre when
   subjected to threats.


9. The judge commented, at paragraph 8.9, that he found the appellant surly
   and unhelpful.


10. The judge concluded that the appellant was not credible and dismissed
   the appeal.


11. The grounds of appeal take issue with the judge's evaluation of the
   appellant's credibility. It is argued that the judge improperly attached
   weight to the appellant's demeanour, describing him as surly and
   unhelpful without foundation to do so. It is also maintained that the
   judge made adverse credibility findings without having regard to the
   appellant's explanation for his conduct in his witness statement. In his
   witness statement the appellant explained why he left his self-
   confinement on the occasion he was threatened, but the judge had not
   taken this into consideration.


12. The grounds also contend that the judge failed to consider documentary
   evidence adduced by the appellant. The appellant submitted Albanian court
   documents showing his brother had committed murder and been imprisoned as
   well as a letter from the CPS concerning his nephew who had been
   attacked. These documents are not evaluated in the decision and the
   grounds argue that this amounts to a material error of law.


13. Before me, Mr Khan accepted that the appellant's witness statement did
   not accord with the 2001 determination but argued that this did not
   excuse the judge from properly considering the evidence before him. He
   highlighted the documentary evidence referred to in the Grounds of
   Appeal, which he claimed corroborates the appellant's account of a blood
   feud and are of central significance. Mr Khan argued that the judge had
   no basis for inferring the appellant was not the victim of violence
   because of a lack of scarring - there was no medical or other evidence to
   support such a position.


14. Mr Tufan focused his submissions on the difference between the
   appellant's claim in 1999 and the present one, describing them as
   completely different. He argued that the documentary evidence relied on
   by the appellant does not strongly support the case, contending that
   there was no evidence establishing that the person who the appellant
   claims is his nephew and about whom the CPS document is written is in
   fact his nephew.

15. As is clear from the 2001 determination of Judge O'Malley, when the
   appellant applied for asylum in 1999 he did not claim to be in a blood
   feud, even though his current case is that the blood feud has persisted
   since 1997.


16. This is completely inconsistent with the information he gave when
   applying for asylum in 2016 where he maintained that the application in
   1999 arose from the current blood feud.


17. Moreover, the fact that the first asylum claim was adjudicated in 2001
   is inconsistent with his claim in 2016 that he withdrew the 1999
   application. In addition, in the current application the appellant stated
   that his parents died in 2005 and 2008 (paragraph 27 of the asylum
   interview). However, in the 2001 determination it is stated that he
   claimed his father had been killed by the Serbs, KLA or other Kosovans.


18. In assessing the appellant's credibility, the judge was entitled to
   attach- indeed, it would be difficult to envisage any judge not attaching
   - substantial weight both to the fact that (a) in the appellant's claim
   for asylum in 1999 no mention was made of the blood feud which is now
   said to have started in 1997; and (b) that in making the current
   application the appellant mischaracterised the basis for his 1999
   application - stating, incorrectly, that it arose from the blood feud
   when in fact he contended before Judge O'Malley in 2001 that his fear of
   return stemmed from the KLA, not a blood feud.

19. At paragraph 8.9 the judge stated that he found "the appellant's
   general demeanour and his testimony not to be credible or trustworthy." I
   agree with the appellant that an adverse credibility finding should not
   be made because of an appellant's demeanour. See MM (DRC, Plausibility)
   [2005] UKIAT 19. I also agree that the judge erred by not making a
   finding in respect of the documentation purporting to show the
   appellant's brother's arrest and imprisonment, as well as the letter from
   the CPS concerning the person the appellant claims is his nephew.


20. However, given the damage to the appellant's credibility arising from
   the 2001 determination I am satisfied that any errors in respect of
   documentation or otherwise were not material and that the judge was
   entitled to find, for the reasons he gave, that the appellant lacked
   credibility and to dismiss the appeal on that basis.


Decision


A. The appeal is dismissed.

B. The judge has not made a material error of law and the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal stands.
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated:  10 September 2017            |


