
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08268/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 February 2020                  |On 16 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Alban of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Syria who  comes  from  Aleppo.
    He was born on 12 August 1994.  He claims that he left Syria  illegally
    in 2014 or 2015 as a result of the ongoing armed  conflict  there.   He
    claims that he  travelled  to  Turkey  and  from  there  travelled  via
    Hungary, Austria, Italy  and  France  before  arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom in October 2015.

 3. On 4  October  2015,  the  appellant  claimed  asylum.   Following  the
    discovery that his fingerprint showed that he  had  claimed  asylum  in
    Hungary on 16 July 2015 and again in  Austria  on  18  July  2015,  the
    appellant was granted temporary release with reporting restrictions  on
    10 October 2015.

 4. On 25 November 2015, a formal request was made  under  the  Dublin  III
    Regulation for Hungary to accept  responsibility  for  determining  his
    asylum claim.  No response was received from Hungary and, as a  result,
    the respondent decided on 22 August 2016 to determine the substance  of
    the appellant's asylum claim.   However,  on  27  September  2016,  the
    appellant was treated as an absconder, due to his  failure  to  report,
    and his asylum claim was treated as withdrawn.

 5. On 6 October 2017, the appellant was encountered by Avon  and  Somerset
    Police working illegally.

 6. On 22 December 2017, further representations were made on  his  behalf,
    and again were made  on  29  March  2018,  and  his  asylum  claim  was
    reinstated.  He was interviewed on 17 December 2018.

 7. In a decision dated 1 August 2019, the Secretary of State rejected  the
    appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection  and  under  the
    ECHR.  The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant  was  a
    Syrian national and came from Aleppo as he claimed.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard on 27 September 2019 by Judge Clemes.  The  judge  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  He too  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant was a Syrian national from Aleppo.  He  found  the  appellant
    not to be a credible witness and concluded that he had "fabricated  his
    entire claim that he is Syrian".

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    challenging the judge's adverse credibility finding and his  conclusion
    that the appellant was not a Syrian national from Aleppo.

10. On 22 November 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Haria) granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

11. On 11 December 2019, the Secretary of State  filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

The Grounds of Appeal

12. Miss Alban, who  represented  the  appellant,  relied  upon  the  three
    grounds of appeal which she developed in her oral submissions.  Grounds
    1 and 3, in particular, set out a variety of points made in respect  of
    the judge's reasoning which led him to his adverse credibility  finding
    and conclusion that the appellant had not established he was  a  Syrian
    national from Aleppo.  I will deal with each of the  points  raised  in
    turn shortly.

13. In response, Mr  Howells,  who  represented  the  Secretary  of  State,
    submitted that the judge's reasoning was sustainable and  even  if  the
    judge had fallen into minor errors,  they  were  not  material  to  his
    ultimate finding and decision.

Discussion

14. The judge's reasoning, and analysis of the evidence, is set out in some
    detail at paras 16 - 26 of  his  determination.   In  her  submissions,
    relying upon the various points raised in grounds 1  -  3,  Miss  Alban
    contended that the judge had erred in a number of ways in reaching  his
    adverse credibility finding.

15. Miss Alban's first point under Ground 1 was that the judge had  applied
    an  incorrect  test  in  para  24  of  his  determination   and   given
    determinative weight to the appellant's failure  to  pursue  fully  the
    asylum claims that he made in the  three  safe  countries  of  Austria,
    Italy and France.  She submitted that the appellant's failure to do  so
    was merely 'potentially' damaging of his credibility.

16. Mr Howells, on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  the
    judge's reasoning in para 24 was not in error.  He had not treated  the
    fact that the appellant had not pursued, or even made, asylum claims in
    a number of EU countries as  being  determinative  of  the  appellant's
    credibility.  Mr Howells submitted that the judge had given a number of
    reasons in his decision for reaching his adverse finding.

17. Section 8 of the 2004 Act, so far as relevant, provides as follows:


         "Claimant's credibility


         (1) In determining whether to believe a statement made by or on
         behalf of a person who makes an asylum claim or a human rights
         claim, a deciding authority shall take account, as damaging the
         claimant's credibility, of any behaviour to which this section
         applies.

         (2) This section applies to any behaviour by the claimant that the
         deciding authority thinks-

             (a) is designed or likely to conceal information,

             (b) is designed or likely to mislead, or

             (c) is designed or likely to obstruct or delay the handling or
             resolution of the claim or the taking of a decision in
             relation to the claimant.

         ....

         (4) This section also applies to failure by the claimant to take
         advantage of a reasonable opportunity to make an asylum claim or
         human rights claim while in a safe country.

         ...."


18. It appears to be accepted  that  the  appellant  did  claim  asylum  in
    Hungary and Austria.  He passed through, but did not claim asylum, in a
    number of other EU countries including Greece, Italy  and  France.   In
    his second statement dated 19 September 2019, at para 6  the  appellant
    explains that he was told, when he was in Hungary, that he would be put
    in  prison  for  fifteen  days  if  he  did  not  claim  asylum.    His
    fingerprints were taken by force and he feared being returned to Syria.
     Further, he feared the other countries that he passed through would do
    the same thing.

19. At para 24 the judge said this:

         "He also - on his own account - travelled through  four  EU  member
         states without making asylum claims that he then properly  pursued.
         Even setting aside Hungary as an ideal place to make  a  claim,  he
         cannot avoid an adverse credibility finding on  the  basis  of  the
         choice to transit  the  other  three  countries  without  making  a
         sustained claim for protection from return  to  what  was  (on  any
         interpretation) a war zone."

20. By virtue of s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004, certain conduct by a Claimant  has  to  be  taken  into
    account as "damaging" of that Claimant's credibility (see s.8(1)).   As
    the Court of Appeal made clear in JT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ
    878, that conduct or behaviour has to be taken by the decision maker as
    only potentially damaging or an individual's credibility.   It  cannot,
    as Miss Alban submitted, be taken as determinative.  A failure to  take
    advantage of a "reasonable opportunity" to make an asylum  claim  in  a
    safe country (which includes the EU member state (s.8(7))) falls within
    s.8 by virtue of s.8(4) and is, therefore, conduct or behaviour that is
    potentially damaging of an individual's credibility.   That  provision,
    therefore, applied in principle to the  appellant's  failure  to  claim
    asylum in, at least, Greece, Italy and France.

21. The specific provision  dealing  with  failure  to  take  a  reasonable
    opportunity to claim asylum in s.8(4) does  not,  on  its  face,  apply
    where an individual has claimed asylum but does not  remain  to  pursue
    that claim in the relevant country.  It was  not  suggested  by  either
    representative that such conduct  could  not  in  principle  fall  more
    broadly within s.8.  In my judgment, the general provision in s.8(2) of
    any behaviour which is designed or likely to (a)  conceal  information,
    or (b) mislead, or (c) to obstruct or delay the handling or  resolution
    of the claim or the taking of a decision in relation to  the  Claimant,
    is sufficiently broad to cover conduct such as the  appellant  where  a
    claim is made but not pursued.   In  relation  to  s.8(4)  the  conduct
    involved is not taking advantage of a "reasonable opportunity" to  make
    an asylum claim.  Likewise, it was  not  suggested  before  me  that  a
    reasonable explanation as to why a claim was not pursued was irrelevant
    in determining whether a failure to pursue a claim that  was  made  was
    potentially damaging of the appellant's  credibility.   In  fact,  Miss
    Alban did not suggest that the judge would have fallen  into  error  in
    taking into account the appellant's failure either to make a  claim  or
    to pursue a claim once made as potentially damaging of his credibility.
     Her point was that the judge went further and treated  this  behaviour
    as determinative.

22. I note that it would appear from the appellant's asylum  interview  (at
    question 50) that at least some of the journey was paid for and  might,
    therefore, have involved the use of  an  agent.   Miss  Alban  did  not
    direct me to any specific evidence  in  relation  to  the  latter.   It
    appears that the appellant paid for  his  journey  between  Turkey  and
    Greece and then from France to the UK.  He does not appear to have paid
    for the journey between Greece and France.

23. The judge discounted the appellant's conduct in Hungary on the basis of
    it not being a "ideal place to make a claim".  Mr Howells invited me to
    take judicial notice of the fact that this  was  not  an  inappropriate
    view.  It was, therefore, only in relation to the other countries  that
    the judge had regard to the appellant's conduct.  The appellant's  only
    explanation was that he feared in those countries, as he had feared  in
    Hungary, that he would be detained and sent back  to  Syria.   I  doubt
    whether that subjective fear, in itself,  is  a  sufficient  reason  to
    conclude that the appellant did not take a "reasonable" opportunity  to
    claim asylum or, in the case of Austria, to pursue a claim that he  had
    made.

24. In any event, in relation to  the  specific  contention  made  by  Miss
    Alban, I do not accept  her  submission  that  the  judge  treated  the
    appellant's  behaviour  as  determinative.   I   accept   Mr   Howell's
    submission that this was only a reason that led the judge to reach  his
    adverse credibility finding.   It  is  absolutely  plain  that  in  his
    detailed reasons in paras 17 - 26 that the judge  gave  numerous  other
    reasons that led him to reach his adverse credibility finding.  Even if
    the judge could perhaps have phrased the point he was making in para 20
    somewhat  differently  from  "cannot  avoid  an   adverse   credibility
    finding", it is plain that the judge was not  taking  this  conduct  as
    determinative of the outcome of the appeal which would  have  been  the
    consequence of finding the appellant not to be credible.  The judge did
    not,  therefore,  misdirect  himself  in  taking   into   account   the
    appellant's behaviour either in not claiming asylum or, having done so,
    in not  pursuing  it  in  safe  third  countries  as  relevant  to  the
    appellant's credibility.

25. The second point made by Miss Alban under Ground 1, again  in  relation
    to para 24, challenges the judge's reasoning in taking into account the
    fact that the appellant had disposed  of  his  Syrian  ID  document  in
    Austria.  At para 24 the judge said this:

         "24. His credibility is further damaged by  the  decision  that  he
             made to dispose of his Syrian identity documents  in  Austria.
             He offered no valid reason for that in his  asylum  interview.
             In common with how he has conducted his  claim  generally,  he
             tries to explain his behaviour late in  his  claim  -  in  his
             September statement. Now, he says, he decided to  get  rid  of
             the card because he feared being sent back there after  having
             a less than welcoming reception in Hungary.  It is  noteworthy
             that he made no claims of ill-treatment in Hungary in  a  very
             detailed part of his asylum interview (question 39-42).  I  am
             satisfied that his lack of Syrian identity documentation is  a
             further illustration of the fact that he is not Syrian.  There
             is no logical reason for the appellant to get rid of the  most
             potent piece of evidence that he could have had to  show  that
             he was from Aleppo."

26. Miss Alban submitted that there was  a  "logical  reason"  because  the
    appellant's case was that he feared  return.   She  submitted  that  it
    might not appear logical to the judge that  he  feared  a  return  from
    Austria to Syria but that was not the test but rather  whether  he  had
    such a fear.

27. When asked about this in his asylum interview, the  appellant  said  at
    question  41  that  his  Syrian  ID  was  checked  in  Hungary  by  the
    authorities: "but I dropped it deliberately in Austria  as  soon  as  I
    spotted the police".  At question 42 he was asked  "Why  did  you  drop
    it?" To which he replied: "To be honest,  I  don't  know".   That  was,
    therefore, his  first  response  to  the  issue  being  raised  by  the
    Respondent.  The appellant repeated his fear in his  witness  statement
    of 19 September 2019 at para 5 namely that: "I thought if they  knew  I
    came from Syria and had ID, they would send me back  there,  just  like
    they told me in Hungary.  I was too scared to go back to Syria  because
    of the conflict so I threw my document away."  The appellant goes on to
    explain that he hopes to obtain further documentation from  his  family
    who are in Jordan.

28.  As  part  of  the  judge's  overall  assessment  of  the   appellant's
    credibility, in my judgment, he was  reasonably  entitled  to  conclude
    that  the  appellant's  explanation  did  not  stand  up  to  scrutiny,
    particularly having regard to the fact  that  the  appellant  initially
    failed to explain why he had thrown it away (and only did so  later  in
    his statement) and had not in his asylum interview  expressed  concerns
    about his  treatment  in  Hungary.   In  the  absence  of  the  judge's
    assessment of  the  evidence  being  unreasonable  or  irrational,  the
    appellant cannot succeed in establishing that he erred in law  in  this
    regard.  In my judgment, he has failed to establish that.

29. As a third point under Ground 1,  Miss  Alban  criticised  the  judge's
    reasoning in para 19 in which he  took  into  account  the  appellant's
    absconding and working illegally in the UK.  Miss Alban submitted  that
    the judge had been wrong to take this into account and to disregard the
    appellant's evidence that he was "scared" of being returned.

30. In effect, the judge was taking into  account  conduct  falling  within
    s.8(2) of the 2004 Act  as  potentially  damaging  of  the  appellant's
    credibility.  At para 18, the judge said this:

         "He explains his non-reporting (after 5 months' compliance, a  fact
         that is not disputed) arose from a  fear  that  if  he  carried  on
         reporting he would be arrested and sent to Syria.  I  am  satisfied
         that that is a false account.  He absconded,  I  find,  to  try  to
         evade his claim being processed and an interview taking place."

31. Then at para 19 the judge continues:

         "This statement is vague, likely deliberately so, on the time  that
         he worked illegally.  He avoids coverage of any adverse  points  in
         the statement.  I am satisfied that he  had  no  valid  reason  for
         absconding and working illegally - he has been unable  to  put  one
         forward, other than becoming  'scared'  of  being  returned.   That
         claim flies in the face of his choice of the UK as  the  safest  of
         havens, he having rejected Hungary, Austria, France  and  Italy  as
         places to fully pursue an asylum claim."

32. As the judge made clear in the remainder of para  19,  the  appellant's
    explanation - as in relation to a number of matters - emerged after his
    initial asylum interview.  So, in para  11  of  his  witness  statement
    dated 26 March 2018 and para  6  of  his  witness  statement  dated  19
    September 2019, the appellant explains that he feared that he would  be
    detained if he reported in the UK and sent back  to  Syria  and  so  he
    stopped reporting.

33. The assessment of this evidence was quintessentially a matter  for  the
    judge subject, again, to that assessment being reasonable and rational.
     Here, as part of the overall emergence of the appellant's explanations
    and bearing in mind that the appellant had claimed asylum on arrival in
    the UK, it was properly open to the judge to take into account that the
    appellant had absconded (and worked illegally) in assessing whether the
    appellant was a genuine asylum seeker and whether his account was to be
    believed.   That  was  neither  an  unreasonable  nor   an   irrational
    conclusion to reach as part of the judge's overall reasoning leading to
    his adverse credibility finding.

34. The fourth point relied on by Miss Alban  was  that  in  assessing  the
    accuracy (or extent) of the appellant's  knowledge  concerning  Aleppo,
    the judge had fallen into error in para 22 in taking into account  that
    the appellant had lived there for "30+ years".  Miss Alban pointed  out
    that the appellant had left Syria when he was about 19  years  of  age.
    Mr Howells acknowledged that the judge had been wrong to  consider  the
    appellant had lived in Syria for 30+ years but submitted that the error
    was not material.  He submitted that the appellant's age  (or  time  in
    Syria) was not relevant to his lack of knowledge  relied  upon  by  the
    judge.

35. It is difficult to deal with this point in isolation from a  number  of
    other  points  raised  in  the  grounds  concerned  with  the   judge's
    conclusions reached, in relation to the  appellant's  origins,  in  the
    light of his knowledge of Aleppo.  The judge's reasoning,  in  relation
    to these issues begins at para 21 through to para 23:

         "21. The appellant might not  have  foreseen  what  the  respondent
             would make any of these answers when she found out how limited
             his knowledge of Aleppo's geography was but I find that  these
             answers are  straightforward  and  explicit  factual  ones  to
             simple factual questions.  His  attempt  to  finesse  them  in
             evidence was evident when cross-examined.  Now, he said,  that
             he might drive but there were no customers and he had  thought
             that the respondent was asking if he was able (or allowed)  to
             drive.  I remind myself that the appellant pronounced  himself
             satisfied with the interview at the time of it and adopted his
             answers in it at the start of his evidence.  He now said  that
             his family had taught him to drive.  When he had said  in  his
             September statement that he could not drive, he had meant that
             he was not  allowed  to  do  so.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
             appellant has given inconsistent  answers  on  a  very  simple
             point and has  tried  to  alter  his  evidence  to  avoid  the
             inference drawn that a driver in Aleppo would know  the  basic
             layout of the city.  Someone who was not a Syrian from  Aleppo
             would struggle to give such detail and  I  am  satisfied  that
             this is precisely what was shown by this part of the evidence:
             the appellant is giving  a  wholly  false  account  which  has
             obliged him to change it as the case has evolved.  By the time
             that he was asked to describe the route that he worked on,  he
             resorted to a simple and (I am satisfied)  wholly  implausible
             account of a non-stop return featureless journey  between  two
             points as the only work that his  uncle  was  allowed  to  do.
             Having been caught out in this falsehood, he now has tried  to
             change his story to fit with his claim.  I am  satisfied  that
             his claim to be a driver in Aleppo was at all times a  lie  as
             are his attempts to explain it.

         22.  I am conscious that questions of  nationality  should  not  be
             determined on the basis of a geography 'quiz' but that this is
             not what has happened here, I find.  The appellant  has  lived
             all of his life in Aleppo, including being schooled there  and
             working as a driver there, he claims.  Yet he gave  vague  and
             general answers on Aleppo's features.  The schools  he  claims
             to have attended are not discoverable  on  internet  searches.
             His solicitor suggested that this is  because  they  might  no
             longer exist.  That - I am satisfied - is a feeble attempt  to
             explain away the appellant being caught out making  up  school
             names in his interview.  He did not go to school in Aleppo,  I
             find.  His grasp of Aleppo's landmarks  amounts  to  'the  big
             mosque, the citadel, the big university'.  No names were  then
             offered.  He now has been able to provide some names  and  did
             so in evidence.  I am satisfied that he  has  spent  the  time
             since his claim was refused trying  to  research  some  Aleppo
             features to cover up his actual lack of any genuine knowledge.
              His memory of Aleppo, after 30+ years living there,  is  that
             if is by the sea.  Aleppo - it  is  well  known  -  is  not  a
             seaside city.  He now says - in what I  find  is  a  desperate
             attempt to explain this fundamentally wrong answer -  that  he
             has confused a nearby lake with the sea.  His descriptions  of
             districts are generic for the most part ('east and west').  He
             could not name the sports stadium because (he says) he did not
             follow football but such a landmark would surely be well-known
             to inhabitants of Aleppo, especially someone  that  drove  the
             paying public for a living.

         23.  I am driven  to  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  poor
             command of Aleppo's geography comes from the fact that  he  is
             neither from Aleppo nor Syrian.  He had had some time to learn
             detail for his asylum interview and  he  had  the  benefit  of
             legal advice before he went for it.  I am  satisfied  that  he
             tried to learn some facets of Syrian life  and  that  accounts
             for the limited series of correct answers on  such  things  as
             popular singers,  the  currency,  the  flag  and  the  capital
             (although I note that he claimed wrongly that F Ahmed was from
             Aleppo when he was  not  and  that  his  other  favourite  was
             'George' despite being unable to offer a surname for him).  He
             could not name newspapers or local radio stations.   He  could
             name Aleppo dishes although I am satisfied that  these  dishes
             are standard Arabic fare, easily found on the internet or from
             the fact that he is Arabic."

36. Miss Alban also relied upon the judge's failure to  take  into  account
    the background evidence concerning the devastation in Aleppo  and  that
    the appellant's school might no longer be found.  Also, having referred
    me to a webpage news item (at page 7 of the supplementary bundle), Miss
    Alban pointed out that the  appellant  had  correctly  named  a  girl's
    school near his own at question 23 of his  asylum  interview.   It  was
    wrong, therefore, for the judge to state in para 22 that  none  of  the
    schools were "discoverable  on  internet  searches".   One  school,  at
    least, was identified in the  background  evidence  before  the  judge.
    Further, Miss Alban submitted, based upon a Google map at page 6 of the
    supplementary bundle, that the area in which the appellant  worked  was
    in fact a "featureless" area.

37. Mr Howells accepted that the judge had not taken into account the  news
    report which included the name of the nearby girl's  school.   Further,
    he submitted that the issue about  the  appellant's  knowledge  of  his
    local area was, in  fact,  part  of  the  judge's  reasoning  that  the
    appellant had changed his story about his employment as a driver by his
    uncle.

38. As regards that latter point, the judge dealt with that at para  20  as
    follows:

         "In evidence the appellant said (his September  statement,  drafted
         to answer the refusal letter,  it  seems)  that  'The  Home  Office
         states at Qs 25-29 that I said that I was a minibus  driver.   This
         is incorrect.  I did not drive the minibus [which] was owned by  my
         maternal uncle whom I worked with.  My job was to help  him,  which
         include taking the ticket money as well as getting my uncle cups of
         tea and cigarettes and basically what he wanted.  I was never  able
         to drive.  I have never  had  driving  lessons  and  never  held  a
         driving licence'.  I am satisfied that by the  time  the  appellant
         drafted his  statement,  he  was  aware  of  the  decision  maker's
         argument that a driver of a minibus would be much more aware of the
         geography of Aleppo than he had managed to be when he was answering
         questions in  his  interview.   The  appellant's  past  and  recent
         versions are wholly inconsistent, I am satisfied, and I find  as  a
         fact that the appellant clearly said in his asylum  interview  that
         he was a driver.  It is misleading to suggest (as he does  in  this
         latest statement) that the respondent said that he  was  a  driver.
         He said that he was a driver in the interview ('a driver  for  some
         time as well'), not  anyone  on  behalf  of  the  respondent.   The
         appellant  himself  then  expanded  on  the  account  in  answering
         subsequent questions - he drove a minibus owned by his  uncle  (the
         only part of his account on this point which has  been  consistent)
         and it was used to transfer people."

39. There is no doubt that the judge wrongly stated that the appellant  had
    lived in Aleppo for 30+ years when in  fact  he  had  lived  there  for
    around 19 years.  Also, the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    documents at page 7 of the supplementary  bundle  which  confirmed  the
    name of the school close to the appellant's claimed school.

40. It remained the fact, however, that the appellant's  own  school  could
    not be discovered on internet searches and Miss Alban  did  not  submit
    otherwise.  The judge was plainly aware of the background situation  in
    Syria and, in particular in Aleppo, that it had been devastated by  the
    warring factions.  The judge's reasoning must be read as a  whole.   It
    was, in my judgment, plainly open to the judge  to  take  into  account
    that the appellant had changed his account as to whether or not he  was
    a driver for his uncle.   Despite  Miss  Alban's  attempts  to  suggest
    otherwise, it is plain from questions 25  -  30,  that  the  appellant,
    without undue prompting, identified that he was "a driver for some time
    as well" (question 25) and that he drove "a minibus" (question 27)  and
    that that minibus was owned by his maternal uncle whom he  worked  with
    (question 28).  At question 37, in response to a question  about  local
    football team and why he was not aware of any of their names, he  added
    that "I am only interested in  driving".   The  appellant  subsequently
    changed  his  evidence  about  that  stating  in  his  September   2019
    statement, that he had not driven a minibus.  He had never been able to
    drive; he had never taken driving lessons and had never held a  driving
    licence.  This was a significant change in his evidence which the judge
    was entitled to take into account  and  the  discrepancy  was  no  more
    explicable if the appellant had lived 30+ or 19 years in Aleppo.

41. Likewise, there  were  significant  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence concerning the geographical location of Aleppo.  He claimed it
    was either by the  sea  or  by  the  Red  Sea.   It  was  neither.   He
    subsequently sought to explain in his statement of September 2019  that
    he was referring to a "lake" which was about twenty minutes by car from
    his home and to which he had gone with his family when he was about  15
    years old.  He says that he thought Aleppo was near the Red Sea but  he
    recognised that it was not and said: "The Red Sea was the nearest sea I
    could think of".  The appellant  was  giving  knowledge  from  his  own
    experience.  His geographical knowledge was, and the contrary  was  not
    contended before me,  significantly  inaccurate.   Again,  whether  the
    appellant had lived in Aleppo for  19  or  30+  years,  the  judge  was
    entitled  to  take  into  account  these  significant  errors  in   the
    appellant's geographical knowledge in  assessing  whether  he  did,  in
    fact, come from Aleppo.

42. Miss Alban also submitted that the judge had been wrong  to  take  into
    account the fact that the appellant named a particular singer as coming
    from Aleppo when, in fact, Miss Alban  submitted  that  the  background
    evidence before the judge (at page 4 of the supplementary bundle) noted
    that the individual was a "Syrian singer".  The  difficulty  with  this
    submission is that  in  his  asylum  interview  (at  question  66)  the
    appellant was asked for  any  famous  or  well-known  people  "born  in
    Aleppo".  In response to that he named  this  particular  singer.   The
    background evidence, though describing her as a  "Syrian  singer"  does
    not show that she was born or, indeed, lived in or around  Aleppo.   It
    gives her place of birth as "Lebanon" and,  although  she  started  her
    singing career in Damascus, she later moved to Cairo.   Egypt  features
    in her life, both as a place of residence and also that she is  married
    to an Egyptian composer.  The material relied upon by Miss  Alban  does
    not, therefore, substantiate the appellant's answer as  being  correct.
    The judge was, in my judgment, entitled to treat the appellant's answer
    as not consistent with his claim to be someone from Aleppo.

43. Relying upon Ground 3, Miss Alban criticised the judge at paras 20  and
    21 of his determination for noting that the appellant had "adopted  his
    answers" in his interview at the start of his evidence.  She  submitted
    that the appellant had contested the accuracy of his  interview  and  a
    copy of the recording of the interview had never been provided  to  the
    appellant.

44. This, in my judgment, is a point without any real  substance.   To  the
    extent that it was suggested  that  the  judge  had  simply  taken  the
    appellant's evidence as given in his interview, it is  plain  that  the
    judge did not do that as substantial parts of his  reasoning  take  the
    appellant's evidence at interview and contrast it with evidence that he
    subsequently gave, either that was inconsistent with what  he  said  in
    his interview or, to the  extent  it  was  being  contended,  that  the
    interview record was inaccurate.  Whilst the absence of  the  recording
    required caution to be exercised in relying on the appellant's  answers
    at interview, it was not in  itself  good  reason  to  disregard  those
    answers.  Indeed, much of the appellant's subsequent evidence  was  not
    directed towards disputing the content of the interview, but seeking to
    gloss the answers or explain what had been said.  The judge was, in  my
    judgment, clearly  aware  of  the  appellant's  case  on  the  evidence
    derived, in large part, from his rebuttal statement in March 2018  and,
    grappling with the  differences  in  that  evidence,  gave  cogent  and
    sustainable reason for concluding that the appellant's account was  not
    to be accepted.

45. Two final points raised by Miss Alban.  She submitted that,  in  taking
    into account the lack of detail in the appellant's answer  at  question
    53 about landmarks in Aleppo as being "the big mosque, the citadel, the
    big university", the appellant had not been given  any  opportunity  to
    follow up on that in the  questions  that  followed.   Whilst  that  is
    undoubtedly the case, the fact  remains  that  the  appellant  did  not
    provide any detail in his initial answer and the judge was entitled  to
    take this into account as one reason, and  it  was  only  one  of  many
    reasons, why he did not accept that the appellant  was  genuinely  from
    Aleppo.

46.  Secondly,  Miss  Alban  criticised  the  judge  at  para  17  of   his
    determination where he concluded that the appellant's delay in pursuing
    his asylum claim was explicable on the basis  that  he  was  not  in  a
    position to fake an asylum interview and needed more  time  to  prepare
    for it.  At para 17 the judge said this:

         "Yet he struggled to answer very simple questions about  that  city
         when he was interviewed.  The  timing  of  his  interview  is  also
         significant, I am satisfied.  Having made a claim for asylum on the
         day after he arrived in the UK, he then reported for 5  months  but
         then absconded.  I find the chronology complied by his solicitors a
         partial and somewhat disingenuous document as it makes  no  mention
         whatsoever of the appellant absconding after  he  was  required  to
         report by the respondent.  I am satisfied that he was - at least in
         part - motivated by a concern that he was  not  ready  to  face  an
         asylum interview and needed more time to prepare for it or possibly
         avoid one altogether by disappearing from view.  He  moved  out  of
         the area where the respondent had accommodated him  (Yorkshire)  to
         Bristol  where  he  worked  illegally  for  a  time  until  he  was
         discovered by chance by the respondent.  Two months  after  he  was
         put back on reporting conditions, he had his solicitors contact the
         respondent to revive his asylum claim.  I am  satisfied  that  this
         was timing of the appellant's choosing - he now felt  that  he  was
         ready to undergo an asylum interview.  I am satisfied that  he  had
         tried to avoid it until this point and had by, late 2017,  acquired
         sufficient knowledge to back up his false claim that  he  was  from
         Aleppo.  He sent in evidence on 29 March 2018 - 2� years  after  he
         came back to the UK."

47. It is, in my judgment, important to put the  judge's  comments  in  the
    context of the totality of his reasons for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    claim as credible that he is a Syrian from Aleppo.  Paragraph 17 itself
    begins with the judge's ultimate conclusion, yet to be  reasoned,  that
    he finds the appellant not to be  credible  and  that  his  account  is
    inconsistent and that he has lacked knowledge which would  be  expected
    of him given he has lived all his life in Aleppo until he came  to  the
    UK.  The judge's comment in para 17 is, in effect, a  conclusion  based
    upon his ultimate decision that  he  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    account, in particular based upon the 'improved' detail of his  account
    over time.  Indeed, as Mr Howells pointed out in his  submissions,  not
    only did the appellant not reengage with the Home Office for some  time
    after ceasing to report, but also it took  him  a  further  two  months
    after he was encountered by the police on  6  October  2017  to  pursue
    again his asylum claim on 22 December 2017.  His initial statement  and
    asylum interviews took place respectively in March and December 2018.

48. Whilst, as  is  accepted  by  Mr  Howells,  there  were  a  few  errors
    identified in the judge's decision, I reject Miss  Alban's  submissions
    that his decision is legally flawed and cannot stand.

49. Standing back from the detail of the points made by Miss  Alban,  there
    were a number of significant discrepancies and inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence which the judge was entitled to take into  account
    and sustain his adverse credibility  finding.   I  accept  Mr  Howells'
    submission that the judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant's
    evidence evolved over time in order to meet the respondent's  case,  in
    particular, denying that he was (or had said that he was) a  driver  in
    Aleppo which was relevant to his local knowledge and  that  his  family
    were refugees in Jordan but later that they were illegal residents  and
    the former status would mean they would likely  have  documentation  to
    support his Syrian nationality.

50. For all these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge did not materially
    err in law  in  reaching  his  findings  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he was a Syrian national from Aleppo and, accordingly,
    his appeal should be dismissed.

Decision

51. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds did not involve the making of a material error of
    law.  That decision stands.

52. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               13 March 2020

