
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08696/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th April 2019                            |On 23rd April 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                      P
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in this determination identified as P. This direction applies
    to, amongst others, all  parties.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. By a decision promulgated on 9th January 2018, First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Ford  dismissed  P's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
         respondent refusing his human rights claim on  Article  3  grounds.
         Permission to appeal was granted.

      2. Ms Harvey did not seek to pursue the nationality issue although she
         did take the view that the First-tier  Tribunal  was  incorrect  in
         refusing to deal with the issue given  that  it  was  not  advanced
         before the First-tier Tribunal as a dispute as to  nationality  but
         rather as part of an Article 8 claim. Given the fundamental  errors
         by the First-tier Tribunal judge in failing to address the  grounds
         of appeal relied upon by the appellant and only  dealing  with  the
         issue as an "Article  3  health  case",  and  failing  to  consider
         Article 8 at all, I am satisfied, as conceded by Mr Mills, that the
         First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law such that  the  decision  is
         set aside to be remade.

      3. Pursuant to Rule 39 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 and by the consent of the parties the following order is
         made:

          i) Upon the determination by the First-Tier Tribunal disclosing a
             material error of law and being set aside on 16th April 2019.

         ii) And upon the parties agreeing that  the  evidence  establishes
             that P would, if returned to South Africa, be  at  risk  of  a
             breach of his article 3 and 8 rights, the appeal  against  the
             refusal of his article 3 and 8 claim is allowed.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 16th April 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
