
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: PA/08879/2016     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 September 2019             |On 15 November 2019              |
|                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                L K (Albania)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Gherman, instructed by Virgo Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. On 17 July 2019, I issued a decision in which I concluded that the First-
   tier Tribunal had erred materially in law in dismissing the  appellant's
   appeal.  I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First  tier,  although  I
   preserved certain findings of fact which were not tainted by  the  legal
   error into which that  Tribunal  had  fallen.   Given  the  history  and
   relative complexity of the case, which has been ongoing since 22  August
   2016, I directed that the decision on the appeal would be remade in  the
   Upper Tribunal. To that end, I reserved the case to myself.  The hearing
   reconvened before me on 23 September 2019, when Ms  Gherman  of  counsel
   continued to  represent  the  appellant  and  Ms  Everett  continued  to
   represent the respondent.

2. I have appended my decision of 17 July to this one and I do not  propose
   to rehearse its contents.  The unusual factual background appears at [3]
   of my first decision.  The appellant was a police officer in Albania who
   refused to become involved in illegal activity at Tirana Airport,  where
   she was stationed.  She fears recriminations from  the  gang  which  was
   behind that activity, including physical harm at their hands and a false
   prosecution which she believes to have been instigated  by  them  in  an
   attempt to keep her out of the country.  At [21] of my first decision, I
   stated that there were five key  factual  elements  to  the  appellant's
   claim:

         Firstly, that the appellant  was  a  police  officer  stationed  at
         Tirana Airport.  Secondly, that illegal migration  was  facilitated
         at that airport and the appellant refused inducements to take part.
          Thirdly, that the appellant had been  threatened  by  BM  and  his
         associates for that refusal.  Fourthly, that she was the subject of
         a prosecution  in  Albania.   Fifthly,  that  the  prosecution  was
         instigated at the request of the criminal elements which controlled
         the operation at the airport.

3. The judge in the FtT accepted that the appellant was a police officer at
   the airport and that she had refused inducements to become  involved  in
   illegal activity there.  It was also accepted that there was  a  pending
   prosecution against the appellant.  The judge did not  accept,  however,
   that the appellant  was  actively  targeted  by  BM,  a  senior  officer
   involved in the illegal activities, whether by threats of violence or by
   the instigation of false charges.  As I explained in my first  decision,
   the premise which underpinned those conclusions was that  the  appellant
   knew too little about the operation for the gang to go to these lengths.
    The judge felt that the appellant had not been 'making waves' and  that
   she would have been left alone by the gang.  I accepted that Ms  Gherman
   had established a critical flaw in that  premise,  which  was  that  the
   judge had overlooked aspects of the  evidence  in  which  the  appellant
   claimed to know enough information about the gang to cause  difficulties
   for them.  Ms Everett  sensibly  accepted  that  the  remainder  of  the
   decision could not stand insofar as  it  was  based  on  that  erroneous
   premise.  So it was that the  appeal  returned  before  me  for  further
   findings of fact to be made on the remaining issues, and for the  appeal
   to be determined in light of those findings.


4. Despite my directions that there should be a consolidated  bundle  filed
   and served in advance of the resumed hearing, this had not occurred.  Ms
   Gherman indicated that she intended to rely upon the bundle of 496 pages
   which had been filed in advance  of  the  first  hearing.   I  had  that
   bundle, as did Ms Everett, and the failure to comply with my  directions
   caused no difficulty.  Ms Gherman indicated that she  intended  to  call
   the appellant to give  brief  evidence  in  chief.   I  noted  that  the
   appellant's latest statement was well  over  a  year  old.   Ms  Gherman
   assured me that the updating evidence she intended to  elicit  from  the
   appellant would not place Ms Everett in any difficulty.  It was in those
   circumstances that I allowed Ms Gherman to ask the  appellant  questions
   beyond the formal adoption of her witness statement.  Before she did so,
   she drew to my attention the fact that the  court-appointed  interpreter
   had interpreted for the appellant at a  previous  hearing  in  the  FtT.
   This caused the appellant no concern.   Ms  Everett  confirmed  that  it
   caused the respondent no concern.  I saw no reason why it  should  cause
   the Tribunal concern, there having been no concern  of  any  description
   raised about the conduct of this interpreter on the previous occasion.


5. Before the appellant gave evidence, I indicated that I intended to treat
   her as a vulnerable witness in accordance with  the  Joint  Presidential
   Guidance Note No 2 2010.  I did so without objection from Ms Everett and
   on account  of  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  is  suffering  from
   depression and anxiety, as documented in her  NHS  records  and  in  the
   report of Dr  Cutting,  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist.   I  explained  the
   procedure which would be followed to the  appellant  in  light  of  that
   decision.  She confirmed that she understood the interpreter.

Oral Evidence
6. The appellant adopted her previous statements.  She stated that she  had
   had no contact with her family in Albania since October 2018.   She  had
   spoken to her mother in France 'a little' and she was  aware  that  they
   had been refused asylum and were in the process of appealing.  There was
   no timescale that she knew of.  She had had no contact with  her  lawyer
   in Albania.  She had chosen not to do so because she felt  that  he  had
   abandoned her case.  She had not been provided with any other update  on
   the case from another party.  She had received no further threats  since
   October 2018.  Her son was healthy and was three and a half  years  old.
   As for her mental health, she was taking Mirtazapine for stress  and  to
   aid her sleep.  She took it every day, a 45 mg  dose.   She  planned  to
   start counselling sessions in October.

7. Cross-examined by Ms Everett, the appellant  stated  that  she  had  not
   thought about instructing another lawyer in Albania;  no  one  took  her
   case without being paid and she did not have enough money to  take  that
   step.  It was correct that her niece in Albania had  power  of  attorney
   but that was in 2015, merely to start the case.  Her niece  remained  in
   Albania but she had not been in contact.  Her niece is a young girl  and
   was too frightened to contact the appellant.  Her niece in 27 years old.
    Ms Everett suggested to the appellant  that  she  had  previously  been
   represented by a legal aid lawyer in Albania and that this had  been  in
   2017.  The appellant stated that her niece had not had power of attorney
   at that time.  Ms Everett suggested to the appellant  that  her  witness
   statement tended to suggest the contrary, and the  appellant  maintained
   that her niece had only had power of attorney at the very beginning.

8. Ms Everett asked the appellant about the reference in her statement to a
   'good friend' who had assisted her to  find  a  lawyer.   The  appellant
   stated that this was a woman who had studied law and had  been  able  to
   put her in touch with a legal aid lawyer.  This woman did not want to be
   involved, however, and the appellant had not sought to make  touch  with
   her again. She did not want to have contact with anyone from  university
   or from her workplace because she feared for her life.  Other people had
   been arrested from her workplace but that had happened after she came to
   the UK.  Ms Everett asked whether they had been  released  from  prison.
   The appellant said they had not.  She had only  known  these  people  as
   colleagues.  She did not know whether they were  part  of  the  criminal
   mafia in Albania and she did not know whether they were  not  guilty  of
   the charges they faced.  They did the same job as the appellant.

9. Asked about her family in Albania, the appellant said that she  had  two
   sisters there, as well as other relatives and an uncle.  She was not  in
   contact with them and they did not want to speak to her.   She  did  not
   think that her parents were in  contact  with  these  relatives  either,
   although she did not talk to her parents  about  that.   She  felt  very
   stressed and unable to talk.  Her parents would typically just  ask  how
   she was and the conversation would progress no further. Ms Everett asked
   whether the appellant sent photos of her  child  to  her  parents.   The
   appellant said that she did not; she spoke to her parents on  Skype  and
   they had consequently seen her son in that way.   Her  sisters  had  not
   seen her son either.

10. There was no re-examination.

Submissions
11. Ms Everett relied on those aspects of the refusal letter which  survived
   the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  preserved  findings
   resolved the large part of the appeal and the area of dispute was really
   what would happen to the appellant on arrival.  It was  not  clear  that
   the appellant posed any kind of risk to the  gang.   She  perceived  her
   manager to be involved but was not aware of  whether  other  people  had
   been.  She was clearly afraid of the rampant corruption in Albania.  The
   background evidence was not entirely supportive of her  contention  that
   she would not receive a fair trial.  It was clearly the case that  there
   is corruption in Albania but it was equally clear that concerted efforts
   were being made to deal with that problem.  It was not clear  which  way
   that cut in the present case; it could be indicative of a sufficiency of
   protection,  in  that  the  real  criminals  had  been   convicted   and
   imprisoned.  Or it could be indicative of an ability on the part of  the
   criminals to secure an unjust result.  The appellant was not a  whistle-
   blower and the reality remained that she  had  no  concrete  basis  upon
   which to incriminate the gang.  It was wholly unclear why the gang would
   target her with a false prosecution if they intended to  kill  her  upon
   arrival.  If it was correct that  they  had  their  tentacles  into  the
   judiciary then she was likely to be in difficulty but the government was
   clearly trying  to  get  a  grip  on  such  matters.   It  was  slightly
   surprising that the appellant had not been in contact with  more  people
   in Albania.  She had arranged for her niece to have power of attorney in
   the past and it was odd that she had taken no further such steps.

12. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, Ms Everett submitted that  the  appellant
   clearly had a support network in Albania and it was not  the  case  that
   her child would go to an orphanage.  In the event that the  appeal  fell
   to be allowed on protection grounds, the Article 8 ECHR claim would fall
   away.  The protection claim was clearly  the  stronger  of  the  claims,
   given the appellant's support network and the fact  that  the  appellant
   has a degree  and  a  professional  background.   There  were  not  very
   significant obstacles to the appellant's re-integration to Albania.  Her
   appeal fell to be dismissed.

13. Ms Gherman relied on the skeleton argument  she  had  prepared  for  the
   hearing before the FtT; the further submissions she had made after  that
   hearing and the grounds of appeal she had settled to the Upper Tribunal.
    She posed a series of factual questions which she invited me to resolve
   in the appellant's favour.  Firstly, was it accepted that  there  was  a
   criminal mafia which had its 'tentacles' in every arm  of  the  Albanian
   state?  The material cited in the skeleton and the  expert  report  from
   Antonia Young clearly established that to be the case.  As that material
   showed, there are strong ties between the police and  the  judiciary  in
   Albania.  The material cited in the skeleton was not  partial;  it  came
   from the respondent's  CPIN  itself.   The  next  question,  Ms  Gherman
   submitted, was whether or not there was interest in this appellant.  She
   had dealt with this point most thoroughly in her grounds  of  appeal  to
   the Upper Tribunal, [12] of which drew together the  evidence  that  the
   appellant knew a little too much about the activities of BM and would be
   an obvious person to silence if they were  attempting  to  secure  their
   position.  The obvious inference from the fact that BM's  father  was  a
   senior police officer was that pressure had  been  brought  to  bear  on
   those in positions of  authority.   The  appellant  knew  about  serious
   criminal conduct on the part of senior figures and  there  was  a  clear
   reason to keep her quiet.  She had seen enough and she would be at  risk
   from the mafia and the authorities.  She would not receive a fair trial.
    The judge in the FtT had set a great deal of store in the  decision  of
   the Scottish High Court in Kapri v Lord Advocate 2014 SLT 557  but  this
   was clearly distinguishable on the basis that the appellant in that case
   had no profile which might influence the trial process in Albania.   The
   same could not be said of  this  appellant.   As  for  the  question  of
   whether the appellant's claim engaged  the  protection  of  the  Refugee
   Convention, it clearly  did.   The  appellant  was  perceived  as  being
   different because she would not play her part in the endemic  corruption
   in Albania.  Failing that, she was at risk  on  account  of  her  actual
   political opinion, which favoured the rule of law.

14. The appellant's Article 8 ECHR  was  advanced  inside  and  outside  the
   Immigration Rules.  Under the Rules, Ms  Gherman  submitted  that  there
   would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's re-integration to
   Albania.  She had given truthful evidence about cutting  ties  with  her
   family in Albania.  They had no desire to have contact with her when  to
   do so might jeopardise  their  own  safety;  the  account  was  entirely
   plausible in that  regard.   The  appellant  had  attempted  to  protect
   herself and  her  son  by  distancing  herself  from  her  family.   The
   consequence was that the appellant had no one to go back to in  Albania.
   The consequences of returning  to  Albania  as  a  lone  woman  with  an
   illegitimate child were made clear in the  country  guidance  decisions,
   and were worsened for a person,  such  as  the  appellant,  with  mental
   health problems.  As a package of difficulties, these problems  amounted
   to very significant obstacles.  Ms Young had considered the issue in her
   report and it was clear that Albania  had  very  different  views  about
   women with illegitimate children.  It remained Ms  Gherman's  submission
   that there was a possibility of the appellant's son being taken into  an
   orphanage in the event  that  she  was  detained  pre-trial.   The  best
   interests of her son were served by remaining in the United Kingdom.

Analysis
15. It is for the appellant to prove  her  protection  claim  to  the  lower
   standard.  Much of it has already been accepted,  as  I  have  explained
   above and in my earlier decision.  It is abundantly clear, as the  judge
   in the FtT found, that the appellant was a police officer in Albania and
   that she was serving at the  airport.   There  is  copious  evidence  in
   support of that claim, including her original  identity  cards  and  her
   bank statements showing salary payments from the  Border  and  Migration
   Department.   It  is  also  reasonably  likely,  when  the   appellant's
   consistent and detailed claim is set  against  the  background  material
   cited in Ms Gherman's skeleton, that there were  illegal  activities  at
   Tirana  International   Airport   and   that   the   appellant   refused
   blandishments to become  involved  in  those  activities.   The  primary
   factual question for me - as  Ms  Everett  recognised  in  her  measured
   submissions on behalf of the respondent - is what would  happen  to  the
   appellant on return to Albania in light of that refusal.


16. I do not accept the submission made by Ms Everett that the gang  has  no
   reason to target the appellant.  It is correct that she did not seek  to
   progress a complaint against BM or his associates.  She did not become a
   whistle-blower and she did not 'make waves', as the judge found  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal.  The fact remains, however, that she  is  privy  to
   information which could cause problems for  BM  and  therefore  for  his
   father, the Chief of Criminal Investigations of the  Border  Directorate
   at Tirana Airport.  The appellant gave details of  this  information  in
   her statement of 5 March 2017.   She  was  asked  by  BM  to  'let  some
   unauthorised Turkish immigrants into the country  and  let  some  banned
   Albanians leave the country'.  She was offered financial inducements  by
   him to become involved.  She refused a direct order to become  involved.
   She  was  aware  that  BM  and  others  had  failed  to  enter  relevant
   information onto the immigration system at the airport and she was  also
   aware that they had deleted relevant entries in  order  to  cover  their
   tracks.  She had prevented a passenger from leaving  the  country,  only
   for BM to take that individual to a corrupt officer who allowed  him  to
   pass.  There was a further incident involving three  banned  individuals
   who the appellant refused to allow to  travel.   BM  instructed  her  to
   reverse her decision because 'they were known to the Director'  but  the
   appellant maintained her stance, only for the people to be taken to  one
   of the corrupt officers  and  allowed  to  travel.   The  appellant  can
   document a catalogue of misconduct on the part of BM.


17. The appellant left the country in October  2015.   Two  days  after  she
   left, proceedings were issued against her.  It is reasonably likely,  in
   my judgment, that there was a direct link between these two events.  The
   appellant had left the country and could then have chosen  to  blow  the
   whistle about the gang's activities.   In  an  effort  to  prevent  that
   happening, or in order to discredit  the  appellant  in  advance  of  it
   happening, criminal proceedings were initiated against her  and  threats
   were made against her and her family.  It is reasonably likely that  the
   gang sought to silence the appellant in this way and, as she suggests at
   [9] of her March 2017 statement, to cause her to fear returning  to  the
   country.  Ms Everett submitted that the gang would not initiate a  false
   prosecution whilst at the same time threatening the appellant.  I do not
   agree.  The method employed is to attempt to control  the  appellant  by
   threatening her and her parents whilst  at  the  same  time  seeking  to
   discredit her through  prosecution  and  the  resulting  loss  of  long-
   standing employment as a police  officer  with  a  long  and  reasonably
   distinguished service record.


18. Ms Everett queried why the appellant had not pursued  avenues  of  legal
   redress and why she had not been in contact with those -  including  her
   niece - who had been prepared to assist her in the past.   I  considered
   her response to these lines  of  cross-examination  to  be  entirely  in
   keeping with the report from  Dr  Cutting  and  the  associated  medical
   papers from the NHS.  Before me, the appellant gave  the  impression  of
   having been 'beaten' by the pressures she faces in Albania, and to  have
   given up.  In the absence of evidence  confirming  long-standing  mental
   health problems, Ms Everett's submission that the appellant  could  have
   done more to contest the untrue allegations might have held  water.   In
   the context  of  a  woman  with  a  young  child  who  has  faced  these
   allegations for four years, however, I considered it to have the ring of
   truth that she had simply stopped contacting people in Albania  because,
   rightly or wrongly, she felt that there was no more which could be done.



19. I find that the appellant's account is  reasonably  likely  to  be  true
   from start to finish.  I accept that she is a police officer who decided
   to take a principled stand against the corruption  at  the  airport  and
   that this decision resulted in threats and a false  prosecution  against
   her.  Those threats were  sufficiently  serious  that  they  caused  her
   parents to flee the country and to  claim  asylum  in  France  and  they
   caused the appellant to take the decision that she could not  return  to
   Albania.

20. In the  event  that  the  appellant  were  to  return,  I  consider  the
   predominant risk to be that she  and  her  son  would  be  targeted  for
   physical harm by those behind the illicit activities at Tirana  Airport.
   As an individual who is targeted  by  people  with  connections  at  the
   highest level of the police force, and against  whom  there  are  extant
   proceedings, I consider it unlikely  that  she  could  depend  upon  any
   realistic avenues of domestic redress against this threat.  I accept the
   submissions made by both advocates  in  this  respect.   Ms  Everett  is
   doubtless correct to submit that the  Albanian  authorities  are  making
   great progress in addressing corruption and in fighting trafficking  and
   other such criminality.  Ms Gherman is also correct to submit,  however,
   that corruption is still  common.   Sadly,  as  the  third  report  from
   Antonia Young shows, the extent of  that  corruption  extends  into  the
   judiciary and a new judicial vetting system which was introduced in 2018
   has made little progress.  It remains the case that the police force and
   the judiciary have strong ties to organised crime.


21.  The  second  threat  faced  by  the  appellant  is  one   of   wrongful
   prosecution.  In the First-tier Tribunal, the  judge  thought  that  the
   appellant would receive a  fair  trial.   As  I  noted  in  my  original
   decision, that was not a finding which was reached in  the  alternative.
   It took as its starting point the judge's conclusion that the  appellant
   was of no real or ongoing interest to BM and his  associates.   For  the
   reasons I have given above, I  have  reached  the  opposite  conclusion.
   Having so decided, and having considered the material parts  of  Antonia
   Young's report alongside the background evidence cited  in  the  refusal
   letter, I come to the clear conclusion that  this  appellant's  case  is
   immediately distinguishable from a case such as the Scottish extradition
   case of Kapri.  As Ms Gherman noted in her  written  submissions  before
   the FtT, the appellant in that case had no reason to  believe  that  the
   judicial system in Albania would be skewed against him.  In  this  case,
   there is every reason to believe that  the  appellant's  pursuers  would
   have the motive and the means to skew the  trial  process  against  her.
   That such corrupt practices occur in the judicial system in  Albania  is
   clear from the background material  cited,  including  the  respondent's
   CPIN, relevant sections of which are helpfully reproduced at [46] of  Ms
   Gherman's original skeleton argument.  BM in particular has  connections
   at the very highest levels through which pressure could  be  brought  to
   bear.


22. I therefore come to the clear conclusion that the  appellant  faces  two
   types of risk on return to Albania and that there would be  no  adequate
   domestic redress against either threat.  Ms Everett did not submit  that
   the appellant could relocate internally so as to avoid any such  threat.
   She was quite right not to do so, for two reasons.  Firstly, there is  a
   likelihood that the threats would be realised as soon as  the  appellant
   arrived in Tirana, given that the risk is from  state  actors  or  rogue
   state actors.  Secondly, as is clear from the country guidance decisions
   in AM & BM [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) and  TD  &  AD  [2016]  UKUT  92  (IAC),
   Albania is a small country in which an individual's background is likely
   to be the subject of enquiry, thereby enabling a would-be persecutor  to
   learn of an individual's new location.

23. It remains for me to consider whether the risk faced  by  the  appellant
   is one which engages the Refugee Convention.  Ms Gherman submitted  that
   it did so in two ways.  She submitted firstly that it the appellant  was
   at risk because of her actual political opinion, which she described  at
   [25] of her skeleton argument as being "respecting the Rule of  Law  and
   being anti-corruption".  This  submission  was  not  further  developed,
   whether by reference to the Qualification  Directive  or  the  extensive
   domestic and international jurisprudence in which  such  questions  have
   been considered.  I have therefore considered the point for myself.

24. Article 10(1)(e) of the  Qualification  Directive  does  not  appear  to
   assist the appellant.  She does not hold an opinion, thought  or  belief
   about the policies or methods of the Albanian state.  On  the  contrary,
   the stated  policy  of  the  Albanian  state  is  anti-corruption.   The
   treatment at paragraph 5.8.2 of  Professor  Hathaway's  Law  of  Refugee
   Status (2nd Edition) is of interest, however, as he notes at  p415  that
   there are three contemporary contexts in which the ability to  recognise
   refugee  status  based  on  imputed  political  opinion  has  particular
   salience, one of which is identified as "opposition to corruption".   As
   he recognises thereafter:

         The difficulty with these claims is that a risk of being persecuted
         is not for reasons of political opinion simply because it arises in
         a politicised context.   Unless  the  reason  for  the  applicant's
         predicament is his or her political opinion, -  whether  it  is  an
         opinion genuinely held, or an opinion  imputed  or  implies  -  the
         causal nexus is not met.

25. Professor Hathaway emphasises that the assessment of the  claim  in  the
   context of the particular society is key.  Considering  the  appellant's
   claim in the context of Albanian society and Albanian politics, I do not
   think that it can properly be said that decrying (or refusing to  become
   involved in) corruption there can be said  to  strike  at  the  core  of
   government.  On the contrary, the appellant's beliefs are  aligned  with
   the politics of the Albanian state.  The reason that the appellant fears
   persecution is as a result of her opposition to corruption on  the  part
   of individual  officers,  in  respect  of  which  the  approach  of  the
   Australian Federal Court in Zheng  v MIMA [2000] FCA 670,  as  cited  by
   Professor Hathaway at p417, applies:

         [it] needs to be emphasised  that  where  individual,  rather  than
         systemic, corruption is exposed it is less likely that the  act  of
         exposure will be one in which a political opinion will be  seen  to
         have been  manifested.   This  is  because  the  exposure  in  that
         instance is more likely to be seen as  the  reporting  of  criminal
         conduct rather than any form of  opposition  to,  or  defiance  of,
         state authority or governance.

26. That decision is obviously not binding on me but I  find  the  reasoning
   to be highly persuasive.  The appellant's opposition to the  actions  of
   BM and his associates cannot properly be categorised  as  political  and
   the reasons that she would be targeted by them are  not  rooted  in  her
   actual or imputed political opinion.  They seek to  target  her  because
   she has the potential to undermine their criminal activities  and  those
   practices are not so closely intertwined with the state that a challenge
   to them is a challenge to the state itself.  In  the  Albanian  context,
   the appellant's refusal to become involved and the threat that she faces
   as a result does not engage the Convention by this route.

27. Ms Gherman also submitted that the appellant was at risk of  persecution
   on account of her membership of a Particular Social Group.  It seems  to
   me that the appellant must, in this context, have  a  common  background
   that cannot be changed, as required by Article 10(1)(d) of the QD.   She
   is a police officer who has taken a stand  against  corruption  and  she
   cannot now change the fact that she shares that  background  with  other
   such officers.

28. The second requirement in Article 10(1)(d)  is  that  the  group  should
   have a distinct identity in the relevant country because it is perceived
   as being different by the surrounding society.  In this  respect,  I  am
   also with Ms Gherman.  Corruption is still sufficiently pervasive in the
   Albanian police force that an officer who refuses to become involved  in
   such activity would, it seems  to  me,  be  perceived  as  different  by
   Albanian society.  Whilst I reject Ms Gherman's attempt to  submit  that
   the appellant would be at risk  on  account  of  an  actual  or  imputed
   political opinion, therefore, I accept her submission that the appellant
   would be at risk on account of her status as a police  officer  who  has
   refused to engage in corrupt practises.

29. In the circumstances, I conclude that the appellant would be at risk  on
   return to Albania and that the risk she  faces  is  on  account  of  her
   membership of a PSG.  Her appeal  is  consequently  allowed  on  Refugee
   Convention grounds.   In  the  event  that  I  had  concluded  that  the
   appellant could not satisfy the Refugee Convention, I would have allowed
   her appeal on Humanitarian Protection grounds, under Article 15(1)(b) of
   the Directive, or on the basis that Articles  3  and  6  ECHR  would  be
   breached by her removal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was erroneous  in  law  and  is  set
aside.  I remake  the  decision  on  the  appeal,  allowing  it  on  Refugee
Convention grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                              11 November 2019
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Number: PA/08879/2016     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 July 2019                  |                                 |
|                                 |.................................|
|                                 |......                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                LK (Albania)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Gherman, instructed by Virgo Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is an Albanian national who was born on 24 July 1983.  She
   appeals against a decision which was issued by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Webb on 22 January 2019, dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's
   refusal of international protection.


2. In granting permission to appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  stated
   Judge Webb's decision was detailed and carefully structured but that  it
   was arguable that the judge's findings that the appellant would  not  be
   at risk in Albania and that she would receive a  fair  trial  on  return
   were irrational,  inadequately reasoned or otherwise unlawful.  Although
   I have concluded for the reasons set out below that the judge did indeed
   err, I wish to record at the outset  my  agreement  with  UTJ's  Bruce's
   opening remarks about  the  judge's  decision,  which  was  plainly  the
   product of detailed and careful consideration.

Background
3. I need not set out in full the basis upon which  the  appellant  claimed
   asylum.  It was rehearsed in a lengthy refusal letter  and  repeated  at
   [4] of the judge's decision.  The appellant was  a  police  officer  who
   worked at the international  airport  in  Tirana.   Other  officers  and
   civilian staff who worked at the airport were involved  in  criminality,
   in particular by facilitating illegal immigration and  emigration.   The
   appellant was offered inducements to participate but she refused  to  do
   so.  Her refusal to cooperate angered her colleagues, and particularly a
   man called BM.  The appellant received  threats  from  BM  and  from  an
   anonymous caller on the telephone.  In the midst of these problems,  the
   appellant travelled to the UK as a  visitor.   After  her  arrival,  she
   heard that a number of  her  colleagues  had  been  arrested  for  their
   involvement in the events at the airport.  She instructed  a  lawyer  to
   represent her own interests, as a result of which she learned that there
   was an arrest warrant pending against her.  The  appellant  subsequently
   learned from her parents that they had been receiving threatening calls,
   warning the appellant not to return to Albania to give evidence  in  the
   pending proceedings.  The appellant's parents were so scared  that  they
   left Albania for France,  where  they  claimed  asylum.   The  appellant
   overstayed the expiry of her visa and claimed asylum.

Appellate History
4. The appellant's application was refused by the respondent and her appeal
   was initially dismissed.  That decision was set aside on appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal, however, and it came before Judge  Webb  as  a  de  novo
   hearing.  Partly as a result of that history, there was a vast amount of
   documentary evidence before the judge.


5. In the face of that evidence, the Presenting Officer who represented the
   respondent accepted that the appellant was employed as a police  officer
   at Tirana airport: [24].  In the same paragraph, the  judge  noted  that
   the appellant had been a police officer since 2003 and that she had been
   deployed at the airport from May 2013.  At [27], the judge accepted that
   the appellant's colleagues had been arrested and that there were pending
   proceedings  against  the  appellant.   He  reached  that  finding  with
   reference to the plethora of documentary evidence  he  listed  at  [26],
   which included court papers about the pending  proceedings  against  the
   appellant and her former colleagues and other official documents showing
   that she had been excluded from the police force  as  a  result  of  the
   allegations.

6. Judge Webb dismissed the appeal for reasons which may be  summarised  as
   follows.  At [28]-[29], he noted that the  Refugee  Convention  did  not
   normally provide protection for those who fled  prosecution.   At  [33],
   having scrutinised the appellant's evidence and the background material,
   he did not accept the appellant's assertion that the Albanian state  was
   controlled by the mafia.  He noted at [34]-[35] that the appellant  said
   that she had received threats  and  had  not  been  physically  targeted
   before she left Albania.  At [35]-[38],  the  judge  made  a  number  of
   critically important findings.  He considered that the  appellant  would
   not be at risk from the gang because she 'knew  too  much'  because,  in
   reality, she knew very little.  She had  not  been  'making  waves'  and
   creating problems for BM.  He found it difficult to understand  why  she
   would be of any great interest to the gangsters and he noted that  there
   was no suggestion that  her  four  co-accused  had  been  targeted.   In
   summary, therefore, he did not find it credible that the  appellant  was
   the victim of  a  criminal  conspiracy.   He  accepted  that  she  faced
   prosecution but he did not accept that this was  because  she  had  been
   'framed' at the request of the gang:  [37].   He  did  not  accept  that
   pressure would be brought to bear on the Albanian judiciary by the  gang
   or their associates.


7. At [39]-[46], the judge considered whether or not  the  appellant  would
   receive a fair trial in Albania.  He drew particularly on Kapri  v  Lord
   Advocate 2014 SLT 557, a decision of the Scottish High Court on remittal
   from the Supreme Court [2013] UKSC 48; [2013] 1 WLR 2324.  In Kapri,  it
   had been held that  corruption  in  Albania  might  occasionally  affect
   decisions involving high ranking politicians or organised criminals  but
   there was no adequate material on which it could be held that there were
   substantial grounds for believing that it existed at  such  a  level  as
   would necessarily involve a flagrant denial of justice in all,  or  even
   most, cases.  The judge reviewed the background material  subsequent  to
   Kapri and concluded that the Albanian judicial system had  continued  to
   improve and that the appellant would  receive  a  'Convention  compliant
   fair trial' there: [46].

8. At [47]-[54], the judge considered the  non-protection  aspects  of  the
   appellant's appeal, focussing on the position of her child, who was born
   in the UK in 2017.  He considered that the best interests of  the  child
   were to remain with the appellant; that the child could be  accommodated
   by family if the appellant was held on remand or imprisoned following  a
   trial; and that there would not be very  significant  obstacles  to  the
   appellant re-integrating into life in Albania.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal
9. Ms Gherman appeared before Judge Webb and it was Ms Gherman who  settled
   grounds of appeal against his decision, firstly to the FtT and then,  on
   renewal, to the Upper Tribunal.  At both stages, the grounds  of  appeal
   were described as  prolix.   The  grounds  are  certainly  not  a  tight
   formulation of the propositions to be advanced (Harverye [2018] EWCA Civ
   2848, at [38]) but, as I stated at the hearing, I considered the grounds
   to be helpful and not to be unduly lengthy.  This  is  an  unusual  case
   with an appellate history and with a vast amount of documentary material
   and I, for one, found the extensive cross-referencing in the grounds  of
   appeal to help, not hinder.

10. On analysis, the grounds of appeal may be summarised as follows:

     i) In concluding that the appellant would not be of interest to BM  and
        his associates, the judge left material aspects of the claim out  of
        account;
    ii) In concluding that the appellant was not being pursued  by  criminal
        gangs affiliated with state officials, the judge  failed  to  assess
        her claim in light of the background material provided;
   iii) In concluding that the appellant  would  receive  a  fair  trial  in
        Albania, the judge failed to consider the written  submissions  made
        on the appellant's behalf; and
    iv)  In  concluding  that  the  appellant  would  not   encounter   very
        significant  obstacles  to  re-integration  into  Albania,  and   in
        deciding that the best interests of her child  would  be  served  by
        returning, the judge failed to consider the stigma attached  to  the
        birth of an illegitimate child in Albania.

11. Expanding these  grounds  before  me,  Ms  Gherman  submitted  that  the
   judge's conclusion that the appellant would not have  been  targeted  by
   the gang because she knew very little about them was illogical. She knew
   that BM had a lavish lifestyle; that he was  responsible  for  accepting
   deportees and that he was able, as  a  result  of  his  rank,  to  usher
   passengers past legitimate border controls;  that  he  had  offered  her
   financial inducements to participate; and that he  assisted  people  who
   were known to the Director.  Nor was it logical or rational to conclude,
   in light of these accepted  facts,  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
   'making waves' with her actions.  These tainted findings  at  [35]  were
   pivotal to the conclusions at [36] and [37] and had vitiated the  entire
   assessment of the risk faced by the appellant.


12. The judge had failed to apply paragraph 339L of  the  Immigration  Rules
   and to consider the plausibility of the appellant's  claim  against  the
   backdrop provided  by  the  country  material  provided,  including  the
   respondent's material and the expert report by Antonia  Young.   In  any
   event, the judge's finding that the appellant would receive a fair trial
   was demonstrably vitiated by the errors he had made at [35]-[38],  since
   that assessment had taken place on the basis that the appellant was  not
   a police officer whom a criminal gang has targeted for refusal to adhere
   to their requests and who have an  interest  in  ensuring  that  she  is
   imprisoned: [38].

13. As to ground three, Ms Gherman submitted that the judge  had  failed  to
   engage with the written submissions she had made about Kapri  after  the
   hearing.  That decision was immediately distinguishable, she  submitted,
   because the appellant in that case had no profile  of  any  description.
   In any event, the judge had failed to have regard to material aspects of
   the respondent's Country Policy and Information Note in concluding  that
   the Albanian justice system would afford the appellant a fair hearing.

14. As to ground four, there had been no consideration by the judge  of  the
   fact that the appellant's child was illegitimate.   The  best  interests
   assessment had focused on the question of whether  the  child  would  be
   placed in an orphanage during the appellant's trial and  any  subsequent
   period of imprisonment and had not  taken  account  of  the  appellant's
   other circumstances.

15. In reply, Ms Everett  submitted  that  the  vast  quantity  of  evidence
   before Judge Webb had amplified the possibility of legal error.  It  had
   nevertheless been open to the judge to conclude that the  appellant  had
   not been 'making waves' and that she was not of interest  to  the  gang.
   She accepted, however, that  this  finding  was  pivotal  and  that  the
   remainder of the judge's assessment could not stand if it fell.  I asked
   Ms Everett whether it could properly be submitted  that  the  judge  had
   taken Antonia Young's report into account when  he  concluded  that  the
   appellant was not of interest to  the  gang.   She  submitted  that  the
   report had 'got a look in' within the  judge's  decision,  although  she
   accepted that there was  no  consideration  of  it  within  the  pivotal
   section of the decision, at [35]-[38].

16. As  to  the  third  ground,  Ms  Everett  accepted  that  there  was  no
   consideration of Ms Gherman's  written  submissions  on  Kapri  but  she
   submitted that the judge's evaluation was nevertheless sustainable.  The
   sustainability of the findings at [35]-[38] was also  relevant  to  this
   ground.  If those findings could not stand, nor could the assessment  of
   whether or not the appellant would receive a fair trial in Albania.  If,
   on the other hand, the judge had reached a sustainable finding that  the
   appellant was not of interest to  the  gang,  his  assessment  of  trial
   proceedings in Albania was sustainable.

17. As to the fourth ground, it was accepted that the judge  had  not  given
   separate consideration to the possibility that the appellant -  who  had
   given birth to an illegitimate child - would be treated as a 'kurva' but
   he had legitimately relied on  the  presence  of  a  family  network  in
   Albania.  Ms Everett accepted that the judge had overlooked the evidence
   the appellant had given that she was  no  longer  in  contact  with  her
   family, however, and had given  no  consideration  to  the  question  of
   whether the family would be supportive  in  light  of  the  conservative
   social mores considered in AM & BM (Albania) CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) and
   TD & AD (Albania) CG [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC).

18. In reply, Ms Gherman submitted  that  the  findings  at  [35]-[38]  were
   critical.  The gang had demonstrated by their actions that the appellant
   was perceived to be a threat and that they wished to silence her.  There
   was clearly a battle against corruption in Albania and  the  gang  would
   seek to safeguard their interests.  The reality on the  ground  did  not
   reflect the conclusions in Kapri.  Ms  Young's  evidence  was  that  the
   appellant probably knew enough to be seen as a threat and  would  be  at
   risk as a result.  The judge had failed to consider her evidence and had
   reached  irrational  or  illogical  conclusions  in  deciding  that  the
   appellant would not be at risk.  The judge had not considered the way in
   which Kapri was distinguishable.   The  judge  had  failed  to  consider
   evidence which militated against his conclusion that the appellant would
   receive support from her family.

19. I reserved my decision on  whether  or  not  the  decision  of  the  FtT
   contained material legal error and asked for submissions on  the  relief
   which should follow in the event that that question was resolved in  the
   appellant's favour.  Ms Gherman invited me to remake the decision on the
   appeal without a further hearing.  Ms Everett was content to leave  that
   decision in my hands.  I indicated that  I  would  reserve  any  resumed
   hearing to myself, owing to my familiarity with the papers.


Analysis
20. Although Judge Webb's decision was clearly the product  of  considerable
   thought, and although it is  detailed  and  methodically  structured,  I
   consider it to be vitiated by legal error.


21. I set out at  the  start  of  this  decision  a  brief  summary  of  the
   appellant's account.  It contains five key elements.  Firstly, that  the
   appellant was a police officer stationed at Tirana  Airport.   Secondly,
   that illegal migration was facilitated at that airport and the appellant
   refused inducements to take part.  Thirdly, that the appellant had  been
   threatened by BM and his associates for that  refusal.   Fourthly,  that
   she was the subject of a prosecution  in  Albania.   Fifthly,  that  the
   prosecution was instigated at the request of the criminal elements which
   controlled the operation at the airport.  In the refusal letter, each of
   these elements was disbelieved by the respondent.

22. At the hearing before Judge Webb, confronted by  a  wealth  of  evidence
   which supported the appellant's role, the  Presenting  Officer  conceded
   the first of these issues.   At  [27],  the  judge  accepted  "that  the
   claimed events of  October  2015  and  thereafter)  in  respect  of  the
   appellant facing arrest and criminal charges in Albania) are as asserted
   by her".  That represented a clear finding on the fourth  issue  I  have
   identified above.

23. At [35]-[36], the  judge  accepted  that  BM  and  his  associates  were
   involved in criminal practices at the airport and that the appellant had
   refused to take part.  In the same paragraphs, however, he rejected  the
   appellant's claim that she had been targeted by the gang as a result  of
   her refusal, reasoning that she had not been 'making waves'  about  BM's
   activities; that she did not know much about their operation and that it
   was consequently difficult to understand why BM and his associates would
   have any great interest in her. In reaching that conclusion on the third
   of the elements I have set out above, I am satisfied that the judge fell
   into error for the following reasons.


24. I consider the judge to have left material matters  out  of  account  in
   concluding that the appellant would not have been of interest to BM  and
   his associates.  Whilst it was correct that the  appellant  knew  little
   about the wider network to which BM belonged, he overlooked what she did
   know and the reasons why BM  and  his  associates  may  have  wished  to
   silence her, whether by threats of violence or the instigation of  false
   charges.  In particular, the appellant knows that BM's  father  was  the
   Chief of Criminal Investigations; that BM himself had a lavish lifestyle
   which was  out  of  kilter  with  that  of  other  staff;  that  he  had
   illegitimately used his position of power to usher deportees and  others
   around lawful border controls;  that  he  and  others  had  offered  the
   appellant inducements to become involved;  and  that  her  managers  had
   advised her not to take complaints against BM any further because he had
   connections with the authorities.  Against  that  backdrop,  it  is  not
   difficult to understand why BM and his associates would  take  steps  to
   silence the appellant, including issuing treats to her and her  parents.
   I am satisfied that the judge erred in  leaving  that  backdrop  out  of
   account when he concluded that  the  appellant  was  not  of  any  great
   interest to BM and his gang.


25. I have described the findings at [35]-[38] as pivotal.  Ms  Everett  was
   constrained to accept at the hearing that  the  decision  could  not  be
   upheld if those findings were tainted by legal error.   That  concession
   was plainly correct.  The judge's assessment of  whether  the  appellant
   would  receive  a  fair  trial  was  expressly  not  a  finding  in  the
   alternative; it was a finding which  took  as  its  starting  point  his
   earlier conclusion that the appellant was not of interest to BM and  his
   associates, and that they had not  and  would  not  affect  the  ongoing
   criminal proceedings.

26. In the circumstances, I am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  FtT
   cannot stand and must be set aside.  Ms Gherman invited me to remake the
   decision on the appeal without a further hearing but I do  not  consider
   that to be a proper course.  The judge reached  lawful  and  sustainable
   findings in relation to only the first two elements of  the  appellant's
   claim.  Those findings (that the appellant was a police officer  at  the
   airport and that she refused to take part in  the  wrongdoing  described
   above) are unaffected by the error I  have  identified  above  and  will
   stand. Lawful findings in relation to the remainder of  the  appellant's
   claim must be made, and I decline simply to  draw  inferences  from  the
   facts accepted thus far.  As I indicated at the hearing, I consider  the
   Upper Tribunal to  be  the  correct  venue  to  undertake  that  further
   consideration.  The  appeal  has  been  remitted  once  before.   It  is
   factually complex and finality is required.  Since I  am  familiar  with
   the voluminous papers, I will direct that the resumed hearing is  before
   me

27. In addition to making findings on the aspects of  the  appellant's  case
   which I have detailed above, I will need  to  consider  at  the  resumed
   hearing whether any persecutory ill treatment feared  by  the  appellant
   engages the Refugee Convention.  I understand it  to  have  been  argued
   below that the appellant belonged to a Particular Social Group and  that
   she feared harm on that account.  Whilst I would potentially  be  minded
   to accept that  the  appellant's  background  might  satisfy  regulation
   6(1)(d)(ii) of The Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
   (Qualification) Regulations 2006, the advocates will  wish  to  consider
   carefully whether, under regulation 6(1)(d)(ii), any group to which  the
   appellant might belong has a distinct identity in Albania.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was erroneous  in  law  and  is  set
aside.  The decision on the appeal will be remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,
although the findings that the appellant was  a  police  officer  at  Tirana
Airport who refused to become involved in unlawful activity  are  preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                                17 July 2019
