
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08967/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30th May 2017                      |On 14 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                                   Ms G.N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Turnock promulgated on 10th January 2017, who  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse both
    her protection and human rights claims.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Kenya who was born on [ ]  1983.   Within
    the decision of Judge Turnock he noted how  the  Appellant  claimed  to
    have left Kenya in January 2007 and then to have worked in  Dubai.  She
    returned to Kenya several times to renew her visa to work in Dubai. She
    claimed that she had arrived in  the  UK  on  25th  December  2015  and
    claimed asylum one and a half  months  later  on  10th  February  2016.
    Judge Turnock noted she had brought a claim for asylum based  upon  the
    fact that it was said that she was escaping from the Mungiki Group  and
    that she was a member of a particular social  group  and  risked  being
    subjected to FGM upon return to Kenya and that she would be killed also
    because she had a child out of wedlock.

 3. Judge Turnock noted that she claimed that  she  was  the  mother  of  a
    British citizen child, W who was born on 8th April 2016  and  that  her
    argument was that if she was moved from the UK, it would be  in  breach
    of Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 4. Judge Turnock refused the asylum claim and I note that within the grant
    of permission to appeal granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes  on
    21st April 2017 that she did not grant permission to appeal in  respect
    of the asylum claim and found  that  the  Judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings in respect of the asylum claim  were  sustainable,  clear  and
    cogent.

 5. In respect of the Article 8 claim Judge Turnock noted in terms  of  the
    evidence, at paragraph 40 of his judgment that  the  Appellant's  claim
    was that on 10th January 2016 Mr A, who is said to be the father of the
    child, threw her out of the house telling her that he was not ready  to
    marry and that the relationship was over and telling her  to  terminate
    the pregnancy so she could go back to Dubai.

 6. Judge Turnock found at paragraph 42 that the Appellant's child, W,  was
    born on 8th April 2016. The birth certificate which was issued  on  9th
    May 2016 did not show the name of the child's father, but a  subsequent
    birth certificate issued on 7th September 2016 showed the father of the
    child to be Mr A, who was born in Nigeria.  Judge Turnock found that  a
    copy of the passports of W and Mr A had been produced which showed them
    both to be British citizens.

 7. Judge Turnock considered the  human  rights  claim  from  paragraph  64
    onwards of his decision and found at paragraph 67  that  the  Appellant
    does have a child with whom she lives and he was satisfied  that  there
    was family life existing between  them.   He  said  that  although  the
    Appellant had made some reference to having established a private  life
    in the UK, she  had  produced  no  evidence  in  confirmation  of  that
    assertion.  At paragraph 74 the Judge found that the Appellant  is  not
    currently in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner,  but
    she was the parent of a British citizen child.

 8. The Judge further accepted  given  the  updated  birth  certificate  at
    paragraph 82 that Mr A was the father and that a DNA  report  had  been
    produced in that regard which stated that the probability of  paternity
    was 99.99% and noted at paragraph 83 that: "However, most  importantly,
    the Appellant has produced a passport which confirms that her son is  a
    British citizen".

 9. The Judge went on to consider a statement 15th December 2016  that  had
    been provided by Mr A, who did not  actually  turn  up  at  the  appeal
    hearing to give evidence. In that statement, Mr  A  said  that  he  was
    writing to fully acknowledge his son W and that he was ready to support
    him and look after him and he stated that he needed his son in  the  UK
    along with the Appellant, for his son to have a sound upbringing.

10. At paragraph 87 the Judge noted that Mr A was prepared  to  participate
    in DNA testing to establish paternity and  that  he  had  accepted  the
    results of the test by having his name recorded on  the  child's  birth
    certificate.  However, the Judge did not accept that evidence  and  the
    Judge found the Appellant not to be a credible witness and  that  there
    was no evidence  that  Mr  A  was  actively  involved  in  the  child's
    upbringing or making the financial  contribution  claimed  towards  the
    child's upbringing.  He found that although it was said that Mr  A  was
    unable to attend the hearing because of another commitment,  the  Judge
    found that called into question his commitment  to  his  son,  and  the
    Judge noted then at paragraph 88 that there was no evidence from L, who
    was the woman with whom the Appellant  was  living,  which  could  have
    confirmed the claimed visits made by Mr A to see and  support  his  son
    and there was no reliable evidence as to the current  circumstances  of
    Mr A.

11. However, the Judge then went on to consider Section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act in terms of the British citizen  child,
    and also made reference to  the  case  of  EV  (Philippines)  &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] as to what was in the
    best interests of the child. The Judge at paragraph 91 found that Mr  A
    was born in Lagos, Nigeria and appeared  to  have  no  connection  with
    Kenya apart from  his  relationship  with  the  Appellant  and  if  the
    Appellant were removed to Kenya taking her  son  with  her  that  would
    severely limit the potential for a close relationship between W and his
    father and that the nature of the current relationship  between  father
    and son was, he found, highly significant in deciding  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

12. Judge Turnock at paragraph  92  went  on  to  find:  "On  the  evidence
    presented I am not satisfied that the Appellant has produced sufficient
    evidence to establish that Mr A is playing a significant  part  in  the
    life of "W but then found at paragraph 93 that the child  was  a  young
    child who had been in the UK for less than two years and found that  it
    was in his best interests to remain with his mother, and he  said  that
    that would be achieved if either his mother is granted leave to  remain
    or, alternatively, he is removed with his mother.  He states  that  the
    child was not yet in education and had not put down roots in the UK and
    that he would be able to integrate with his mother into life  in  Kenya
    without significant difficulty and while he would be deprived  of  some
    of the benefits of British citizenship, he said that it  would  not  be
    unreasonable for him to follow the Appellant  to  the  country  of  her
    origin.  On balance he found the need to maintain effective immigration
    control was not outweighed by the factors favouring the grant of  leave
    to the Appellant.  He dismissed both the protection  and  human  rights
    claim.

13. The Appellant then sought to appeal against that decision. The  Grounds
    of Appeal dealt with both the protection claim and the Article 8 claim.
    In respect of the Article 8 claim it was stated that there was evidence
    showing strong enough commitment by Mr A towards his son, W,  and  that
    the Appellant was the single mother of a British  child  and  it  would
    make life difficult for her son if sent to Kenya and they would have no
    accommodation, no money to feed him and being a 9  month  British  baby
    "he does not deserve all of  this"  was  what  was  stated  within  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  She said that sending herself and her son to  Kenya
    would deny him fatherly love and support and that W's life would be  in
    danger since they would be homeless and not be able to provide him with
    any basic needs.

14. Following that, there was a grant of permission to appeal by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Landes on 21st April 2017,  who  granted  permission  to
    appeal on Article 8 grounds only.  She  did  not  grant  permission  to
    appeal in respect of the asylum claim on the basis  that  the  decision
    and findings there were sustainable, clear  and  cogent.  Judge  Landes
    noted in respect of the Article 8 claim  that  the  Appellant  was  now
    unrepresented and there was,  she  found,  an  arguable  error  of  law
    regarding the human rights claim and that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    reasons given by the Judge that it would not have  been  reasonable  to
    expect the Appellant's son, a British citizen, to  leave  the  UK  were
    inadequate.  The Judge found that he would be able  to  integrate  into
    life in Kenya without significant difficulty but Judge Landes said  she
    could trace no findings which supported that conclusion.  In particular
    she could trace no findings about the conditions the Appellant and  her
    son would return to or what practical or financial support  they  would
    have.

15. She went on to note that the Appellant had been working in  Dubai,  but
    that was before she had a baby and although there were indications that
    the Appellant had family living in Kenya,  absent  any  findings  about
    their current location and ability to support  the  Appellant  and  the
    child, at least initially, she did not consider  it  could  be  assumed
    that they would be able to support her and  her  son  immediately  upon
    return.

16. I have fully taken account of the Respondent's Rule 24 notice dated 4th
    May 2017 in which it is argued that the  Judge  had  properly  directed
    himself and it is said that the Judge noted at paragraph  74  that  the
    Appellant is not currently in a  subsisting  relationship  but  is  the
    parent of a child who is a British citizen.  It is said that the  Judge
    had correctly directed himself to EV (Philippines) and that  the  Judge
    had identified that the nature and quality of the relationship  between
    the father and the child was a highly significant issue.   It  is  said
    that the findings of the Judge at paragraphs 92 and  93  were  entirely
    open to the Judge to make and  were  not  perverse  and  were  properly
    reasoned and that the decision amounts to  no  more  than  disagreement
    with the findings of the Judge.

17. I bear in mind that the Appellant is  unrepresented  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Today I do note she was accompanied  by  the  father  of  her
    child, Mr A,  who  had  produced  what  he  described  as  being  legal
    submissions in respect of the Judge's consideration of  the  Article  8
    case which were handed up to the Tribunal and in respect  of  which  Mr
    Armstrong did not have any objection to the Tribunal considering.

18. I have taken account of the submissions made within that document  but,
    in my judgment, the submissions made in that document do not go to  the
    core of the problem in this case regarding  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Turnock's decision.

19. In his submissions Mr Armstrong properly  conceded  that  although  the
    evidence given  by  the  Appellant  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Turnock in regards to Mr A's involvement within W's life was said to be
    more substantive in terms of both visits and  financial  contributions,
    in fact Judge Turnock did not accept that Mr A was involved in W's life
    to the extent claimed.  He found the Appellant not  to  be  a  credible
    witness and found specifically that :

         "There is no evidence that Mr A is actively involved in the child's
         upbringing or making the contribution  claimed  by  the  Appellant,
         there is no confirmation of  Mr  A's  contribution  in  the  letter
         produced which said that  he  was  unable  to  attend  the  hearing
         because of another commitment, which I find calls into question his
         commitment to his son."

20. As previously noted, there was no evidence  from  L  which  could  have
    confirmed the claimed visits made by Mr A to see and support  his  son.
    There was no reliable evidence as to the current circumstances of Mr A.
     As Mr Armstrong concedes, the Judge did not accept therefore that Mr A
    was playing any or any significant part or role in  W's  life  although
    the Judge then went on to find in paragraph 91 that that was  a  highly
    significant factor.  The Judge bore in mind the fact that the child was
    less than 2 years old at that point and found that W would be  able  to
    integrate with life  in  Kenya  with  his  mother  without  significant
    difficulties and he may be deprived of some of the benefits of  British
    citizen, it was not unreasonable for him to follow the Appellant to the
    country of origin.

21. Mr Armstrong referred me to the case of MA (Pakistan)  &  Ors  v  Upper
    Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705
    from the Court of Appeal and in particular to the lead judgment of Lord
    Justice Elias, with whom the remainder of the Court  of  Appeal  Judges
    agreed. He referred me particularly to paragraph 114 of  the  judgment,
    where it was held that in considering the reasonableness  question  the
    wider public interest considerations rather than simply the position of
    the child had to be considered including the immigration history of the
    parents.

22. However, of course I bear in mind in that regard that MA (Pakistan) was
    dealing not with a case of a British citizen child but a child who  was
    a foreign national who had at that stage lived in the UK for more  than
    seven years. Clearly, under Section 117B(6) obviously in  the  case  of
    either a British citizen child or in terms of a child who has lived  in
    the UK for more than seven years, the public interest does not  require
    removal where it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
    the UK.

23. However, in considering the reasonableness issue,  I  find  that  Judge
    Turnock has failed to consider in this  case  is  whether  or  not  the
    Zambrano principle would be breached.

24. The principle set out in the Zambrano case is reflected within the Home
    Office's own guidance in respect of family life as a partner or  parent
    and private life under the ten year route dated August 2015  that  both
    decision makers should not take a decision in relation to the parent or
    primary carer of a British citizen  child  where  the  effect  of  that
    decision would  be  to  force  the  British  child  to  leave  the  EU,
    regardless of the age of that child.

25. Mr Armstrong is quite correct in saying that the fact that there  is  a
    British citizen child is not a trump card.  However, the  principle  in
    the Zambrano case was recently  upheld  and  considered  by  the  Grand
    Chamber in the case of Chavez-Vilchez and Others (Union  citizenship  -
    Article 20 TFEU  -  Access  to  social  assistance  and  child  benefit
    conditional on right of residence in a Member State : Judgment)  [2017]
    EUECJ C-133/15.

26. Consideration has to be given to whether or  not  there  is  any  other
    person who would in fact be in a position and willing to look after the
    British/EEA national child within the UK if an  Appellant  were  to  be
    returned to their country of nationality, or whether the decision  will
    in fact force the child to leave the EU.

27. In this case Judge Turnock found that W was a British citizen child and
    on the findings of Judge Turnock his findings were that Mr  A  was  not
    actually involved in the life of W in any way and certainly not to  the
    extent claimed and did not accept that there were visits  or  financial
    contributions and simply found in effect that it  would  be  reasonable
    for W to leave the UK if the Appellant were forced to leave.

28. In that regard, although Mr Armstrong argued that EV (Philippines)  was
    considered by the judge in respect of what is in the best interests  of
    the child, there has not been a consideration of the Zambrano principle
    and no consideration as to whether the decision in effect forces  W  to
    leave the EU.  The whole point of the Zambrano principle is that it  is
    not reasonable to force a British citizen child to leave the EU.  That,
    I find, is a Robinson obvious point that should have been considered in
    this case given the Judge's findings that Mr A was not involved in  the
    upbringing of the child as claimed.

29. I do therefore find that there is a  material  error  of  law  in  that
    regard in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Turnock.

30. However, I agree with Judge Landes that the decision in respect of  the
    protection and asylum claim should stand. Judge Turnock did give  clear
    and adequate and sufficient reasons for rejecting the protection claim.

31. However, in respect of the Article 8 claim in  light  of  the  material
    error of law, I cannot be satisfied  that  it  can  be  said  that  the
    decision would have been necessarily the same had that error  not  been
    made. I find that the decision was in respect of the  Article  8  claim
    should be set aside.

32.  I accept the argument made by Mr Armstrong that  the  situation  since
    the date of the decision before Judge Turnock in December last year may
    have changed.

33. However, the findings of Judge Turnock regarding his consideration that
    he did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness and  that  there
    was no evidence of Mr A being actively involved in  W's  upbringing  or
    making the contribution claimed by the Appellant and no confirmation of
    Mr A's contribution in the letter produced, and his finding that  Mr  A
    had failed to  attend  the  hearing,  this  called  into  question  his
    commitment to his son in paragraph 87,  are  findings  that  should  be
    preserved.  Those  were  based  upon  the  evidence  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Turnock in December.  Although clearly matters may  have
    changed since then, the  findings  as  to  Mr  A's  involvement  as  at
    December should be preserved. Mr Armstrong accepts those findings  were
    open to the Judge on the basis of the evidence at that stage.

34. I accept the argument by Mr Armstrong that clearly there  has  been  no
    separate or further evidence produced in respect of the position  today
    and although I do have both the Appellant and Mr A before me  today,  I
    am not persuaded that it would be fair or in the interests  of  justice
    simply to hear evidence from them and submissions  from  the  Appellant
    today.  The Zambrano point and the consideration of the  European  case
    law following it is a technical legal argument.  The  Appellant  should
    also have the opportunity of giving a statement to  address  the  issue
    and to take some legal advice on that issue.  I do not think it  is  in
    the interests of justice to expect the Appellant to  be  able  to  deal
    with any complex legal arguments on that Zambrano  issue  herself  this
    afternoon.

35. I therefore do find that given that there is a  fair  amount  of  fact-
    finding that will be required in terms of the  current  position  under
    Article 8 and  in  consideration  of  the  Zambrano  principle.  It  is
    appropriate to set aside the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Turnock in respect  of  the  Article  8  consideration,  save  for  the
    preserved findings of fact which I have already previously mentioned. I
    therefore do allow the Appellant's appeal to that limited regard.

36. I therefore direct that the case should be remitted back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Turnock, being limited to the Article  8
    claim and consideration of  the  Zambrano  principle,  subject  to  the
    preserved findings of fact referred to in  my  judgment  regarding  the
    extent of Mr A's involvement in W's life as at December 2016.

37. I do bear in mind that the First-tier Tribunal Judge Turnock did  grant
    an anonymity direction in this case and in such circumstances I do find
    that it is appropriate given the issues raised within that judgment for
    there to be an anonymity order.  The case clearly does involve a  young
    child.

Notice of Decision


    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Turnock  in  respect  of  the
    Article 8 claim, does contain a material error of law. I set aside  his
    decision in respect of the human rights Article 8 claim, save  for  the
    preserved findings of fact referred to  in  the  body  of  my  decision
    regarding the extent of Mr A's involvement in W's life as  at  December
    2016.

    I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing on the
    Article 8 human rights claim only, to be heard  before  any  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keefe.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 5th June 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

