

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA087222016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th April 2017                            |On 2nd May 2017              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     TM
                           (Anonymity order made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Khan, instructed by Barnes, Harrild & Dyer,
solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the respondent in
this determination identified as TM. This direction applies to, amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give
rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. The respondent was granted permission to appeal the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Sweet, promulgated on 2nd December  2016  allowing
      his appeal on Asylum grounds and under paragraph 276ADE. Deputy  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Hill QC found a material error of law on the basis,  in
      essence, that although the report by Dr Joffe  dated  26  August  2016
      indicated that the situation in Iran had deteriorated, the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge had  failed  to  engage  adequately  with  the  Country
      Guidance case of SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)  Iran
      CG [2016] 00308 (IAC). DUTJ Hill QC set aside the decision,  adjourned
      further consideration and directed that any further evidence was to be
      filed and served no later than 7 days prior to the resumed hearing.


        Refusal to admit documents


   2. The respondent, TM, failed to comply with directions.  On  26th  April
      2017 he filed, through his solicitors, a redacted copy of  an  opinion
      by Dr Joffe which Dr Joffe  had  written  for  another  person  and  a
      decision by UTJ Canavan allowing an appeal, which  Mr  Khan  submitted
      was on the same basis as TM's. Mr Khan confirmed that he had not  made
      any search to  establish  whether  there  had  been  any  other  Upper
      Tribunal decisions on the same topic and accepted he had not  complied
      with Practice Directions in that regard. Mr Melvin had not received  a
      full copy of Dr Joffe's redacted opinion. He had been offered  a  full
      copy the morning of the hearing but said he had refused to  accept  it
      or read it.

   3. Mr Khan submitted the opinion should be admitted -  it  had  not  been
      available on the day of the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge (the opinion was dated 14th April 2017) and  he  apologised  for
      not complying with directions. Dr Joffe had given reluctant permission
      for it to be used in this appeal. Mr Khan submitted that although  UTJ
      Canavan's decision was not reported and he had not complied  with  the
      Practice Directions it was of persuasive authority.

   4. I refused to admit either the  redacted  report  or  to  consider  UTJ
      Canavan's decision as of persuasive authority.  Neither  document  was
      filed in accordance with directions, no search had been undertaken  in
      connection with UTJ Canavan's decision to identify whether there  were
      other decisions making similar or contrary findings and Dr  Joffe  has
      reluctantly agreed to his report  being  relied  upon.  He  makes  the
      perfectly valid point that by doing so he has  in  effect  waived  his
      entitlement to a fee to  prepare  a  report  for  an  individual.  The
      application as made does not set out why it is relevant to TM's  case.
      The DUTJ reached his decision on 15th  February  2017  and  gave  very
      specific directions. If a report was considered necessary for  TM,  it
      could and should have been sought. No reason has been given  why  that
      was not done save for a vague reference to a caseworker being ill.

        Submissions

   5. DUTJ Hill QC stated that findings of fact were preserved  namely  that
      TM would be returning to Iran as a failed asylum seeker on  a  laissez
      passer and as an ethnic Kurd whose claim for asylum had been found not
      credible.


   6. Mr Khan submitted that Dr Joffe's  report  of  August  2016  confirmed
      there was a worsening situation for Kurds in Iran, a  community  which
      is already subject to severe discrimination. He submitted that SSH and
      HR was authority for the proposition that as a returned failed  asylum
      seeker he would be subject to prolonged  detention  and  investigation
      based upon his Kurdish ethnicity. He identified TM's ethnicity as  the
      "trigger point". In particular, he  submitted  that  SSH  and  HR  had
      recorded that the case before them had not been argued on that  basis.
      He accepted that if TM were returning on a passport he  would  not  be
      subject to investigation and detention  but  returning  on  a  laissez
      passer he submitted he would be subject  to  such  investigations  and
      would not be entitled to a fair trial or investigation.

   7. Mr Melvin, relying on his written submissions,  argued  there  was  no
      evidence that the situation for Kurds was worsening, that  Dr  Joffe's
      assertions as to a worsening situation for Kurds was  unsourced,  that
      there were risks for those associated with Kurdish groups but  TM  had
      been found not to be associated and there was no evidence to  merit  a
      departure from SSH and HR. He relied upon the Country Information  and
      Guidance report produced by the Home Office dated July 2016.  This  is
      an updated report; that referred to in SSH and  HR  is  dated  January
      2016.

   8. The head note of SSH and HR reads as follows:

             (a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who
             does not possess a passport, will be returnable on a laissez
             passer, which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on proof
             of identity and nationality.


             (b) An Iranian male in respect of whom no adverse interest has
             previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not face
             a real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights on
             return to Iran on account of having left Iran illegally and/or
             being a failed asylum seeker. No such risk exists at the time
             of questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of
             illegal exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have been
             established. In particular, there is not a real risk of
             prosecution leading to imprisonment.

   9. SSH and HR are both Kurdish failed asylum seekers with no political or
      other associations with Kurdish opposition groups. Dr  Khakhi  in  his
      report to the Tribunal in SSH and HR stated that  when  a  request  is
      made for a  laissez  passer,  the  Iranian  Embassy  would  carry  out
      security checks concerning the kind of activities  an  individual  had
      been involved in whilst outside Iran ([8] of SSH and HR). [15] of  SSH
      and HR refers to the


             "general consistency [of] evidence that a person returning  on
             a  laissez  passer,  having  left  Iran  illegally,  would  be
             subjected to no more than a fine  and  probably  a  period  of
             questioning although there was no indication in  the  evidence
             that questioning would be of a kind or in a place  where  ill-
             treatment could be expected...there is  no  evidence  to  show
             that a period of questioning in the context with which we  are
             concerned can be equated to pre-trial detention; nor does  the
             evidence suggest that it would take place in a prison."


  10. The conclusion by the Upper Tribunal  in  SSH  and  HR  was  that  the
      evidence does not establish that a failed asylum seeker who  had  left
      Iran illegally would be subjected on return to a period  of  detention
      or questioning such that there is  a  real  risk  of  Article  3  ill-
      treatment ([23]). The Tribunal, in the same  paragraph  refers  to  Dr
      Kakhki's evidence that the  treatment  an  individual  received  would
      depend on their individual case.


             "It they co-operated and  accepted  they  left  illegally  and
             claimed asylum abroad then there would be no reason  for  ill-
             treatment,  and  questioning  would  be  for  a  fairly  brief
             period....as a consequence we conclude that a person  with  no
             history other than that of being a failed  asylum  seeker  who
             had exited illegally and who could be  expected  to  tell  the
             truth when questioned would  not  face  a  real  risk  of  ill
             treatment during the period of questioning at the airport."


  11. Dr Kakhki did not, it appears from the decision in SSH and HR, provide
      as an example of someone who might be at additional risk of  intensive
      questioning and/or detention, a Kurdish failed asylum seeker returning
      on a laissez passer. [34] of SSH and HR states


             ...it was however agreed that being Kurdish  was  relevant  to
             how a returnee would be  treated  by  the  authorities.  ...No
             examples  however  have  been  provided  of  ill-treatment  of
             returnees with no relevant adverse interest factors other than
             their Kurdish ethnicity, and we  conclude  that  the  evidence
             does not show risk of ill-treatment to such returnees,  though
             we accept that it  might  be  an  exacerbating  factor  for  a
             returnee   otherwise   of   interest...with   regard   to   HR
             specifically, it does not appear to be  disputed  that  he  is
             Kurdish and that he is undocumented: hence we  see  no  reason
             for remittal. Prosecution for illegal exit is an  outcome  not
             generally experienced by returnees, and where it  does  occur,
             the most likely sentence in relation to illegal exit would  be
             a fine.....[appeal] dismissed."


  12. Dr Joffe's report is a general  report  entitled  Kurds  in  Iran  and
      considers the current situation facing Kurds in Iran, the attitudes of
      the Iranian authorities towards Iranian Kurds  who  have  returned  to
      Iran having left illegally and having no documents to establish  their
      nationality, the formal requirements in Iran which must  be  fulfilled
      to obtain a replacement passport or laissez  passer.  He  comments  on
      these issues in the light of SSH and HR. He  considered,  inter  alia,
      the Country Information and Guidance issued by the Home office in July
      2016. He referred to a report he  had  written  in  October  2014  and
      expressed his disagreement with the conclusions of the Upper  Tribunal
      in SSH and HR with respect to the consequences upon return as a failed
      asylum seeker and considered that being returned as both a Kurd and  a
      failed asylum seeker 'does imply a significant risk  of  persecution'.
      He "wonders" whether the Upper Tribunal overlooked two general aspects
      of the current situation in Iran - the  worsening  security  situation
      and the increasing domestic tension. [30] of his report states


             All these factors have led to intensified repression of  Kurds
             and, if a Kurdish returnee has given  rise  to  suspicions  of
             anti-regime behaviour, either whilst abroad by,  for  example,
             applying for asylum, or before he left Iran, his prospects  of
             avoiding persecution upon return will have been  significantly
             diminished. I do not feel that the  decision  in  the  country
             guidance  case  has  paid  sufficient   attention   to   these
             considerations. This is an issue which has also been neglected
             in the latest edition of the Home Office's Country Information
             and Guidance for Iran, dated July 2016.

    13.  Dr Joffe disagrees with the UT in its description of how a laissez
        passer is obtained and refers to the  problem  that  the  applicant
        must provide details of his asylum application. The UT in  SSH  and
        HR considered the position at its highest, namely that  a  returnee
        would not lie about his status (or lack of it) whilst he  had  been
        in the UK and that the Iranian authorities would be aware  that  he
        was a failed asylum applicant.


    14. Dr Joffe does not  provide  any  examples  of  problems  that  have
        occurred for failed asylum seekers such as TM on  return  to  Iran.
        Such evidence as there was before the Upper Tribunal in SSH and  HR
        for returned Kurds, was considered. Although the  headnote  of  SSH
        and HR does not refer to returned Kurds, what evidence  there  was,
        was in front of the Tribunal and the case put forward by TM was not
        argued although it appears that HR was similar factually. It was  a
        matter that was considered. Dr Joffe's report does not identify any
        evidence that would have  resulted  in  a  different  outcome.  His
        report is no more than a disagreement with the conclusions  of  the
        Upper Tribunal.

    15. There has been no appeal to the Court of Appeal of SSH and HR.  SSH
        was represented by Mr R Drabble QC and HR was represented by  Mr  A
        Mills, both eminent and experienced counsel and each instructed  by
        established and experienced  solicitors.  If  there  had  been  any
        indication  that  the  Tribunal  had  overlooked  relevant   and/or
        significant  matters  it  would  be  unrealistic  to  suppose  that
        permission to appeal would not have been granted.


    16. The July 2016 Country Information and Guidance Report  produced  by
        the Home Office does not consider the position  of  individuals  in
        the situation of TM save to refer to [34] of SSH and HR, as set out
        above.

    17. Taking the available evidence into account and bearing in mind  the
        exhaustive examination of the evidence that was  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal in SSH and HR, I conclude there is a dearth of evidence to
        justify departure from the country guidance case of SSH and HR.  In
        my judgment TM is not at risk of being persecuted on return to Iran
        as a Kurdish failed asylum seeker on a laissez passer.

        Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and is set aside.


    The appeal of the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  is
    allowed; the consequence of which  is  that  TM's  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse him asylum/Article 3 protection is dismissed.


    Although not argued before me as a separate issue, it follows that  the
    appeal on human rights grounds under  276ADE  is  set  aside  and  TM's
    appeal falls to be refused.


[pic]

                                    Date 27th April 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
