

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08182/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                           |On 24 February 2021           |
|On 5 February 2021                         |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                                H K (Albania)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Ubah Dirie, Counsel instructed by Kingswood
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Andy McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of H K who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 20 January  2020  to  refuse  him  refugee  status  under  the  1951
    Convention, humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds and grant  discretionary  leave  as  an
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking child until 1 June 2020, six months before
    his 18th birthday.

 2. The appellant is an Albanian citizen, born in December 2002 and now  19
    years old.

Background

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is at risk from a  modern
    blood feud in his home area of Shkoder, Albania, and that  no  internal
    relocation option would protect him.

 4. On 13 August 2009, when the appellant was 7 years old, his  father  was
    involved in a road traffic accident: a car containing two,  or  perhaps
    three, drunk young men from another  family  hit  his  father's  truck,
    which was loaded with concrete blocks, and some of those fell off.  The
    car behind crashed, and all (or both) of  them  died.   The  First-tier
    Judge noted at [46] that the appellant's  father  was  cleared  of  all
    wrong doing and that toxicology reports showed that both of  the  young
    men in the car behind were drunk.

 5. It is the appellant's account that his father is  in  self-confinement,
    for fear of attack by the family of the young men who died.  The  other
    family has not declared a blood  feud  officially  yet.  In  fact,  the
    appellant's family do not know the name of the other family whose  sons
    died.

 6. The appellant's father is said to be in self-confinement but leaves  it
    for food and drink and to visit relatives, without any negotiation with
    the affected family.  The appellant's dad has left Albania twice,  once
    when all the family went to seek international protection  in  Germany,
    and on another occasion recently.  The appellant  continued  to  attend
    school and his football practices while in Albania.

 7. The appellant claims to have been the victim of an attempted kidnap  in
    2012, when he would have been 10 years old.  The judge found  that  the
    kidnap attempt, if it occurred, was not necessarily linked to the  road
    traffic accident in 2009.  The appellant left Albania with  his  family
    in May 2015, when he was 13 years old. The family claimed international
    protection in Germany unsuccessfully, and were removed  to  Albania  in
    June 2017, again as a family unit.

 8. In April 2018, when he  was  15,  the  appellant  left  Albania  alone,
    travelling via Serbia, Montenegro, Hungary, Germany and Belgium  before
    climbing into a lorry and entering the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely.
    On 16 April 2018, the appellant claimed asylum in  the  United  Kingdom
    and was served with illegal entry papers.   His statement  of  evidence
    form was submitted on 29 March 2019 and he provided a witness statement
    on 9 May 2019.

 9. In the United Kingdom, the appellant has been living  with  his  uncle,
    who has a Romanian restaurant which, while it used to  provide  a  good
    living, is currently closed because of  the  Covid-19  pandemic.   They
    were not able to pay solicitors to lodge the  onward  appeal  promptly,
    but that is of no moment, as time has been extended.









                                                                     Refusal
letter

10. On 20 January 2020, the respondent refused  protection.  The  appellant
    was then 17 years old and would not reach 18  until  1  December  2020.
    The respondent granted him discretionary leave until 1  June  2020,  as
    she was not satisfied that there were adequate  reception  arrangements
    for him in Albania. The appellant had then been in the  United  Kingdom
    for one year and ten months.

11. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

12. The First-tier Judge directed himself at [42] that he should  take  all
    relevant evidence into account and consider credibility in  the  round.
    His self direction on the correct approach is correct.   He  also  gave
    himself a proper self-direction on the appellant's vulnerability,  with
    reference to the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  2/2010,  as  the
    appellant was still a minor at the date of hearing, 18 February 2020.

13. At [13]-[25]  of  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision  he  set  out  the
    appellant's account.  The appellant confirmed that as at  the  date  of
    hearing, there had still been no formal declaration of  a  blood  feud.
    The appellant still did not know the name of the other  family,  though
    he had been told that they were a big, dangerous gang.  They could also
    find him in Tirana, so internal relocation was not an option.

14. While the family was in Germany, their truck had been set on fire.  The
    incident had been reported  to  the  police,  but  they  had  not  done
    anything.  The family presumed it was to do with the  blood  feud  with
    the other family.  The appellant did not have any  documents  from  the
    family's time in Germany, in particular no documents  relating  to  any
    protection claim unsuccessfully made there.

15. After  their  return  from  Germany,  the  family  lived  with  various
    relatives, maternal and paternal, and were in hiding.  The  appellant's
    father became very paranoid and moved, whenever he saw a new face.  The
    appellant said that he had two paternal uncles and three male  cousins,
    who were living normal lives.

16. His father lived in partial self-confinement: he went out for food  and
    drink, and to meet relatives who could help him,  albeit  rarely.   His
    father had taken the appellant to football training, but the  appellant
    now said it had occurred  only  once,  so  that  the  boy  could  'feel
    normal'. The appellant mentioned for the first time that his father had
    been stabbed in the back, which 'must have been by the  other  family'.
    It was normal to make a mistake  or  forget  a  matter  like  that:  it
    happened when the appellant was very young, on  one  of  the  occasions
    when his father had to go out from confinement.

17. The evidence of the appellant's uncle, with whom he was living  in  the
    United Kingdom, was that he also knew about the stab wound but had  not
    mentioned it in his own witness statement.  He had heard that there had
    been abortive attempts at reconciliation between the two families, 'and
    that people may have been sent for this  purpose...but  these  attempts
    had apparently failed'.

18. In submissions for the appellant, Mr Slatter  confirmed  his  position,
    which is summarised at [38]:

         "38.  [Mr  Slatter]  placed  continued  reliance  on  the  [country
         guidance case EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012]  UKUT  348  (IAC))
         but said there had been a slight variation  in  the  evaluation  of
         what constituted a 'blood feud' in Albania (see 3.5.3 of the  CPIN)
         and the definition had been widened as a consequence.  He said that
         modern day criminality, as with the gang here, often ignores  Kanun
         (an ancient Albanian system of local justice)."

19. The First-tier Judge had regard to the country  guidance  given  in  EH
    (Albania) and at [45] gave himself a  proper  self-direction  that  the
    issue was whether there was a blood feud in existence.   At  [46]-[59],
    the First-tier Judge set out why he found the account of a  blood  feud
    to lack credibility.

20. In particular, at [49], the judge found it not  credible  that  neither
    the appellant, nor his uncle, could name  the  other  family  or  gang,
    despite their claimed influence and power.  The  judge  noted  that  EH
    (Albania) held that children under 15 were not usually  involved.   The
    appellant had said that as he got older, he had been able to  ask  more
    questions and learn about the feud, but this  basic  question  had  not
    been answered.  The index event was in 2009, now some 11 years ago, and
    the appellant was 17 years old  now.   The  First-tier  Judge  did  not
    consider that the kidnap attempt, even if  credible,  was  specifically
    linked to the claimed feud.

21. The new account by both the appellant and his uncle,  that  his  father
    had been stabbed in the back in Albania, was a huge incident and it was
    not credible that the appellant and  his  uncle  had  both  omitted  to
    mention it until the First-tier Tribunal hearing.    'Sometimes  things
    are forgotten' was not a credible explanation for that. The appellant's
    evidence was that his father had left Albania for a second time,  quite
    recently, and had returned by choice to what the appellant claimed  was
    a life of self-confinement and an active blood feud.

22. The  appeal  was  dismissed.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

23. On 31 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia granted  permission   on
    the basis that it was 'at least arguable' that the First-tier Judge had
    failed to consider background country material  which  was  capable  of
    undermining the findings made,  and  that  in  all  the  circumstances,
    including the appellant's young age, it was in the interests of justice
    to grant permission to appeal.  Judge Mandalia gave triage  directions,
    following which it was decided that an oral hearing was necessary.

Rule 24 Reply

24. The Secretary of State's Rule 24 Reply is dated 15 September 2020.   It
    was out of time, due to administrative difficulties caused by the Covid-
    19 pandemic: as the appellant's appeal was also out of  time  and  time
    has been extended, I see no difficulty in extending time for  the  Rule
    24 Reply.

25. The respondent's contention in the Reply was as follows:

         "5.  There is no indication that  the  judge  has  failed  to  have
         proper regard to the background evidence.  The points relied on  in
         the grounds relate to highly specific incidents or are things which
         are said to sometimes happen.  They do not  represent  the  typical
         circumstances that occur in the case of blood feuds.

         6.   It was open to the judge to conclude in paragraph 47  that  it
         was implausible 'given the circumstances', in this  case  that  the
         appellant's father was entirely blameless, that a traffic  accident
         does not seem to be  the  basis  on  which  a  blood  feud  can  be
         established.

         7.   The appellant and his witness [the uncle]  both  claimed  that
         the other family had influence and power.  It is not credible  that
         they would be in a position to know this but not have any idea  who
         the other family were, particularly after a claimed feud  that  had
         run for many years.  The  judge's  conclusion  that  this  was  not
         credible was sound.

         8.   The determination shows that the judge did  properly  consider
         the evidence and  that  his  conclusions  were  properly  reasoned.
         There is no error of law."

Rule 25 Response

26. The appellant responded to the respondent's Rule 24 Reply.   He  argued
    that where, as here, the judge  found  that  events  relied  upon  were
    implausible, it was an error of law to do so without taking account  of
    evidence which showed that events, similar to  those  described,  could
    and did occur:  see SB (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 160 at [48] and at [62]-[64].

27. In particular, the appellant challenged the finding by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that children under 15 were not usually targeted  in  a  blood
    feud: the appellant relied on the respondent's CPIN at 3.3.1, 3.3.5 and
    3.5.2 and that the judge should have diverged from the  description  of
    self-confinement in the country  guidance  decision  EH  (blood  feuds)
    Albania CG [2012] UKUT 348 (IAC): at 4.1.1, the CPIN accepted that some
    blood  feud  affected  families  were  semi-isolated,  and   that   the
    description of the approach of  the  appellant's  father  to  isolation
    fitted the semi-isolation there described.

28. As regards whether a  blood  feud  could  arise  from  a  no-fault  car
    accident, the appellant criticised the finding by the First-tier  Judge
    at [47] that this  was  'highly  implausible  to  the  point  of  being
    incredible'.  The appellant contends that it was not open to the First-
    tier Tribunal to assume that the other family would act reasonably: see
    Kasolo v Secretary of State for the Home Department [13190] IAT,  which
    quoted a passage by Sir Thomas Bingham (as  he  then  was)  in  Current
    Legal Problems, as follows:

         "... No judge worth his salt could  possible  assume  that  men  of
         different nationalities, educations, trades, experience, creeds and
         temperaments would act as he might think he would have done or even
         - which may be quite - different - in accordance with  his  concept
         of what a reasonable man would have done."

29. In HK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2006] EWCA Civ 2037 at [28]-[29], the Court of Appeal  emphasised  the
    need to have regard to the  available  country  evidence  and  reliable
    expert evidence, when reaching an holistic view of credibility:

         "28. Further, in  many  asylum  cases,  some,  even  most,  of  the
         appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely but  that  does  not
         mean that it is untrue. The ingredients of the story, and the story
         as a whole, have to be considered  against  the  available  country
         evidence and reliable expert evidence, and other familiar  factors,
         such as consistency with what the appellant has  said  before,  and
         with other factual evidence (where there is any).

         29.  Inherent probability, which may be helpful  in  many  domestic
         cases, can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate,  factor  to
         rely on in  some  asylum  cases.  Much  of  the  evidence  will  be
         referable to societies with customs  and  circumstances  which  are
         very different from those of which the members of the  fact-finding
         tribunal have any (even  second-hand)  experience.  Indeed,  it  is
         likely that the country which an asylum-seeker  has  left  will  be
         suffering from the sort of problems and dislocations with which the
         overwhelming majority of residents of this country will  be  wholly
         unfamiliar. The point is well made in Hathaway on  Law  of  Refugee
         Status (1991) at page 81:

             "In assessing the general human rights information,  decision-
             makers  must  constantly  be  on  guard  to  avoid  implicitly
             recharacterizing the nature of the risk  based  on  their  own
             perceptions of reasonability."

         30.  Inherent improbability in the  context  of  asylum  cases  was
         discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in Awala -v-  Secretary  of
         State [2005] CSOH 73. At paragraph 22, he pointed out that  it  was
         "not proper to reject an applicant's account merely  on  the  basis
         that  it  is  not  credible  or  not  plausible.  To  say  that  an
         applicant's account is not  credible  is  to  state  a  conclusion"
         (emphasis added). At paragraph 24, he  said  that  rejection  of  a
         story on grounds of implausibility  must  be  done  "on  reasonably
         drawn inferences and not simply on conjecture or  speculation".  He
         went on to emphasise, as did Pill LJ in Ghaisari,  the  entitlement
         of the fact-finder to rely "on his common sense and his ability, as
         a practical and informed person, to identify  what  is  or  is  not
         plausible". However, he accepted that "there will  be  cases  where
         actions  which  may  appear  implausible  if  judged  by...Scottish
         standards, might be plausible when considered within the context of
         the applicant's social and cultural background."

30. The appellant contends that in  this  case,  the  judge  made  a  wrong
    assumption of implausibility, with reference to the  respondent's  CPIN
    at 3.4.1,  which  asserted  that  blood  feuds  can  arise  for  'petty
    reasons', including car accidents.  The  appellant  contends  that  the
    innocence of the appellant's father may not have been as obvious to the
    family of the men who died.  The judge should  have  applied  a  child-
    sensitive assessment of the  lower  standard  of  proof  applicable  to
    protection claims: see KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 552  (IAC)
    at [99].  It was unsafe for the judge to assume  that  the  appellant's
    parents and other family members would have told him which  family  was
    targeting his father in a blood feud.

31. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

32. In submissions for the appellant at the hearing, Ms Dirie relied on her
    written submissions above and argued that there was no reason  to  find
    the appellant's account to be implausible.   She  reminded  me  of  the
    passages in the CPIN on which the appellant relied and asked  that  the
    appeal be allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  remaking
    afresh.

33. For the respondent, Mr  McVeety  said  that  it  was  not  possible  to
    establish a material error of law  by  alternative  reasoning,  as  the
    appellant was seeking to  do.    The  assertion  that  the  appellant's
    father had been attacked was late-added  and  the  judge's  credibility
    findings were fully supported by the evidence before him.

34. The claimed blood feud  was  far  from  being  within  the  norm.   The
    appellant's account was that he did not know  the  name  of  the  other
    family who were threatening his family.  The judge had been entitled to
    say that the evidence before him did not amount to credible evidence of
    a  blood  feud:  his  decision  was  neither  perverse  nor  Wednesbury
    unreasonable.

35. The CEDOCA report which was quoted in all of the passages in  the  CPIN
    upon which the appellant relied, when read in full, was not  supportive
    of the appellant's account.  There was nothing  about  the  appellant's
    claim which could logically lead to revenge.

Albania: Blood feuds, CPIN February 2020 (version 4.0)

36. The appellant relies on the CPIN, arguing that had the First-tier Judge
    taken proper account of its contents, he would have reached a different
    conclusion about the credibility of the appellant's account.   It draws
    heavily on the research of CEDOCA, the research  unit  of  the  Belgian
    Office of the Commissioner General for Refugees and Stateless  Persons,
    published June 2017, entitled  Blood  Feuds  in  contemporary  Albania:
    Characterisation, Prevalence, and Response by the  State.  The  parties
    agreed at the hearing that the Tribunal could look at the source report
    if necessary, as it is quoted at such length in the CPIN.

37. Under the heading at 3.2, Contemporary attitudes to customary law,  the
    CPIN quotes the 2017 CEDOCA report as saying that contemporary Albanian
    society no longer legitimates or  accepts  blood  feud  murders  as  an
    integral social obligation under customary law:

         "Mentor Kikia [a journalist and  civil  society  activist]  stated:
         "Most people started to think differently; persons who  were  self-
         confined have understood now that they are no longer  obligated  to
         stay in their homes.  Nowadays, they go to the police  and  say:  I
         have nothing to do with it and I want to live my life."

38. At 3.2.2, the CEDOCA report is quoted as saying that  there  despite  a
    new, modern mentality that no longer sustains blood feuds, murders have
    still been committed in  the  21st  century  in  which  the  Kanun  was
    invoked.  Some people, particularly  in  the  Shkoder  Regional  Police
    Directorate, still had the traditional mentality,  and  the  old  Kanun
    rules could be applied, including self-confinement.

39. At 3.3.1, the 2017 CEDOCA report said that the Albanian  Institute  for
    Public Affairs had said that the only thing left of the Kanun was self-
    isolation.  The customs were not the same as those  prescribed  by  the
    Kanun:

         "...since the 1990s, it is not  about  honour  any  more.   80%  is
         criminal and not related to customary law or medieval  common  law.
         It's about mafia-style  killings.   It's  murder  cases  for  other
         reasons than blood feud, just like  they  happen  elsewhere.   It's
         normal killings and  vendetta  killings.  ...nowadays,  people  are
         killing even women and children for blood feud,  which  is  not  in
         accordance to the stipulations of the Kanun."

40. In fact, CEDOCA's interlocutors concluded that very few of  the  recent
    murders were blood feuds at all.  Quoting Mentor Kikia again, the  CPIN
    says that criminal problems,  individual  conflicts  or  disputes,  can
    happen to anyone and 'are very often wrongly labelled as  blood  feud'.
    Blood feuds required the 'regulating role of the elderly' and they,  as
    prescribed by the Kanun, would  'sometimes  choose  a  target  and  the
    victim will lock himself up'.  Nearly all of  the  recent  blood  feuds
    relate to property and land disputes. The  Rules  of  the  Kanun  'were
    respected in practically none of these cases and  that  it  was  nearly
    always very  difficult  to  distinguish  these  murders  from  ordinary
    revenge killings'.

41. A passage from Operazione Colomba (the 'Non-Violent Peace Corps of  the
    Association Comunita Papa Giovanni XXIII') in December 2017  said  that
    the practice of vendetta was evolving, and gave examples of  women  and
    children under 15 who had been victims  of  blood  feud  violence:  two
    girls aged 17 and 19, a Protestant pastor whose age is not given, and a
    child hit in error by a bullet aimed at his 22 year old uncle during  a
    fight with another man.

42. At 3.4.1, under the heading Reasons for Blood Feud, car  accidents  are
    given as an example of an event which could start a blood feud:

         "Car accidents.  On 23 August 2012, a man was injured by a  firearm
         when  he  was  in  his  car  with  his  girlfriend.    The   police
         investigation assumed that this was  an  act  of  vendetta  over  a
         previous car accident in which the victim killed a  member  of  the
         road           police           (Panorama,            19.11.2012)."
         [Emphasis added]

43. The same Operazione Colomba reported that there were 16 families in the
    Shkodra District living in self-confinement, and a total of 31 families
    in the centre north of Albania.

Analysis

44. Ms Dirie has kindly provided the Tribunal  with  a  full  copy  of  the
    CEDOCA report, the contents of  which  is  so  heavily  quoted  in  the
    respondent's CPIN and which she contends would have led the judge to  a
    different conclusion, had he  reviewed  the  CPIN  and  approached  his
    decision holistically, as he had directed himself to do.  Both she  and
    Mr McVeety were content for me to look at the original document,  which
    forms the basis of most of the CPIN.  I am satisfied, having  read  it,
    that it is accurately reflected in the CPIN.

45. The thrust of the CEDOCA report is that the old Kanun law form of blood
    feud is dying out, as the Tribunal found  in  EH  (Albania).   What  is
    sometimes called a modern blood feud is really no more than mafia-style
    criminality, with few if any of the  ground  rules  which  defined  the
    traditional blood feud.  In fact, they  seem  to  be  indistinguishable
    from ordinary murders.

46. It is right that there  is  one  instance  reported  where  the  police
    thought a car accident might be related  to  a  blood  feud.   What  is
    really striking, though, about the evidence  in  this  appeal  is  that
    there has been no formal declaration of a blood feud at all, and  that,
    11 years after  the  original  incident,  nothing  that  could  not  be
    otherwise explained has occurred.

47. I remind myself that the existence of the CPIN evidence  was  drawn  to
    the judge's attention in submissions, and  also  that  at  [9]  of  his
    decision, he stated that he had the respondent's February 2020 CPIN  on
    Albanian blood feuds before him, and at [10] that he considered all the
    evidence before him, even if not specifically referenced.   My  primary
    finding is that it is likely that  the  judge  did  consider  the  CPIN
    evidence, even if he did not set it out.

48. If I am mistaken, then having  considered  the  CPIN,  and  the  CEDOCA
    source, I am not satisfied that  the  contents  of  that  evidence  are
    sufficiently different from the guidance in EH (Albania)  that  it  was
    necessary for the First-tier Judge to depart from the guidance.

49. I remind myself that the First-tier Judge heard the  oral  evidence  of
    the appellant and his uncle, and that he  is  the  fact-finding  judge.
    The Upper Tribunal can interfere with findings of fact and  credibility
    only in very limited circumstances:  see R (Iran) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982  and  AA  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296.

50. There is no perversity or Wednesbury unreasonableness  in  the  judge's
    reasoning.  His findings are based on reasonably drawn  inferences  and
    not simply on conjecture or speculation:  was  unarguably  entitled  to
    find that it was not credible after 11 years, that the appellant  still
    did not know the name of the other family or gang, such that it was not
    possible for evidence to be produced about the reach of that  gang  and
    whether internal relocation was available.

51. The attempted kidnapping, if it occurred, had no obvious  link  to  the
    claimed feud, and nor did the arson damage to the  family  truck  while
    they were in Germany.  It was certainly open to the judge  to  consider
    that the alleged stabbing of the appellant's father, mentioned only  at
    the hearing, was a fabrication.

52. There is no material error of law in the judge's reasoning and I uphold
    this decision.

DECISION

53. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:



    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law


    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.






Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      9 February
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



