
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08764/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2019                             |On 7 March 2019               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     DH

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born in 1989.

 2. At the initial hearing at  the  Upper  Tribunal,  both  representatives
    agreed that the tribunal had erred in law, that its decision felt to be
    set aside and that the Upper Tribunal should remake the decision on the
    existing evidence allowing the appeal on human rights grounds  (Article
    8 ECHR). Mrs Pettersen, for the  Secretary  of  State,  accepted  that,
    subject to Section 117B6 of the 2002 Act, it would not be reasonable to
    expect the British citizen child of the appellant to live in Iraq.  The
    judge had misdirected himself with  regard  to  relevant  jurisprudence
    (e.g. EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874) and his finding in  respect
    of Section 117B6 was perverse.

 3. I agree with the representations made to me by both representatives.  I
    set aside the First-tier  tribunal  decision.  I  remake  the  decision
    allowing the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  9
    April 2018 is set aside. I have re-made the decision.  The  appellant's
    appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 2 February 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

