
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08221/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th March 2018                        |On 27th March 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          haramein jeilani mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tiki Emezie (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge C A Parker, promulgated at Taylor House  on  8th  December  2017,
    following a hearing on 10th November 2017.  In the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State  subsequently  applied  for,  and   was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Somalia, who  was  born  on  [  ]
    1986.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 21st July 2016 refusing his application to  remain  in  the
    UK, given his protection  claim  and  his  human  rights  claims.   The
    Appellant's claims were against the Respondent's  letter  of  26th  May
    2015 advising the Appellant that under Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders
    Act 2007, he is required to be deported  unless  he  could  demonstrate
    that he fell within one of the specified exceptions set out in  Section
    33 of the Act.  The Appellant made representations in response to  this
    which were dated 18th June 2015 and 18th May 2016, where  he  explained
    why he should not be deported.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's mother arrived in the UK on 4th  September  2000.   She
    made a protection claim.  The Appellant was a dependent on his mother's
    claim.  She was granted exceptional leave to remain and thereafter  was
    granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  26th  February  2006.   The
    Appellant was granted leave in line with his mother.  However,  on  2nd
    October 2008 he was committed of an offence which  attracted  automatic
    deportation.  The  judge  on  12th  July  2010  noted  the  Appellant's
    minority clan membership had not been  considered  by  the  Respondent.
    The decision to deport was withdrawn on 12th March 2010.  The Appellant
    made a further representation to him on 1st July 2010.  However, he was
    then convicted of a further offence on 10th August 2011.  He was  again
    notified of his liability  to  automatic  deportation.   Again  he  was
    invited to make further  representations  for  why  he  should  not  be
    deported.  His protection claim was then refused on 25th July 2013.  On
    30th July 2014 he was issued with a notice of liability to removal.  On
    26th May 2015 he was served with notice of liability to deportation.

 4. The Respondent explained the reasons as being the Appellant's  criminal
    convictions.  He had driven a car while uninsured.   He  had  driven  a
    vehicle without a licence, and he had resisted arrest by  a  constable.
    He was convicted on 2 October 2008  on  three  counts  of  supplying  a
    controlled drug - class A and sentenced to four years' imprisonment  on
    each  count.   His  sentence  was  varied  on  appeal  to  14   months'
    imprisonment for each conviction running  concurrently.   He  was  then
    convicted again for driving a motor vehicle with  excess  alcohol.   He
    was found to have been using a  vehicle  while  uninsured  and  driving
    otherwise than in accordance with a licence.

 5. In short, the Respondent stated that  the  Appellant  had  committed  a
    particularly serious offence and considered  to  be  a  danger  to  the
    community of the United Kingdom.  Reliance was placed by the Respondent
    to the case of MOJ (return to  Mogadishu)  CG  [2014]  UKUT  442.   The
    Respondent concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  a  "ordinary  citizen"
    returning to Somalia, and did not face a real risk  of  coming  to  the
    adverse attention of Al-Shabab.  His membership of a minority clan  did
    not subject him to risk of harm, as this was no longer an issue.



The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge began his consideration of the appeal by  pointing  out  that
    this was a case where "neither the Appellant nor Respondent has covered
    themselves in glory in terms of their preparation and representation of
    this appeal" (paragraph 58).  This is not least given  that  there  had
    been a failure to take a decision  by  the  Respondent  to  deport  the
    Appellant on two previous occasions.  The  judge  observed  that,  "the
    most likely reason appears to be Article 3 considerations, or that this
    is speculation on my part".  This was also a case where "there has been
    considerable confusion concerning the  Appellant's  immigration  status
    and the Respondent has apologised  for  this  to  some  extent  in  the
    refusal letter at  paragraph  98".   The  Respondent  stated  that  the
    Appellant had not been  adversely  affected  by  this.   The  Appellant
    stated that he had been.  He pointed out that he  had  been  unable  to
    work since his residence card expired in  March  2014.   On  the  other
    hand, it emerged that the Appellant did have indefinite leave to remain
    throughout the period (paragraph 15).

 7. The judge, having considered everything, came to  the  conclusion  that
    this was an Appellant who had left Somalia at the age of 14 and was now
    31 years old.  Throughout this period he has  lived  with  his  mother.
    Although he will remain familiar with some aspects  of  Somali  culture
    and customs, this was a case where "he has spent most of his  formative
    years and the whole of his adult life in the  United  Kingdom".   There
    was no evidence of any health problems.  Nevertheless, the judge  could
    not find that the Appellant was a resourceful young man  who  would  be
    able to easily avail himself of what opportunities might  be  available
    in Somalia (paragraph 61).

 8. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge failed  to  give  clear
    reasons for the findings made.  It was not clear why  a  healthy  young
    man with no medical issues would be unable  to  live  independently  in
    Somalia.  The  judge  did  not  put  sufficient  consideration  to  the
    possible advantages the Appellant would have upon returning to  Somalia
    which had a booming  economy  now  (see  paragraphs  351  to  352,  and
    paragraph 477 of MOJ).

10. On 5th January 2017 permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    it was not clear why the judge found that the Appellant was not capable
    of living independently in Somalia.

Submissions

11. At the  hearing  before  me  on  5th  March  2018,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Tiki Emezie, a  Solicitor,  and  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Ms Brocklesby-Weller, a Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.  Since it was the Respondent Secretary of State's appeal,  she
    began by stating that, to allow the appeal under Article  3  ECHR,  was
    irrational given that the Appellant could not be at risk of poverty and
    destitution under the principles  set  out  in  MOJ  [2014]  UKUT  442.
    Although a reference was expressly made to that country  guidance  case
    (at paragraphs 66 to 67) the fact was that the strictures of that  case
    were not properly applied on the facts here.  There is  no  reason  why
    the Appellant would not be able to live independently in Somalia.  This
    was  because,  as  the  judge  pointed  out  no  Somali  or   Bravanese
    interpreter  was  requested  at  the  hearing  to  interpret,  and  the
    Appellant spoke and understood some Bravanese, although the judge  also
    noted that, "but I am not satisfied that he is fluent or  confident  in
    that language" (paragraph 66).

12. Second, the Appellant was not a particularly young child when  he  left
    Somalia.  He was 14 years of age then.  Although he was 31 years of age
    now, he  would  have  sufficient  recollection  of  that  country,  and
    sufficient wherewithal, to be able to  manage  in  that  country  quite
    independently without any support from  anywhere  else.   He  had  been
    engaged in criminal conduct across a range of activities in the UK.  He
    did attend school  here.   He  did  acquire  some  skills.   These  are
    vocational skills. It did not make sense to say that he  would  not  be
    able to fend for himself there.

13. Ms Brocklesby-Weller referred to the Tribunal decision in  AAW  (expert
    evidence - weight)  Somalia  [2015]  UKUT  00673.   In  that  case  the
    Appellant faced the prospect of removal after seventeen  years  in  the
    UK.   He had no nuclear family or other close relatives  in  the  city.
    He was also a member of the minority clan.  The  Tribunal  pointed  out
    that this required an examination of all the circumstances.  This meant
    circumstances in Mogadishu, the length of absence from  Mogadishu,  the
    clan associations the Appellant  may  have,  his  access  to  financial
    resources,  the  possibilities  of  him  securing  a  livelihood,   the
    availability of remittances from abroad, his means and  support  during
    the time spent in the UK, and why his ability to fund  the  journey  to
    the west no longer enables an Appellant to secure financial support  on
    return.  The Tribunal referred to the economic  boom  in  the  country.
    There was no evidence that returnees were taking jobs at the expense of
    those who have never been away.  Only those  with  no  clan  or  family
    support, who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad, and who
    have no real prospect of securing access to livelihood on return, would
    face the prospect of living in circumstances falling below  that  which
    is acceptable in humanitarian  protection  terms  (paragraph  47).   Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller submitted that this was  the  case  here  also.   The
    Appellant would have the prospect of securing access to  livelihood  on
    return.

14. Second, there was a material error on the part  of  the  judge  in  not
    referring to the Facilitated Return Scheme.  Under this  the  Appellant
    would be entitled to claim �750 "should he choose to apply for it" (see
    paragraph 57 of AAW).  There is no mention of this at all by the  judge
    in this determination.

15. Third, there was a submission in AAW also that for much of his time  in
    the UK the Appellant had been unemployed and homeless.  It was not  the
    case here, submitted Ms Brocklesby-Weller, that the Appellant had  been
    homeless.  He had been living with his mother all along.  Moreover, the
    judge in AAW referred to the level of skills, which were quite  similar
    to the ones that the  Appellant  had  acquired  here,  which  had  been
    available in that case also (see paragraph 15).   The  Appellant  there
    had completed eight weeks of a sixteen week course in bricklaying.  The
    conclusion reached in AAW was that, "all of  this  indicates  that  the
    Appellant would be a  person  who,  in  seeking  low  skilled  work  in
    Mogadishu would have advantages over those without anything to  show  a
    prospective   employer,    particularly    given    his    construction
    qualifications" (paragraph 59).

16. Finally, my attention was drawn to the Court of Appeal judgment in Said
    [2016] EWCA Civ 442.  This emphasised that what was required was in the
    "nature of exceptional and compelling circumstances in  the  Strasbourg
    cases"  (paragraph  19).   The  present  case  did  not  exhibit  these
    features.

17. All in all, therefore, the judge was wrong to conclude that there were,



         "... substantial grounds for believing that there is a real  chance
         of the Appellant finding himself homeless and destitute upon return
         to Mogadishu on account of his minority  clan  membership,  limited
         language ability, lack  of  experience  of  independent  living  or
         employment, lack of family in Mogadishu or support in  the  UK  and
         absence of a very lengthy period" (paragraph 77).

18. For his part, Mr Emezie, submitted that everything that was set out  as
    being  relevant  in  the  country  guidance  case  of  MOJ  (return  to
    Mogadishu) CG [2015] UKUT 442 had  been  found  by  this  judge,  in  a
    careful and plausible determination, to be in the Appellant's favour.

19. First, there was recognition right at the outset of  the  determination
    of the fact that "the Respondent acknowledged that the Appellant  would
    not have support from his nuclear family in Somalia" (paragraph 12).

20. Second, the Appellant had stated that he had  now  a  record  of  well-
    behaved conduct in prison and he had  completed  various  courses.   He
    understood how his actions affected society as a whole.  He  no  longer
    took drugs or drinks alcohol.  The Appellant's mother and siblings  are
    British citizens and the Appellant is the main carer for his mother who
    has been suffering persistent lower back pain for  over  fifteen  years
    (paragraph 13).

21. Third, there was evidence that the Appellant hardly knows "the country"
    when it comes to Somalia.  He  is  a  person  who  "does  not  properly
    understand the language and can only  speak  a  little".   Somalia  was
    dangerous and alien to him.  He knew nobody there.   His  family  would
    not join  him  owing  to  the  risks  there.   Moreover,  although  the
    Appellant was an adult, "he had not formed his  own  independent  life"
    (paragraph 33).

22. Fourth, the Appellant  was  actually  asked  about  his  rehabilitation
    during the hearing and he stated he was unable to get  drink  or  drugs
    while he was in  prison  and  he  had  stopped  taking  them.   He  had
    undertaken courses addressing his alcohol and  drug  consumption.   The
    Appellant was no longer in contact with any of those with whom  he  had
    associated leading to a  conviction  for  his  drug  offences  in  2008
    (paragraph 37-38).

23. Fifth, the Appellant was then asked about his  qualifications  when  he
    confirmed that he had left school at the age of 16  having  taken  some
    GSCEs but he had not really passed them.  He is dyslexic.  He could not
    write properly (paragraph 39).

24. Sixth, the Appellant stated that he did not speak  Somali  although  he
    understood some things.  His mother and  uncle  spoke  Bravanese.   His
    uncle spoke  more  Somali  than  his  mother.   Importantly,  there  is
    evidence that his brother and sister do not normally  speak  Somali  or
    Bravanese at home (paragraph 45).

25.  Seventh,  it  was  against  this  background,  that  the  judge  began
    consideration  of  the  facts  before  him  (paragraph  58).   He  then
    concluded that the Appellant's most formative years were spent in  this
    country.  The whole of his adult life was spent in  this  country.   He
    had left Somalia at the young age of 14.  He was now 31  years  of  age
    (paragraph 61) and he still lived with his mother.

26. Eighth, there was the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant  would  be
    "resourceful" as an able-bodied person without any health  problems  in
    Somalia.  It was not as if the judge did not consider this  issue.   He
    tackled it head on.  He was perfectly cognisant of the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had undertaken some painting and decorating work and had also
    been given as apprentice to his uncle to work as  an  electrician.   In
    prison he had undertaken painting, decorating, plumbing and  electrical
    work.  However, the judge concluded that, "there  was  no  evidence  to
    support his own evidence about these claimed courses, qualifications or
    work experience" (paragraph 62).  It remained  the  case  that  he  was
    unable to find work in the  UK  since  2014  after  his  identity  card
    expired (paragraph 62).

27. Finally, it was in these circumstances  that  the  judge  came  to  the
    conclusion that, "there is no evidence that he has any  qualifications"
    (paragraph 63).  The judge's view was that he could  not  be  satisfied
    that there was evidence "even to the lower standard, that he is capable
    of living independently and being  self-sufficient".   The  explanation
    that the judge gave for this was that, "apart from a  brief  period  in
    2008 when the Appellant had his own  flat,  the  Appellant  had  always
    lived at home with his mother and remains doing so today at the age  of
    31" (paragraph 63).

28. Finally, as far as the cases of AAW [2015] UKUT 00673 and  Said  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 442 were concerned, those were cases where there was  evidence
    that the Appellant could  be  in  receipt  of  financial  support  from
    abroad, namely, from the UK, when he returned back  to  Somalia.   This
    was not the case here.  The Appellant was a carer for his mother.   She
    was in no position to provide him with financial support.  He was not a
    member of a nucleus family.  He had no family in Somalia.  As to  there
    being no reference to the returns policy, there is no evidence that the
    Presenting Officer brought this to the attention of the judge.  It  was
    not an issue that was raised.

No Error of Law

29. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

30. First and foremost, the jurisdiction of this  Tribunal  is  supervisory
    only.  As Brooke LJ stated in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982, "it is well-
    known that a 'perversity' represents a  very  high  hurdle"  (paragraph
    11).   His  Lordship  went  on  to  explain  that,   "far   too   often
    practitioners use  the  word  'irrational'  or  'perverse'  when  these
    epithets are completely inappropriate" (paragraph 12).   The  question,
    therefore, is whether the decision arrived at by the judge was one that
    could be described as "irrational".

31. Second, it is not for this Tribunal to disagree with  the  findings  of
    the judge below unless there is indeed an error of  law  in  the  sense
    that the conclusion arrived at was "perverse".   This,  however,  is  a
    case where the judge appears to have had regard  to  all  the  relevant
    issues before him.  The controlling judgment of MOJ [2014] UKUT 442 was
    expressly noted by the judge at the outset (see paragraph 12).  It  was
    also accepted at the outset that the Respondent had  acknowledged  that
    the Appellant would not have support from his nuclear family in Somalia
    (paragraph 12).  The outstanding question here  has  been  whether  the
    Appellant, as an able-bodied young man with no health  problems,  could
    use his skills learned in the UK to make a life  for  him  in  Somalia.
    Whilst I do not accept the implication in the  judge's  reasoning  that
    the Appellant would not have acquired  some  formal  qualifications  in
    order to find work in Somalia (see paragraph 63), and  that  skills  in
    painting and decorating, as  well  as  electrical  work,  may  well  be
    transferable, the fact here was that the  Appellant  had  never  really
    lived an independent life at all, "apart from a brief  period  in  2008
    when the Appellant had his own flat".  He had always lived at home with
    his mother.  He still lived with her at the age of 31.  In addition  to
    this, he was a carer for his mother.  The  conclusion  reached  by  the
    judge was that when the Appellant did  briefly  live  independently  he
    fell with the wrong crowd and committed offences.   The  judge's  clear
    finding was that the suggestion by the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    Appellant is a fit healthy young man "who could grasp the opportunities
    in Somalia runs counter to the  evidence  before  me"  (paragraph  63).
    That was a conclusion that was open  to  the  judge,  in  circumstances
    where the Appellant had lived most of his formative life in the UK  and
    the whole of his adult  life  here.   There  was  an  issue  about  his
    language skills but as the judge found, "he speaks and understands some
    Bravanese but I am not satisfied he is  fluent  or  confident  in  that
    language" (paragraph 66).  The Appellant would therefore  be  hamstrung
    with a lack of linguistic skills, on top of his dyslexic condition, and
    the fact that he had since the age of 14 been  in  this  country.   The
    conclusion was one that was open to the judge in the  circumstances  of
    this case.

32. Third, it follows from this that had it been the case that such matters
    had been left unconsidered, it may well have  been  possible  to  argue
    that the judge did not have regard to that which he ought to  have  had
    regard to, and erred  in  law  in  failing  to  give  consideration  to
    relevant circumstances before him.  That is not  the  case  here.   The
    Tribunal judgment in AA [2015] UKUT 00673 puts the position as follows.
     First, in order to succeed a person has to be one  "with  no  clan  or
    family support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad".
    Second, and in addition to this, they have to be someone who  "have  no
    real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on return"  (paragraph
    47).  There is a conjunctive requirement here.  Both elements  must  be
    proven.  It is not enough for the Appellant to state that he is not  in
    receipt of remittances from abroad.  It was also necessary to show that
    they would have no prospect of securing access to livelihood on return.
     However, in this case the judge has made precisely that  finding,  and
    has done so by pointing out  that  the  Appellant  does  not  have  the
    language skills to enable him to secure employment, has  not  lived  an
    independent life, and suffers from dyslexia (paragraph 62).

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th March 2018



