
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/08036/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                       |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On December 8, 2017                      |     On December 12, 2017         |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                            MR SARBAST AHMED OMER
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Tabassum (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeetie, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  The appellant came to this country
    as a Tier 4 student on June 16, 2014. He returned to Iraq  in  December
    2015 and then returned back to  this  country.  He  claimed  asylum  on
    January 18, 2016.  The  respondent  refused  his  protection  claim  on
    October 6, 2016 under paragraphs 336 and 339M/339F HC 395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  October  20,  2016  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His
    appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   A   Davies
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on February 27, 2017 and in a decision
    promulgated on March 31, 2017 the  Judge  refused  his  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision on April 13,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dineen
    on April 27,  2017  but  following  renewed  grounds  of  appeal  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pitt granted permission on July  13.  2017  finding  the
    grounds arguable. The respondent lodged a Rule 24 response dated August
    2, 2017 in which she argues there was no error in law.

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Miss Tabassum adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted the appellant
    had published from the United Kingdom a number of articles  which  were
    highly critical of the Kurdistan government. She submitted  that  as  a
    returning journalist, who had published a number of critical  articles,
    the appellant would be at  risk.  In  distinguishing  between  internet
    publications and newspaper articles the Judge had erred.  At  [48]  the
    Judge failed to explain why he would not be at risk.

 7. Miss Tabassum further submitted that the publication  of  articles  and
    the appellant's ongoing beliefs placed at risk in line with  HJ  (Iran)
    [2010] UKSC 31. The Judge also failed to grasp  the  point  being  made
    that he had already been targeted because his funding had been  stopped
    whereas all other students' funding continued.

 8. Mr McVeetie relied on the Rule 24 statement and  submitted  there  were
    differences between  what  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  done  and
    journalists who submitted articles to newspapers.  The latter  were  at
    risk if their views were against the authorities  whereas  Mr  McVeetie
    submitted the appellant's action were akin to a blogger. The  fact  the
    website may be scrutinised did not mean he would  be  targeted.  Whilst
    blogging articles to the web he had returned to Iraq and encountered no
    problems either on arrival or  departure.  Mr  McVeetie  submitted  the
    Judge's findings were open to him.

 9. With regard to the HJ point he submitted the Judge did  not  accept  he
    was genuine in his views and consequently HJ was not engaged. The Judge
    concluded he was trying to create a claim to support  his  claim.  With
    regard to the final ground the Judge was not required to  consider  why
    the authorities stopped his funding because he had rejected  his  claim
    overall.

10. In response Miss  Tabassum  submitted  that  her  final  ground  was  a
    standalone ground and not just connected to the first ground of appeal.
    The appellant had returned to sort out some money issues  and  he  only
    realised there was a problem when he returned. Whether  he  blogged  or
    printed articles she submitted HJ applied.

11. Having heard submissions I reserved my decision but indicated  that  if
    there was an error in law then I would remake the decision by  allowing
    it on protection and article 3 ECHR grounds.

    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

12. The appellant originates from Sulaymaniyah in  the  Kurdish  region  of
    Iraq and his wife's family come from Erbil. He came to this country  to
    study and he was able to afford the cost of  his  studies  due  to  the
    financial assistance offered by the Kurdish  authorities.  He  was  not
    significantly involved in politics in Iraq but his claim is  that  once
    he was in  the  United  Kingdom  he  began  criticising  the  Kurdistan
    government.

13. The Judge accepted he was funded by the Kurdistan government  and  that
    he left the country legally in 2014. He returned in  December  2014  to
    bring his family to this country and the Judge found he had no problems
    up to December 2014 which suggests anything he had written  had  either
    not come to the attention of the authorities or they  were  simply  not
    interested in it.

14. The Judge accepted at [33] the appellant wrote  a  number  of  critical
    articles after he arrived in the United Kingdom but commented  at  [34]
    that such articles were at odds with what he had previously written  in
    Iraq but identified the real issue  was  whether  such  articles  would
    place him at risk of harm from the Kurdistan government.

15. Miss Tabassum submits that the Judge's approach hereafter  was  flawed.
    The Judge examined the country evidence and accepted  that  people  who
    wrote critical  articles  risked  being  detained  and  abused  by  the
    authorities. However, the Judge drew a distinction between professional
    journalists and the defendant. He considered the HJ point and concluded
    at [38] that  the  appellant,  based  on  his  previous  activities  in
    Kurdistan, would not be politically active in Kurdistan. It is this for
    this reason that he concluded HJ did not apply to this case.  This  was
    an argument adopted by Mr McVeetie although both  Upper  Tribunal  Pitt
    and Miss Tabassum raised concerns over this approach.

16. In giving permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Pitt  found  it  arguable
    that the Judge incorrectly approached HJ because the Judge accepted the
    appellant had written articles and that  his  claim  political  parties
    watched website was plausible.

17. The Court in HJ stated:

         "(a) The first  stage,  of  course,  is  to  consider  whether  the
         applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of that
         orientation he will not be entitled to be treated as  a  member  of
         the particular social group. But I would regard this  part  of  the
         test as having been satisfied if the applicant's case is that he is
         at risk of persecution because he is suspected of being gay, if his
         past history shows that this is in fact the case.

         (b) The next stage is to examine a group  of  questions  which  are
         directed to what his situation will be on return. This part of  the
         inquiry is directed to what will happen in  the  future.  The  Home
         Office's Country of Origin  report  will  provide  the  background.
         There will be little difficulty in holding that in  countries  such
         as Iran and Cameroon gays or persons who are believed to be gay are
         persecuted and that persecution is something that may reasonably be
         feared. The question is how each applicant, looked at individually,
         will conduct himself if returned and how others will react to  what
         he does. Those others will include everyone with whom he will  come
         in contact, in private as well as in public. The  way  he  conducts
         himself may vary  from  one  situation  to  another,  with  varying
         degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to  conceal
         aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
         even from those whom he knows may disapprove of  it.  If  he  fears
         persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he  will  be
         entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal  to  resort  to
         concealment may be. The question what is reasonably  tolerable  has
         no part in this inquiry.

         (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be able
         to do in the country of his nationality everything that he  can  do
         openly in the country whose protection he seeks is not the test. As
         I said earlier (see para 15), the Convention was  not  directed  to
         reforming the level of rights in the country of origin. So it would
         be wrong to approach the issue on the basis that the purpose of the
         Convention is to guarantee to an applicant who is gay that  he  can
         live as freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to
         do if he were not returned. It does not guarantee to  everyone  the
         human rights standards that are applied by  the  receiving  country
         within its own territory. The focus throughout must be on what will
         happen in the country of origin.

         (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will in  fact
         conceal aspects of  his  sexual  orientation  if  returned,  is  to
         consider why he will do so. If this will simply be in  response  to
         social pressures or for cultural or religious reasons  of  his  own
         choosing and not because of a fear of persecution,  his  claim  for
         asylum must be rejected. But if the reason why he  will  resort  to
         concealment is that he genuinely fears that otherwise  he  will  be
         persecuted, it will be necessary to consider whether that  fear  is
         well founded. Page 18

         (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have a well-
         founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he has,  the  causative
         condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426,  para  5  will  have
         been established. The applicant will be entitled to asylum."

18. Mr McVeetie argued the Judge's decision was not  flawed  and  there  is
    merit in that argument. The appellant had clearly not  experienced  any
    problems prior to leaving the country. He was clearly highly thought of
    because he received  funding  from  the  government  for  his  studies.
    Clearly, if there were concerns about him this would not have been  the
    case. The appellant stated that he submitted critical articles  to  the
    website but whenever he returned he experienced no problems whatsoever.
    He was able to enter the country without difficulty and then leave  the
    country without difficulty.

19. Miss Tabassum's argument is that when he returned in late December 2015
    he found his funding had ceased. The appellant's claim was that he  had
    been singled out and this was due to his  critical  articles.  However,
    there was nothing to support his claim this was the reason his  funding
    had ceased and the Judge spent some time considering the events of  his
    time in the KRG in December 2015.

20. Returning therefore to the HJ questions I accept the Judge was entitled
    to conclude the appellant did not fall  within  the  test  set  by  the
    Court. As he did not fall  within  the  risk  category  the  Judge  was
    entitled to reject the HJ argument as long as he reasoned his  findings
    which he did.

21. There is therefore no error of law on any of the  issues.  Whilst  they
    are separate arguments they are intertwined because unless the articles
    would place him at risk the HJ point would not arise and the reason for
    his funding was consequently for a reason other than  that  claimed  by
    the appellant.

    DECISION

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date     08.12.2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.


Signed                              Date     08.12.2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





