
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08048/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2020                           |On 20 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     PT
                         (ANONYMITY DIREction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi of Counsel, Templeton Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Kenya, is appealing against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Young promulgated on 16 October 2019 refusing
    his protection claim.  The appellant claims to be gay.  Judge Young did
    not believe him.  He gave multiple reasons including that the
    appellant, despite having been in the UK since 2002 and despite
    submitting multiple applications to the respondent, had not raised the
    issue of his sexuality until he claimed asylum in August 2018.

 2. The judge observed, at paragraph 17 of the decision, that in the
    appellant's asylum interview, which took place on 31 May 2019, the
    appellant made several references to feeling suicidal and to hearing
    voices in his head.

 3. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing the appellant applied for an
    adjournment in order to obtain a psychiatric report.  The judge refused
    the application.

 4. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge fell into error by refusing
    to adjourn the hearing.

 5. Upper Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission on the basis that arguably
    fairness meant that the judge ought to have had the benefit of a
    medical report in order to assess the weight to be given to the
    appellant's answers at the asylum interview.

 6. The issue in this appeal is fairness: that is, whether the appellant
    was deprived of a fair hearing by the absence of a psychiatric report.
    As explained by the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC):

         If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request, such
         decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial considerations to intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most cases
         the question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it is important to recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied is that of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284

 7. Before me, Mr Pipi submitted that it was necessary for there to be a
    psychiatric report about the appellant's mental health as the case
    turned on his credibility, and the credibility of his evidence could
    not properly be evaluated without the benefit of medical evidence.  He
    drew attention to paragraph 90(6) of the decision where the judge
    placed weight on the confusion in the appellant's witness statement.
    Mr Pipi argued that the confusion may have been a consequence of the
    appellant's mental health and the judge was unable to properly assess
    this without a medical report.

 8. Mr Melvin argued that an application had not been made prior to the
    hearing and the limited medical evidence that was put before the First-
    tier Tribunal did not indicate that the appellant had a significant
    mental health problem.  He noted that there was no indication that an
    expert had been instructed or as to how long it would take to obtain a
    report.

 9. I am sympathetic to the argument advanced by Mr Melvin that if the
    appellant needed an expert report he could, and should, have applied
    before the hearing for an adjournment. I also agree with Mr Melvin that
    there is a notable lack of evidence, in the form of medical records, to
    support the appellant's claim to suffer from serious mental health
    problems. However, the responses given in the asylum interview (as
    summarised at paragraph 17 of the decision) indicate that the appellant
    may have a serious mental health problem which would need to be taken
    into consideration when assessing his evidence. Whilst the appellant's
    representatives clearly ought to have applied prior to the hearing for
    an adjournment, the timescales were relatively short: the respondent's
    decision is dated 13 August 2019 and the hearing was on 20 September
    2019. Considering all of the circumstances, I am (just) persuaded that
    fairness required the appellant to be given an opportunity to produce a
    medical report notwithstanding the failure to apply for an adjournment
    earlier and the lack of medical records to support the claimed mental
    health problems.

10. As the appeal will need to be considered afresh with no findings
    preserved, having regard to para. 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements of
    the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and
    Upper Tribunal, I have decided that the appeal should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

 1. The appeal is allowed.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a different
    judge.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                      |                               |
|Signed                                |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|[pic]                                 |                               |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |Dated: 24 March 2020           |

