
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/08344/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2019                         | On 25 June 2019                      |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                             jamal lutfi mahmoud
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr U Aslam of McGlashan MacKay Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is of Palestinian origin.  He was born in Jenin and moved
    with his family when he was two years old to live in Jordan in  the  Al
    Zarqa Refugee Camp.  But for  a  period  of  one  year  in  Syria,  the
    appellant had lived all his life in Jordan in this UNWRA Camp.

 2. The appellant's case is that left Jordan  in  April  2013  and  claimed
    asylum in Sweden in May 2013, and then claimed in Germany in  September
    2014, leaving the latter before a decision was made.  He claimed asylum
    in the United Kingdom in August 2014 after being served  notice  as  an
    illegal entrant that same month.  The Dublin III Regulation was applied
    however the appellant was taken out of the third country process  on  1
    October 2017 and considered to be in the UK.

 3. The claim was  based  on  adverse  attention  that  the  appellant  had
    received from the Jordanian authorities which would recur on return and
    because of his lack of documentation.   The  respondent  accepted  that
    Jordan was the appellant's former country  of  habitual  residence  and
    that he was a Palestine national.  He had been educated in  Jordan  and
    employed there, which required him to be a documented Palestinian.   In
    the light of the appellant's poor credibility, the respondent  did  not
    accept that he was not documented as a Palestinian living in Jordan nor
    was  it  accepted  that  he  would  be  of  adverse  interest  to   the
    authorities.

 4. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sorrell for reasons given in her  decision
    dated 4 February 2019.  She accepted the appellant's evidence  that  he
    was not documented as a Palestinian in  Jordan  but  that  this  was  a
    result of his  decision  not  to  apply  for  it  rather  than  one  of
    disentitlement.  She did not accept that the appellant would have  been
    released if he was of adverse interest to  the  Jordanian  authorities.
    Although she accepted the appellant had been detained and was routinely
    stopped and questioned, she did not consider the appellant was at  risk
    of persecution or serious harm if returned to Jordan.  She explained at
    [32] and [33]:

         "32. In respect to the practical issue of the Appellant's return to
             Jordan, the Respondent has stated in their written submissions
             that as it is not accepted the Appellant  is  undocumented  in
             Jordan, it is considered that his removal to that country  can
             be instigated if his appeal fails or in the alternative  as  a
             national of Palestine, he  can  also  be  removed  there.   In
             contrast, the Appellant has submitted that the Respondent will
             be unable to return him to Jordan in the absence of  documents
             required to obtain travel documentation,  or  that  if  he  is
             removed but not admitted upon arrival, he  will  be  stateless
             and the Tribunal will have to reconsider the issue.

         33.  Having considered their submissions in light of  the  findings
             in NA Jordan CG I am of the view that this is a matter for the
             Respondent and if such travel documentation is  not  available
             or the Appellant is not admitted upon  arrival  to  Jordan  or
             indeed in the alternative to Palestine,  then  the  Respondent
             will not be able to successfully remove the Appellant and will
             have to reconsider their position."

 5. The judge then turned to Article 8 and concluded  the  appellant  would
    not face significant obstacles to his re-integration into Jordan as  he
    had lived the majority of his life there, with reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).

 6. Permission to appeal was sought on a number of grounds.  It  is  argued
    with reference to the appellant's documentation, that he would  not  be
    recognised as a refugee by the Jordanian authorities and therefore  was
    not entitled to  documentation.   Had  the  judge  had  regard  to  the
    appellant's note of argument in a certain exchange of emails, she would
    not have concluded that his lack of documentation was due  to  his  not
    having applied for it  rather  than  because  he  was  not  necessarily
    entitled to it.

 7. The second ground of challenge argues that the judge had failed to give
    adequate and comprehensible reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim
    that he had been put on a list as a result of the authorities'  filming
    him and others at a demonstration.  The judge had made a  finding  that
    no reasonable judge would have made in this regard.  This was clarified
    at the hearing as a perversity challenge.

 8. The third ground distinguishes NA (Palestinians - Not at general  risk)
    Jordan CG [2005] UKIAT 00094 on the basis that the  appellant  was  not
    recognised by the Jordanian authorities as a refugee and  that  he  was
    undocumented.  The judge had  failed  to  make  any  mention  of  these
    distinguishing features in applying the country guidance.

 9. The fourth ground challenges the conclusion that  there  would  not  be
    very significant obstacles to the appellant's re-integration  into  the
    Palestinian territories with reference to the  meaning  of  the  phrase
    "very significant obstacles" considered by the Court of Appeal in AS  v
    SSHD [2018] Imm AR 169.  It is argued that the judge had failed to give
    adequate and comprehensible reasons and thereby erred in  law  in  this
    respect.

10. In granting permission to appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blundell
    focused on the appellant's fears from the authorities.  He observed  at
    [3] and [4]:

         "3.  I consider it arguable that the findings at [24]-[25] of Judge
             Sorrell's  decision  are  difficult  to  reconcile.   It   was
             accepted, on  the  one  hand,  that  the  appellant  had  been
             detained on a number of occasions but it was not accepted,  on
             the other hand, that the appellant would have been  identified
             and  put  on  a  list  as  a  result  of  being  filmed  at  a
             demonstration.  Sedley LJ's well-known remarks in YB (Eritrea)
             [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360  are  cited  in  the  grounds  in  this
             connection but the obvious point is that the  authorities  did
             not  need,  in  the  case  of  this  appellant,  to  undertake
             investigations to ascertain his identity, he was already known
             to  the  authorities  as  a  result  of  his   many   previous
             detentions.

         4.   The point made at [5] of the grounds is also arguable.  Having
             accepted much of the appellant's account, there  were  factors
             which distinguished him from the general  position  considered
             in NA (Jordan) CG [2005] UKIAT 94.  The remaining  points  are
             less strong, to my mind, but I nevertheless  grant  permission
             to argue all of the grounds of appeal."

11. The judge's determination sets out the  law,  considers  a  preliminary
    issue in relation to  an  adjournment  application  by  the  Presenting
    Officer based on late  compliance  by  the  appellant  with  directions
    (which was refused) which is then followed by  a  summary  of  the  key
    evidence at [11] to [13] as follows:

         "11. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he  was  born  in
             Jenin, in the West Bank in Palestine  and  that  when  he  was
             around 2 years old, he moved with his family to  Al  Zarqa  in
             Jordan and was brought up in a United Nations Relief and Works
             Agency ("UNWRA") supported refugee camp.  His father  and  his
             four brothers and four sisters live in Jordan, but his  mother
             died in 2011.  He still has family  in  Palestine.   Life  was
             difficult growing up in Jordan.  The Appellant, his father and
             brothers worked hard to make a living and support the  family.
             He was educated in Jordan at  schools  that  were  set  up  by
             "UNRWA".  He has had various jobs in Jordan.  He worked  as  a
             salesman, within the construction sector and  for  a  printing
             company.  He did not work as a graphic designer as recorded at
             his screening interview and thinks that he was  misinterpreted
             by the interpreter.

         12.  As  a  Palestinian  living  in  Jordan  he  has  been  treated
             differently to native  Jordanians.   Whilst  participating  in
             demonstrations the Jordanian authorities would  throw  teargas
             and batter them.  They are not allowed to visit or  return  to
             Palestine.  He left Jordan because it was becoming politically
             very bad for Palestinians living there.  He was harassed  many
             times by the authorities when walking to work.  They would ask
             who he was, where he was going and would be very rude to  him.
             He would also be asked if he supported a particular group,  if
             he opposed the government and about his activities.  He thinks
             that the authorities  feared him for  being  an  activist  and
             that he was at risk to the  safety  of  Jordan.   In  2012  he
             participated in  a  demonstration  in  front  of  the  Israeli
             embassy.  The Jordanian police recorded  the  event  and  took
             their names and put them on a list.  In 2012  he  participated
             in a large demonstration against  the  Jordanian  authorities.
             In that year he was involved in many demonstrations and a  lot
             of people were arrested.  The police would throw stones, water
             and teargas to separate and stop the demonstrations.  He  also
             witnessed a friend's friend who was Palestinian  being  beaten
             and kicked by the authorities and subsequently detained.

         13.  In the last three months before he left Jordan, he  was  being
             harassed and questioned by the police at least once  every  10
             days.  He has been detained by the police  on  more  than  one
             occasion.  On one of these occasions he was detained  for  one
             day.  He does not know why  he  was  detained  but  was  asked
             questions about where he was going and his  intentions.   When
             leaving Jordan, he used an agent to obtain travel documents as
             it is virtually impossible  for  a  Palestinian  to  obtain  a
             Jordanian travel document  and  it  was  too  risky  to  apply
             through the proper  procedure  in  case  his  application  was
             refused and the length of time it could take.  He accepts that
             some Palestinians do obtain travel documentation, but that  he
             doesn't see the purpose of having it as it does not  have  any
             legal status in Jordan and he would still be  treated  in  the
             same way by the Jordanian authorities.  He did not possess  an
             identity card in Jordan and does not think as a Palestinian he
             could have acquired one as evidence of identity  is  required.
             It would only have confirmed that he is Palestinian anyway and
             not having one just suggests the same in that he is a  refugee
             living in Jordan.  He accepts that he may not be a  person  of
             adverse interest to the Jordanian  authorities  but  does  not
             think he will be allowed to re-enter Jordan without  Jordanian
             citizenship or any travel documentation.  He claims that he is
             at risk of persecution or serious harm if he were returned  to
             Jordan on the grounds of nationality and  as  a  member  of  a
             particular social group.  He further claims that  there  would
             be a breach of Article 8 of the "ECHR" if he were returned  to
             Jordan  or  Palestine  as  there  would  be  very  significant
             obstacles to his re-integration into either country."

12. Thereafter the judge sets out the  reasons  for  refusal  which  raised
    issues of credibility on the issue of documentation in the light of the
    appellant's education and employment and the issue of  obstacles  under
    paragraph 276ADE(vi). The  judge  went  on  to  explain  that  she  had
    carefully considered all the evidence in  the  round  with  an  overall
    assessment before reaching her findings.

13. On the issue of documentation, the judge had this to  say  at  [21]  to
    [23]:

         "21. I accepted the Appellant's material evidence as credible  that
             he was not documented as a Palestinian  in  Jordan.   This  is
             because I found he was largely consistent in his  evidence  in
             that he did not see the point of having any  documentation  as
             it  would  have  made  no  difference  to  the  discriminatory
             treatment he received from the Jordanian  authorities  in  any
             event.  I also found his explanation plausible that as he  was
             educated in "UNWRA" schools he  did  not  need  documentation.
             This is because it was not in  dispute  that  his  mother  was
             registered with "UNWRA" and he was raised in the "UNWRA" Zarqa
             refugee support camp.  (Page 1 of the Appellant's 5th  bundle)
             Furthermore, it is clear from  the  "UNWRA"  publication  2015
             about the Zarqa camp, (lodged at page 2 of the Appellant's 1st
             bundle) that it runs four-double shift schools in the camp.  I
             further found the Appellant's  evidence  consistent  regarding
             his casual and various employment in Jordan  which  would  not
             have required documentation and therefore  accepted  that  the
             interpreter   at   his   Asylum   Screening   Interview    had
             misinterpreted his work for a printing company as him being  a
             graphic designer.

         22.  However, I found that the Appellant's lack of documentation in
             Jordan was as a result of his decision not to  apply  for  it,
             rather than because he was not necessarily  entitled  to  any.
             This is because in his amended response to Question 73 at  the
             "SAI" as  to  why  he  couldn't  use  his  parent's  residence
             documents to gain documentation for himself, he stated that it
             is very difficult to obtain documents  to  reside  in  Jordan,
             although he could have done so if he  really  needed  to,  but
             that he didn't want to live the  same  life  as  his  parents.
             (Paragraph 16 at C33 of the Respondent's bundle)

         23.  His evidence was also uncertain  and  inconsistent  about  the
             type of documentation he could have  applied  for  as  in  his
             evidence-in-chief he stated that some Palestinians  do  obtain
             travel documentation, but that he did not think he could  have
             acquired  an  identity  care.   Yet,  when  asked  in   cross-
             examination about the type of document he could  have  applied
             for, he responded that he didn't know exactly as he had  never
             applied for one and that it could  be  a  work  permit  or  an
             identity card as he has seen other Palestinians with  identity
             cards.  Nevertheless, I considered that this evidence  further
             supported  his  account  that   he   did   not   possess   any
             documentation and that it accorded with the complex manner  in
             which the type of  documentation  a  Palestine  in  Jordan  is
             entitled to depends  upon  how  their  status  is  categorised
             (Pages 23-4 of the Refugee Review Tribunal-Australia 2009)"

14. As to the appellant's difficulties  with  the  authorities,  the  judge
    observed at [24] and [25]:

         "24. It was not in dispute that the Appellant had been stopped  and
             questioned by the authorities on a  number  of  occasions,  or
             that he had attended demonstrations in Jordan.  However, I did
             not accept his evidence that he knew he was put on a list as a
             result  of  the  authorities  filming  him  and  others  at  a
             demonstration.   This  is  because  I  did  not  consider   it
             plausible that as a result of being filmed he would have  been
             readily identifiable and put on a list, especially if  he  was
             undocumented.

         25.   Furthermore,  although  I  found  the  Appellant's   evidence
             plausible that he had been detained by the authorities, I  did
             not accept that he would have  been  released  if  he  was  of
             adverse interest to the Jordanian authorities and listed as an
             activist.   Indeed,   the   Appellant's   own   evidence   was
             inconsistent as to whether he was  of  such  interest  to  the
             authorities.  In his evidence in  chief,  he  stated  that  he
             thought the authorities feared him for being an  activist  and
             that he was a risk to the safety  of  Jordan.   (Paragraph  9)
             Yet, in response to the "RFRL," he accepted that he may not be
             a person of adverse interest to  the  Jordanian  authorities."
             (Paragraph 30)

    before concluding at [26]:

         "26. In assessing all of the evidence in the round,  I  am  of  the
             view that the Appellant is not  of  adverse  interest  to  the
             Jordanian authorities.  This is because he was released on the
             occasions he was detained by the authorities  and  that  other
             than being questioned by them, he gave no evidence that he had
             suffered ill-treatment  or  had  been  threatened  with  such.
             Therefore, whilst I  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
             detained and was routinely stopped and questioned which  could
             amount to discriminatory treatment, I did  not  consider  that
             the Appellant was at risk of persecution or  serious  harm  if
             returned to Jordan.  In reaching this  finding,  I  have  also
             taken account of the country guidance in  NA  (Palestinians  -
             not at general risk) Jordan CG [2005] UKIAT 00094, which  held
             that  although  Palestinians  in  Jordan  may  be  subject  to
             discrimination in certain respects in their social lives, this
             does  not  cross  the   threshold   from   discrimination   to
             persecution or a breach of protected human rights and that  in
             the absence of any  evidence  to  the  contrary,  I  have  not
             departed from that."

15. Having found that the appellant would not be at  risk  in  Jordan,  the
    judge then considered on a hypothetical basis, the  alternative  course
    of return to Palestine.  She concluded that he would neither be at risk
    under Article 3 ECHR nor that he qualified under Article 15(c) in  such
    an eventuality before looking at the consequences of  statelessness  in
    [32] which is set out above.

16. The Article 8 aspect which is challenged in ground 4 was considered  by
    the judge under the rules taking account of  the  length  of  time  the
    appellant has lived in Jordan, language and family support as  well  as
    his employment history.  There was no case based on private life in the
    UK.

17. The amended answer to question 73 at interview  (referred  to  in  [22]
    cited above) was as follows:

         "Question 73.   Delete  sentence  and  replace  with  "it  is  very
         difficult to obtain documents to reside in  Jordan,  however  if  I
         really needed to, I could have obtained documents but I didn't want
         to live the same life as my parents.  My parents were  labelled  as
         homeless and were often forced out of their homes because they were
         refugees living in Jordan.  A refugee in Jordan is not  allowed  to
         have full access to education or jobs.  The local people look  down
         at refugees there; we are discriminated there as refugees.  I don't
         want to live my life with that feeling."

18. Pausing also here to note the emails referred to  in  ground  1,  these
    comprised a response from UNWRA  on  5  August  complaining  about  the
    shortness of the time for reply but also asking for  the  appellant  to
    fill in and sign a verification form.  This was in response to an email
    from the appellant's solicitors dated 1 August which simply  refers  to
    attached correspondence.  That email provides the appellant's full name
    plus a reference number.  The  completed  verification  form  has  been
    provided but none of the correspondence that accompanied the email of 1
    August.  An explanation for the short time scale is given  in  a  reply
    from the solicitors on 8 August which refers to  a  copy  of  an  UNWRA
    registration card for the appellant's  maternal  grandfather's  family.
    This has also been provided.  UNWRA replied on 9 August explaining:

         "Kindly note the applicant is not a registered refugee with  UNWRA.
         His mother, Zeinat Fawzi Chubach Ali is registered with the  agency
         as single on her  father's  family  card  in  Jordan.   No  further
         information is available about his father or any of his family."

19. The appellant was not at court.  Mr Aslam explained that  he  had  been
    given the option of doing so but he had been told it was  an  error  of
    law hearing and the case could be remitted.   Such advice was  perilous
    in the light of the clear direction given with the grant of  permission
    that if error were found the presumption was  that  the  remaking  will
    take place at the same hearing.

20. I take each ground in turn.

21. Ground 1:  Mr Aslam began his submission on the  basis  that  the  case
    required remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.  He contended that  there
    was a conflict between the findings in [21] where  the  judge  accepted
    that the appellant was undocumented and [22] and [23] where  the  judge
    considered he could obtain documentation.  The judge had  not  referred
    to the email exchange and although he acknowledged that  the  appellant
    had accepted in the amended answer to question 73 that  he  could  have
    applied.  He drew a distinction between the appellant's opinion on  the
    matter and whether in fact  he  could  obtain  documentation.   It  was
    unclear whether the judge had read the email  exchange,  but  this  was
    neither here nor there in the light of the lack  of  clarity  over  the
    documentation issue.  He acknowledged  that  the  judge  had  not  been
    provided with a copy of the request made to UNWRA.

22. For his part Mr Govan began his  submissions  by  arguing  the  grounds
    overall were a disagreement and that the judge  had  provided  adequate
    reasons.  Specific to  ground  1,  the  judge  had  reasoned  that  the
    appellant had accepted he could have  accessed  documentation  but  had
    chosen not to do so by reference to  the  amended  answer.   The  email
    exchange had not advanced the case and the judge was  not  required  to
    comment on every aspect of the evidence.

23. In my judgment, this ground is not sustainable.  There was a wide range
    of material on the circumstances of Palestinians in Jordan  before  the
    judge and there is no reason to doubt the  judge's  sincerity  when  in
    [20], she explained that  she  had  considered  all  the  evidence.   A
    reading of the material provided by the appellant's advisers shows that
    the issue of documentation is a complex one and  I  accept  Mr  Govan's
    submission that the email exchange did not advance  matters  except  to
    confirm the evidence of  the  appellant  which  was  that  he  was  not
    documented.  Crucially the email does not address the  point  at  issue
    which was whether the  appellant  was  entitled  to  documentation.   I
    consider that given the evidence by the appellant  which  was  that  he
    could have applied for documentation, the judge was rationally entitled
    to conclude as she did.

24. As to ground 2,  Mr  Aslam  noted  that  the  judge  had  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence that he had been detained by  the  authorities  in
    [25] and it was therefore difficult to see how  the  judge  could  have
    concluded in [24] that he would not have been readily identifiable as a
    result of being filmed.  Had the appellant been detained and  released,
    he would have been of some interest.  In my  judgment  this  ground  is
    without merit.  The reasons given for  the  conclusion  to  reject  the
    evidence that the appellant knew he was on a list as a result of  being
    filmed was because of the appellant's evidence that he was undocumented
    and therefore would not have been readily identifiable.  A fair reading
    of the judge's reasoning at [24] to [26]  informs  the  reader  of  the
    judge's thinking and reasoning for her findings on this aspect  of  the
    claim which in my judgment were rationally reached.

25. Turning to the third ground, Mr Aslam candidly acknowledged that it was
    not  his  strongest.   The  appellant's  distinguishing   features   or
    characteristics were plainly in the judge's mind as explained  in  [26]
    before her conclusion was reached by reference  to  NA  (Palestinians).
    In my judgment this ground is a disagreement with  the  conclusion  and
    does not disclose any error of law.

26. As to the final ground, Mr Aslam explained its scope.  The  significant
    obstacles which the appellant contended he would face on return related
    only to  Palestine  and  not  Jordan;  the  appellant  relied  only  on
    protection grounds in relation to the latter.  The judge had considered
    return to Palestine on  a  hypothetical  basis  as  an  alternative  to
    removal to Jordan where a primary finding had been made that  he  would
    not be at risk.  At [31] the judge explained why she did  not  consider
    substantial grounds had been  shown  that  were  the  appellant  to  be
    returned to Palestine he would face a risk of suffering persecution  or
    serious  harm.   Return  to  Palestine  was  also   considered   on   a
    hypothetical basis as an alternative to Jordan in respect of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) as follows:

         "35. The Appellant seeks leave to remain in the UK on  the  grounds
             of private life in accordance with Paragraph 276ADE  (1)  (vi)
             of the Immigration Rules in that he has lived continuously  in
             the UK for  less  than  20  years  and  there  would  be  very
             significant obstacles to his re-integration in Jordan,  or  in
             the alternative Palestine, if he were required  to  leave  the
             UK.  This is on the basis that in the  absence  of  any  legal
             status or protection from "UNWRA," he would  not  be  able  to
             secure employment  in  Jordan  and  he  cannot  reasonably  be
             expected to live with his family.  Further, that in  terms  of
             Palestine, he has not lived there since he was very young."

27. The judge then  proceeded  specifically  in  respect  of  Palestine  to
    conclude at [36]:

         "36.  ...  In  respect  of  re-integration  into  Palestine  as  an
             alternative, I found that apart from leaving  Palestine  at  a
             young age, there was  no  other  evidence  before  me  of  the
             significant obstacles  the  appellant  may  face  to  his  re-
             integration there.  As such, I did not  accept  the  appellant
             would face significant obstacles on that basis alone and  have
             noted that he does still have family in Palestine who he is in
             contact with.  I therefore considered that in  applying  these
             facts to the guidance in the decision of Kamara v SSHD  [2016]
             EWCA Civ 813 and having heard no  evidence  of  the  appellant
             establishing a private life in the UK to which Razgar could be
             applied, there would be no breach of Article 8 of the ECHR."

28. The grounds complain that the informed  reader  is  left  in  real  and
    substantial doubt as to the reasons for which the judge concluded there
    were no significant obstacles to the  appellant's  re-integration  into
    the Palestinian territories.  Mr Aslam reminded me that  the  appellant
    had left Palestine at the age of 2 which he contended  was  a  material
    factor.

29. In my judgment the judge gave sustainable reasons  why  she  considered
    there were not unsurmountable obstacles having regard to the absence of
    evidence on the point.  Even if I were persuaded the judge  had  erred,
    Palestine was considered on an alternate basis to Jordan.   Sustainable
    reasons had been given why the appellant could safely return to Jordan.
     Not only do I consider the judge reached a justified  conclusion  with
    regard to Palestine in paragraph 2976ADE,  even  if  I  were  persuaded
    otherwise, such error in the circumstances would not be material.

NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


UTJ Dawson

Signed                                  Date 21 June 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
