










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08846/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 20 September 2017                 |On: 6 October 2017                   |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                  Mr G E T
                        anonymity direction EXTENDED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr O Sobowale, counsel (instructed by C.A.S.A. UK)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The appellant is a national of Cameroon born on [ ] 1990.  He  appeals
      with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge,
      promulgated on 22  March  2017,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
      decision of the respondent refusing his claim for asylum, humanitarian
      protection and on human rights grounds.

The first-tier Tribunal's decision

   3. The F-tT Judge was not satisfied that the  appellant  had  established
      that he was ever in a homosexual relationship with  V.  There  was  no
      evidence that V even existed, apart from  the  appellant's  assertion.
      There was no evidence to substantiate that he  was  the  victim  of  a
      vicious assault and is either fighting for his life or possibly  dead.
      No further inquiries had been made by the  appellant  in  that  regard
      even though "V and he were in love." He has not  troubled  himself  to
      find out whether V is still alive. That indicated to  the  Judge  that
      the appellant is not telling the truth [36].

   4. The appellant had provided letters indicating his membership  of  LGBT
      organisations.  A  witness  attended  the  hearing.  In  evidence  she
      conceded that her letter produced is based entirely on  what  she  had
      been told by the appellant.  It  is  almost  all  effectively  hearsay
      beyond the fact that the appellant attended a Reading  LGBT  Pride  in
      September 2016 and engaged with staff at Support You. [37]

   5. All the documentary evidence of contact with  LGBT  organisations  "is
      post the appellant's asylum application."  This  highlights  the  fact
      that he has no evidence of contact with the gay  scene  prior  to  his
      making of the asylum application [38].

   6. The F-tT Judge had regard to a psychiatric report from a Dr  Lawrence.
      His impression is that the appellant is gay. He concedes that this  is
      not his expert opinion. Accordingly he is in no better a position than
      anyone else to make an assessment of  the  appellant's  homosexuality.
      The report is based for the most part on what the appellant  has  told
      him and the Judge could  not  find  that  his  "impression"  that  the
      appellant is gay is evidentially of significant weight [39].

   7. The F-tT Judge set out various paragraphs in the report from  [40-48].
      Dr Lawrence conceded  that  he  cannot  confirm  with  any  degree  of
      certainty that the appellant is suffering from PTSD [46].  Whilst  the
      Judge accepted that the appellant suffers from low mood  and  anxiety,
      he was not  satisfied  that  he  is  a  suicide  risk.  There  was  no
      suggestion  that  his  mental  health  problem  is  not  treatable  in
      Cameroon. He has not availed himself of the opportunity of counselling
      in the UK [48].

   8. The Judge was also satisfied on the facts that the appellant failed to
      make an application for asylum until 22 January 2016,  having  entered
      the UK on 29 September 2013. That damaged his credibility [49].

   9. Accordingly the Judge was not satisfied that the appellant established
      to the requisite standard that he is a homosexual. [50]

  10. The Judge noted that the appellant claimed to have  been  involved  in
      anti government activity and produced photographs of his attendance at
      a demonstration. That appeared to be the extent of the activity. He is
      not a member  of  any  anti-government  organisations.  There  was  no
      evidence when these photographs were taken. There was no evidence that
      they have or would  come  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  in
      Cameroon.

  11. The Judge was satisfied that the appellant  has  nothing  to  fear  on
      return to Cameroon, having regard to any political activity in the  UK
      [53]. In the light of those  findings  he  could  not  find  that  the
      appellant met the requirements under  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(vi).  Any
      private life formed in the UK was  established  when  his  immigration
      status  was  precarious.  The  decision   to   remove   him   is   not
      disproportionate [55].

  12. In granting the appellant permission to appeal, Judge  Cruthers  found
      that it may be that the Judge erred in some of the  ways  alleged  and
      there may be some validity in paragraph 3.2 of the grounds.

  13. It was contended that the judge found that  the  appellant  would  not
      have told an authority figure, namely his teacher, that  he  was  gay.
      The appellant did not state that he had informed his teacher  that  he
      was gay. The appellant stated that in a conversation,  he  "opened  up
      this (sic) to my biology teacher... because I was very confused and  I
      trusted him and he told me I may be gay and that I should do all I can
      to stop being gay because the Cameroon community does not  approve  of
      it and I could be expelled from school and the community could kill me
      for just being suspected of homosexuality". It is contended that  this
      evidence was disregarded by the First-tier Tribunal.  It  was  in  the
      appellant's witness statement at paragraph 15.

  14. Judge Cruthers also found that there may be  some  validity  regarding
      the finding that all of the evidence presented post-dated  the  asylum
      claim. It was factually incorrect. The claim was made  on  22  January
      2016. Pages 148 and 149 of the bundle showed photographic evidence  of
      the existence of Manga as well as his attendance at Reading  Pride  in
      2015. That evidence had not been considered.

  15. Judge Cruthers found that there was "just sufficient in  the  grounds"
      to make a grant of permission appropriate. He stated that this  should
      not be taken as an indication  that  the  appeal  will  ultimately  be
      successful. On an initial reading many of the points made by the Judge
      do seem to cast significant doubt on the core claims.  Judge  Cruthers
      referred to various paragraphs in the decision. In addition, he stated
      that it is correct to say that in general an asylum  seeker  does  not
      need to corroborate his claims but in this appeal there was a distinct
      lack of the sort of corroborating evidence that might reasonably  have
      been expected in relation to many of the appellant's core  claims.  He
      referred to paragraph [14] of ST  (Corroboration  -  Kasolo)  Ethiopia
      [2004] UKIAT 00119 and TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 at [16].

Error of law hearing

  16. Mr Sobowale, who did not appear on behalf of the appellant before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, submitted that the Judge erred  in  finding  that
      the appellant was not credible and that he is not gay. He adopted  the
      grounds prepared by counsel who represented the appellant  before  the
      First-tier tribunal.

  17. The basis upon which the Judge made his finding is  unsustainable.  He
      failed to have regard to evidence adduced in support of the appeal and
      made adverse credibility findings on key elements on the basis of  the
      lack of corroborative evidence.

  18. Mr Sobowale referred to the evidence relating to LGBT which  pre-dated
      the asylum claim.

  19. He referred to paragraph [23] of the decision where the  Judge  stated
      that the appellant was 15 years old when he  realised  how  other  gay
      people are treated in Cameroon. He did not accept that he  would  have
      been unaware of homosexuality or homophobia in  Cameroon.  That  would
      have been the subject of  general  conversation  between  himself  and
      fellow pupils. It was not credible that  at  his  boarding  school  he
      would not have talked about these things. He  claimed  that  on  first
      being told about the problem by his biology teacher, he then  saw  the
      problem that gays have on the television news.  He  could  not  accept
      that he would not have seen it on the news before that point [23].

  20. That being the case  he  could  not  accept  that  he  would  tell  an
      authority figure such as a teacher that he  thought  he  was  gay  and
      openly discuss his feelings [24].

  21. Mr Sobowale submitted that there were no reasons given as to how  this
      finding has been made. The appellant's written evidence also  referred
      to his previous knowledge on how  homosexuals  are  being  treated  in
      Cameroon - paragraph 16 of his witness statement.

  22. Nor did the appellant tell his teacher that he thought he was gay. The
      appellant had stated that in a conversation he opened this up  to  his
      teacher because he was very confused and he trusted him, and  he  told
      him he may be gay and "should do all  I  can  to  stop  being  gay"  -
      paragraph 15 of his witness statement.

  23. The Judge simply rejected elements of the appellant's account  without
      adequate reasoning, particularly with regard  to  paragraphs  [26-29].
      The Judge stated that given that the appellant and Manga were  sharing
      a room with only one bed, he could not accept that a  neighbour  would
      need to go to the trouble of boring a hole through the  wall  when  he
      heard sexual noises. After hearing such noises he  would  have  raised
      the alarm immediately.

  24. Nor did he accept that the neighbour would have been able  to  bore  a
      hole  through  a  wall  (and  through  a  Bob  Marley  poster  on  the
      appellant's wall) without the appellant or Manga being  aware  of  it.
      The appellant was unsure as to how the hole was bored through, stating
      only that the neighbour probably made  a  small  hole.  He  found  the
      appellant's account so implausible "....that it bears the hallmarks of
      being an invention to assist his claim to being gay" [27].

  25. He found that even though it might be plausible that upon calling  the
      neighbours a crowd would immediately  congregate  it  was  implausible
      that the crowd would immediately form armed with  blunt  weapons  with
      which they then immediately used  to  attack  the  appellant  and  his
      friend, the crowd having the intention of killing them [28].

  26. It was also implausible that his uncle happened to be fortuitously  in
      the vicinity and contacted the police who  saved  the  appellant  from
      further injury. The Judge was 'at a loss to understand'  how,  if  the
      crowd had surrounded the  appellant  at  that  point,  his  uncle  was
      alerted before the police arrived. The appellant was not killed or  at
      least very seriously injured by the  crowd  of  ten  people,  although
      there were 50 people in total, armed with weapons. [29].

  27.  Mr  Solowale  submitted  that  there  was  no  "objective   evidence"
      supporting all these assertions. The appellant  was  at  a  school  in
      Cameroon. There are different cultural practices.

  28. He also submitted that the Judge rejected parts of his account on  the
      basis that there was no corroborative evidence.  In  that  regard  the
      Judge found that the appellant had claimed to have  gone  to  hospital
      for a few days. There was however no documentary evidence  to  support
      this such as a discharge letter. The Judge stated that  he  was  aware
      that corroboration is not required and there was no evidence that even
      an attempt had been made to obtain these documents which at  one  time
      were in the appellant's possession [30].

  29. The appellant had also contended that he was conditionally bailed  and
      the Judge stated that he '...should expect some information as to  the
      conditions of bail and the return date'. Not only does  the  appellant
      not answer his bail but managed to leave  Cameroon  about  6-7  months
      later on his own passport. If he was on  conditional  bail  he  should
      have expected him to be stopped at the airport [31].

  30. In the grounds of appeal, it  is  contended  that  the  appellant  was
      unofficially released with the payment of a  bribe  but  was  informed
      that the police would monitor his activities. There has  not  been  an
      adequate assessment by the First-tier Tribunal.

  31. Further, the finding that the documentary  evidence  of  contact  with
      LGBT post dated the date of his application was  factually  incorrect.
      The appellant in fact produced at pages 148-149 photographic  evidence
      of the existence of Manga as well as his  attendance  at  the  Reading
      Pride in 2015. That evidence was not considered.

  32. Mr Solowale submitted that the photographs produced indicate a  degree
      of "closeness  from  the  body  language".  Had  these  been  properly
      considered a different decision might have been reached.

  33. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Melvin referred to the fact that there
      was a bundle consisting of  250  pages.  There  was  also  a  skeleton
      argument.  However,  there  was  nothing  in  the  bundle  making  any
      reference to any dates regarding the  photographs.  Had  that  been  a
      significant factor it would have been drawn to the Judge's attention.

  34. He referred to the skeleton  argument  in  the  bundle,  drawn  up  by
      counsel who represented the appellant. The submissions are recorded at
      paragraph 5.2 of the skeleton.  There was however no reference to  the
      photographs in the way that they have been described at this hearing.

  35. He submitted that the Judge considered the evidence at [21-24] and has
      given reasons why he could not accept that he would tell  his  teacher
      that he thought he was gay and openly discuss his feelings.

  36. Mr Melvin accepted that the submissions relating  to  the  photographs
      constitute one small point. However, the  other  credibility  findings
      are substantial and go against the appellant. Even if the  photos  had
      been taken into account, this does not constitute a material error  in
      the circumstances.

  37. In reply Mr Solowale submitted that it is clear  from  the  interviews
      that the appellant tried  to  seek  counselling.  It  was  accordingly
      appropriate for him to behave in that way.

  38. Moreover  the  photographs  are  relevant.  In  the  society  of  rife
      homophobia it does not mean that this is  a  subject  that  is  talked
      about as a matter of routine. It is not surprising that  homosexuality
      would not be discussed at a boarding school.

      Assessment

  39. The First-tier  tribunal  Judge  has  given  a  detailed  and  lengthy
      decision.

  40. The appellant claimed at interview that he first became  conscious  of
      being attracted to men when he was 15 years old, whilst at school.  He
      told his teacher about these feelings. The teacher told him about  the
      consequences of being  homosexual  in  Cameroon.  The  appellant  then
      watched the news and realised how other gay people were treated there.



  41. At [23-24] the Judge could not accept that  he  would  not  have  been
      aware of homosexuality or homophobia in Cameroon. He  did  not  accept
      that gays and gayness would not  have  been  the  subject  of  general
      conversation between himself and fellow pupils. He found that  it  was
      not credible that at his boarding school  he  would  not  have  talked
      about these things with his fellow pupils [23].

  42. It was on that basis that he could not accept that the appellant would
      tell an authority figure that he thought he was gay and openly discuss
      it. That was a finding open to the Judge in the circumstances.

  43. It was also contended that the Judge simply rejected elements  of  the
      appellant's account at  paragraphs  [25-29]  which  I  have  set  out.
      However, the Judge has given sustainable reasons as to why he did  not
      accept that a neighbour would have needed to bore a hole  through  the
      wall when he  heard  sexual  noises:  He   did  not  accept  that  the
      neighbour would have been able to bore a hole  through  the  wall  and
      through a poster without the appellant or Manga being aware of this.

  44. Similar considerations apply to the neighbours  who  congregated.  The
      finding that he was fortuitously rescued by his uncle did not  explain
      why the crowd who had surrounded him at that point had  not  seriously
      injured the appellant, seeing that they were armed with weapons.

  45. The psychiatric report also refers to the appellant's  description  of
      neighbours breaking down the door and dragging both he and  Manga  out
      and beating them. The Judge noted at [42] that no such description was
      in the appellant's witness statements, nor in  the  asylum  interview.
      The volatile crowd must have gathered  swiftly  and  silently  if  the
      first the appellant knew was that the door was being broken down [42].

  46. With regard to the submissions relating to  corroboration,  the  Judge
      did properly direct  himself  that  corroboration  is  not  ordinarily
      required in such a case. This did not however mean that an adjudicator
      is required to leave out of the account  the  absence  of  documentary
      evidence which  might  reasonably  be  expected.  An  appeal  must  be
      determined on the basis of the evidence produced but the weight to  be
      attached to oral evidence may be affected  by  a  failure  to  produce
      other evidence in support - ST [2004] UKIAT 00119 at [15].

  47. In the circumstances it was not an error for  the  Judge  to  draw  an
      adverse inference and it was not unreasonable to expect the  appellant
      to provide corroboration with regard to those  matters  referred  from
      paragraph [30].

  48. Finally, there is nothing in counsel's skeleton argument referring  to
      the photographic evidence relating to the alleged existence  of  Manga
      as well as his attendance at Reading Pride in 2015. Nor was there  any
      evidence provided to suggest that the Judge was in  fact  referred  to
      those photographs either during the course of  the  evidence  or  that
      they were identified or referred to when submissions were made.

  49. The Judge referred to the appellant's involvement  in  anti-government
      activity  and  that  he  produced  photographs  of  attendance  at   a
      demonstration. The Judge found that there was  no  evidence  when  the
      photographs were taken. Nor was there evidence  that  the  photographs
      have or would come to the attention of the  authorities  in  Cameroon.
      Nor was there evidence that he could be identified from them [52].  He
      never claimed to be an organiser or to have played a prominent role in
      such demonstrations.

  50. I find, having regard to the evidence as a whole, that the  Judge  has
      carefully considered the evidence before him and  has  given  adequate
      and sustainable reasons for his findings.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer              Date 4 October 2017

