
[pic]
Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08993/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke on Trent                         |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 1 August 2017                                |On 3 August 2017           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                                     OK
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, instructed by Paragon Law
For the respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, OK, date of birth [ ] 1999, is a citizen of Iran.

 2. I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  any
    anonymity direction. No submissions were made on  the  issue.  However,
    the First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  13(1)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances,  including  the
    appellant's age, I continue the anonymity order.

 3. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shanahan promulgated 20.4.17, dismissing  on  all  grounds  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  12.8.16,  to
    refuse his protection claim.  The Judge heard the appeal on 22.3.17.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kimnell  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    15.5.17.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 1.8.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 6. For the reasons summarised below, I found no material error of  law  in
    the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require the decision of Judge Shanahan to be set aside.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Kimnell considered it  arguable
    that the judge failed to give consideration to the  argument  that  the
    appellant would be  at  risk  on  return  because  his  past  smuggling
    activities are likely to emerge in interrogation on return.  The  judge
    added, "It appears from the record of proceedings that an argument  was
    put the judge along those lines but it has not been adjudicated upon."

 8. I have carefully  read  the  record  of  proceedings  relating  to  the
    submissions of, Mr Markus, the appellant's representative at the First-
    tier Tribunal appeal hearing, but I do not see or  recognise  any  such
    submissions, and there is  no  witness  statement  from  Mr  Markus  to
    support the suggestion. What is recorded is that Mr  Markus  submitted,
    inter alia, that "if returned  he  would  be  interview  and  would  be
    expected to tell the truth. Even if he doesn't, the Home Office will be
    required to give that information." It does not appear that  Mr  Markus
    was suggesting that the Home Office would disclose that  the  appellant
    was a smuggler, but rather than he was a failed asylum seeker.

 9. Whilst relying on SSH & HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG
    [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC), Ms Wilkins did not go so far as to suggest  that
    the appellant must be expected to volunteer that he has been a smuggler
    in Iran. However, it was submitted that being a Kurd  and  having  left
    Iran  illegally,  he  is  likely  to  be  closely  questioned  by   the
    authorities on return. She suggested that there was a possibility  that
    this would expose him to a risk of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  for
    being a smuggler.

10. Whilst the judge of the First-tier Tribunal found at [32] that  it  was
    reasonably likely that the appellant worked with his father and brother
    as a smuggler, the judge did not accept that either father  or  brother
    had been killed or arrested by the authorities, or that  the  appellant
    himself was sought by the authorities. At [34] the judge concluded,  "I
    am satisfied that there has been no previous adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant and accordingly he would not face a real risk of  persecution
    or ill-treatment on return."

11. It follows that whilst he will be questioned and cannot be expected  to
    lie, there is no basis upon which the  appellant  might  reasonably  be
    likely to be questioned about smuggling activities in Iran. Ms  Wilkins
    submissions that there is a risk that he will be  obliged  to  disclose
    that he is a smuggler is an unwarranted leap that is not  supported  by
    SSH & HR. His account of being of adverse interest to  the  authorities
    as a smuggler has been clearly rejected. It would be speculation and  a
    step too far to suggest that simply because he  has  been  involved  in
    smuggling in the past, he would have to volunteer that information.  He
    was  found  to  have  made  a  false  application   for   international
    protection, as have many economic migrants, and thus there is no reason
    for the appellant to make a voluntary disclosure going beyond  that.  I
    do not accept that he would be bound to disclose that he had worked  as
    a smuggler before he left Iran.

12. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that the ground of  appeal  is
    made out. I do not find that there is any error of law in  the  judge's
    alleged failure to address a risk of harm on disclosure in  questioning
    on return as to past smuggling activities in Iran.

Conclusion & Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated
