
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08452/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 30th November 2018                |On 31st January 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  Kaman [N]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Mynott (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A. R. Hudson, promulgated  on  31st  October  2018,  following  a
    hearing at Manchester on 15th August 2018.  In the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a  citizen  of  Iran,  and  was  born  on  6th
    November 1966.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 21st June 2018, refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he has a well-founded fear
    of persecution on account of his conversion from the Islamic  faith  to
    Christianity.  He claims that he had told his friend, Bahman, about his
    dissatisfaction with  Islam,  whilst  still  in  Iran.   He  wished  to
    convert.  He became a Christian six months later.  In November 2017  he
    was arrested and detained overnight  before  being  released  upon  the
    payment of a bribe in Iran.  He then left the country.  He  arrived  in
    the UK in December 2017 and has been a practising Christian ever since.



The Judge's Findings

 4.  Judge  A.  R.  Hudson,  found  that  the  Appellant's   knowledge   of
    Christianity was vague and his account of his conversion and  detention
    in Iran was implausible (paragraph 10).  She did not  accept  that  the
    Appellant was a Christian convert.  At the hearing, Judge Hudson  heard
    evidence from the Reverend Spittle and Shephard, and  from  Mrs  Currey
    and Mrs Smye-Rumsby.  The judge observed how the Appellant was baptised
    on 25th March 2018 in the UK within three months of his  attendance  at
    church here.  The Reverend Spittle accepted that this was earlier  than
    the church would ordinarily consider an  applicant  ready  for  baptism
    (paragraph 25).  Mrs Currey had been to court to support Iranian asylum
    seekers on many other occasions and had only  refused  once  (paragraph
    30).   Mrs  Smye-Rumsby  was  a  part-time  caseworker  for  the  local
    authority, and he had also been to court some twenty times  to  support
    asylum seekers (paragraph 30).  In addition to this,  the  judge  found
    that the Appellant's evidence was such that "he gave the appearance  of
    being thoroughly evasive" (paragraph 18).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6.  The  grounds  of   application   state   that,   notwithstanding   her
    reservations, the judge had accepted the evidence of Mrs Currey and Mrs
    Smye-Rumsby, and found  the  latter's  evidence  to  be  "considerable"
    (paragraph 30).  Indeed, the judge had said in relation to  the  church
    witnesses that these witnesses have a "wealth of experience speaking to
    Iranian Christian-converts and they  are  thoroughly  convinced  of  Mr
    [N]'s assertions".  This being so, the judge  held  that,  "I  place  a
    great deal of weight on their evidence" (paragraph 33).

 7. Second, it is clear that the judge had also found  that  the  Appellant
    holds "significant theological knowledge" of Christianity,  "suggesting
    a significant commitment to  that  study"  (paragraph  26).   In  these
    circumstances, the decision to reject the Appellant's claim of a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on the basis of  his  Christian  conversion
    was not sustainable.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 20th September 2018  on  the  basis
    that the judge arguably failed to give sufficient reasons  relating  to
    his rejection of the Appellant's genuine conversion to Christianity  in
    the United Kingdom and his church activities whilst here.  It was  also
    arguable that the judge failed to consider the  evidence  of  the  four
    witnesses in the round, instead relying on earlier  findings  connected
    to the events claimed in Iran.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 30th November 2018, Mr Mynott, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, handed up the recent decision of the  Scottish
    Court of Session in TF and MA [2018] CSIH 58, which stated  that,  "the
    judge should not allow his adverse finding about the credibility of the
    Appellant to sway his assessment of the credibility  and  relevance  of
    other independent evidence bearing upon the issue before him.  So here,
    where the FtT Judges have disbelieved  the  Appellant's  evidence  that
    they are genuine converts  to  Christianity,  their  evidence  to  that
    effect will be put to one side, given no weight.  But the rejection  of
    their evidence on this  point  does  not  become  evidence  that  their
    conversion is not  genuine,  to  be  set  against  other,  independent,
    evidence  from  which  the  genuineness  of  their  conversion  can  be
    inferred.  That other evidence requires to be assessed on  its  merits,
    without any a priori assumption derived from the complainer's own false
    evidence that it is in some way suspect or of little value"  (paragraph
    49).

10. Mr Mynott went on to explain that in TF and  MA  [2018]  CSIH  58,  the
    Court of Session looked at the evidence as falling into three  specific
    categories, as it explained, at the basic level, it consists of factual
    evidence about what the Appellants themselves did and said in  relation
    to their attendance at the church.  At the second level, it consists of
    evidence explaining the practices of the church itself.  At  the  third
    level,  it  consists  of  opinion  evidence  given  by  individuals  in
    positions of responsibility within the church, who  have  observed  the
    Appellants in their activities at the church (see paragraph 52).

11. Mr Mynott explained that what the Court of Session determined  on  this
    basis was that, the evidence at the second and third level, "is  expert
    evidence" (paragraph 54).  When there is evidence from the church about
    the mission of the church  and  its  structures  and  its  approach  to
    individuals from other traditions who come to the church to  learn  all
    about Christianity with a view to baptism, and where there is  evidence
    of Bible study  groups  and  other  courses  designed  to  assist  such
    individuals, this is to be described  as  "expert  evidence  of  fact".
    Indeed,

         "In cases where the court does not have sufficient knowledge of its
         own - and despite what is said about judicial notice  in  Dorodian
         (at paragraph 8(d)), it might not always be possible for a judge to
         be confident that he knows and understands all the relevant  detail
         of what happens at a  particular  church  or  within  a  particular
         tradition - such evidence can  help  'to  illuminate  the  court's
         understanding of matters [which may be] outwith its knowledge'" (at
         paragraph 54).

12. On the basis of this, Mr Mynott submitted that, in this case  what  the
    Appellant had said happened to him in Iran, in terms of his  conversion
    and subsequent detention, had not been accepted by the  judge  in  this
    country, and this was not being challenged.  However,  what  was  being
    challenged was the fact that four witnesses turned up from  the  church
    in this country, whose evidence  the  judge  had  accepted,  but  which
    evidence was taken in the context of the disbelief  of  the  Appellant,
    rather than being treated distinctly, where such  evidence  effectively
    amounted to "expert evidence".  Insofar as the evidence of  the  church
    witnesses was actually rejected, it is not clear  (see  paragraph  33),
    why that evidence is rejected.  The judge had earlier accepted that, if
    the Appellant was a genuine  Christian  convert,  then  "he  could  not
    return to Iran and no opportunity to safely seek  protection  from  the
    state or internally relocate would arise" (paragraph 10).   Given  that
    this was the case, it was important to properly evaluate  the  evidence
    of the church witnesses.  If the judge had  stated  that,  "I  place  a
    great deal of weight on their evidence"  (paragraph  33),  it  was  not
    clear why their evidence that the Appellant  was  a  genuine  Christian
    convert was being rejected.

13. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that the Scottish Court  of  Session
    judgment in TF and MA [2018] CSIH 58 is not binding upon  Tribunals  in
    the United Kingdom.  It was well established in  the  jurisprudence  in
    this country that experts cannot pronounce upon the  credibility  of  a
    claim, which lay within the province of the judicial Tribunal, and  yet
    the case of TF appeared to be suggesting just as  much.   In  the  same
    way, insofar as TF and MA suggests  that  the  Appellant's  disbelieved
    evidence cannot stand in contradiction of other independent evidence on
    which he relies, it  is  mistaken  in  then  stating  that  this  again
    "reflects the standard direction in  criminal  cases  in  Scotland  and
    applies  in  civil  cases  too,  including  cases   before   Tribunals"
    (paragraph 49), because that is not the approach taken in this country.
     In any event, in TF and MA,  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  was
    consistent in  that  it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    politically active.  In the instant case,  the  Appellant's  claim  had
    been that he  had  been  at  risk  in  Iran  for  having  converted  to
    Christianity, and this was roundly rejected by  the  judge.   The  core
    basis of his claim was rejected.

14. In reply, Mr Mynott submitted that what TF and MA actually addresses is
    the specific interaction between a claimant and  the  church  witnesses
    attending on his behalf.  It was relevant, because  in  this  case  the
    same scenario had arisen, and the judge had  rejected  the  Appellant's
    evidence, and then not explained why the evidence of the witnesses  had
    not been found compelling when the judge had concluded that, "I place a
    great deal of weight on their evidence" (paragraph 33).

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

16. First, the judge directed herself on the basis that,

         "I find that it turns upon the credibility of his claim  to  be  at
         risk of persecution within  Iran  due  to  his  religion.   I  have
         carefully considered the documents and evidence  provided  in  this
         case and find that the account provided by  the  Appellant  is  not
         credible" (paragraph 14).

17. The judge had also correctly stated that, "I also bear in mind that  if
    I conclude that Mr [N] has lied about one aspect  of  his  claim,  that
    does not necessarily mean that he has  lied  about  others"  (paragraph
    33).  However, the judge fails, against that background, to explain why
    the Appellant has not converted to Christianity since arriving  in  the
    UK given the evidence before her.

18. Second, the judge had accepted that the Appellant had demonstrated  his
    commitment to his fate, such that the leadership  team  at  his  church
    felt that he could be baptised after only  three  months  because  they
    "were convinced of Mr [N]'s fate, he has in fact  demonstrated  a  very
    short period of commitment to the church" (paragraph 29).

19. Third, and most importantly, there was the  evidence  of  the  Reverend
    Shephard, which was described as "compelling" (paragraph  29),  by  the
    judge.  There was the evidence  of  Mrs  Currey  and  Mrs  Smye-Rumsby,
    whereby  the  latter's  evidence  was  regarded  to  be  "considerable"
    (paragraph 30).  The judge's view  was  that  these  witnesses  have  a
    "wealth  of  experience   speaking   to   Iranian   Christian-converts"
    (paragraph 33).  The Appellant  himself  had  "significant  theological
    knowledge" of Christianity, such that the judge's view  was  that  this
    suggested "a significant commitment to that study" (paragraph 26).

20. In the circumstances, it is simply not clear from paragraph 33  of  the
    determination why the judge did not find the Appellant to have  been  a
    genuine  convert  in  the  United  Kingdom,  particularly   given   her
    observation that, were the Appellant to be able to show that  this  was
    the case then "he could not return to Iran" (paragraph  10).   To  this
    extent, the strictures in TF and MA [2018] CSIH 58 are relevant in that
    the  interaction  between  the  church  witnesses  and  the  Appellant,
    together  with  an  analysis  of  their  church  practices,  should  be
    considered.   The  manner  in  which  the  three  different  levels  of
    evidence, outlined by the Scottish Court of Session in  that  case,  is
    something that cannot be ignored.  The matter needs to be remitted back
    to the First-tier Tribunal where this can now be done.

Notice of Decision

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  I remake the decision on the basis of the  decision  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before her, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  This appeal will be remitted back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal under practice statement 7.2(b) to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge A R Hudson.

22. No anonymity direction is made.

23. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th January 2019

