
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/08720/2017
     PA/08726/2017
     PA/08732/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 November 2018                          |On 08 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     NN
                                     RA
                                     PN
                         (anonymity directionS made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Samra of Harbans Singh & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Perry  in  these  linked
    appeals are set aside for material error of law.


2.   This is because the First-tier Tribunal Judge does  not  set  out  with
    adequate clarity any finding in respect of the weight to be accorded to
    supporting documentary evidence filed by the Appellants, or does not in
    the alternative make a finding to the  effect  that  the  evidence  was
    false and/or otherwise unreliable.  Whilst  the  Judge  has  made  some
    clear and reasoned adverse observations in respect of  aspects  of  the
    Appellants' accounts, these cannot be separated from other  aspects  of
    the reasoning that is unsatisfactory.


3.   By way of background it is  to  be  noted  that  the  three  Appellants
    herein were previously the dependants in  the  asylum  application  and
    appeal of SN (ref. AA/04107/2015).  SN is the mother of the  Appellants
    PN and NN and the daughter-in-law of the  Appellant  RA.   She  claimed
    asylum in  the  United  Kingdom  having  entered  clandestinely  on  19
    November  2013;  she  included  the  three  Appellants  herein  as  her
    dependants.  SN's application  was  refused  in  February  2015  and  a
    subsequent appeal dismissed.  An application for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was granted but in due course the decision of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  upheld.   SN  became  'appeal  rights
    exhausted' on 30 November  2016.   Thereafter  further  representations
    were made but these were rejected as not constituting a fresh claim  on
    17 January 2017.  Subsequently the Appellants herein made  applications
    for asylum in their own  right.   Those  applications  were  considered
    together and rejected for reasons set out in  respective  'reasons  for
    refusal' letters ('RFRLs') dated 25 August 2017.


4.   The claims of the Appellants herein  were  said  to  be  based  on  new
    circumstances that had emerged (and were therefore  not  considered  in
    SN's appeal).  In particular it was said that the husband of SN (herein
    'H') - i.e. the son of RA and the father of PN and NN -  who  had  been
    thought  to  be  missing,  possibly  kidnapped  by  the  Taliban,   had
    reappeared in Afghanistan together with another son (whom it  was  also
    thought had been kidnapped or disappeared at the  same  time).  It  was
    claimed that both were now active members of the Taliban.  It was  said
    that H wished now to recruit PN into the Taliban, and had  promised  NN
    to a Taliban member in marriage.


5.   It was the Appellants'  case  that  the  reappearance  of  H  had  been
    communicated to SN through a former work colleague,  'A'.  A  had  made
    contact with SN to inform her  that  H  had  contacted  her  (i.e.  had
    contacted A) seeking information as to the whereabouts of  SN  and  the
    rest of the family.  In due course A gave the telephone number of SN to
    H pursuant to what was said to have been threats to A's life.  Thus,  H
    contacted SN and in due course also spoke to at least PN and NN on  the
    telephone in the course of two telephone calls made on  29  March  2017
    and 5 April 2017.


6.   It may be noted that those claimed calls post-dated the making  of  the
    applications for asylum herein.


7.    In  support  of  their  cases  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   the
    Appellants relied upon a number of documents that it was said had  been
    provided to them by A.  These documents,  together  with  translations,
    are reproduced in the Appellants' bundle before the First-tier Tribunal
    at pages 19-29.


8.   One document is described as a 'letter of petition': it is  a  document
    supposedly signed by A making  complaint  to  the  authorities  in  the
    Kunduz province as to the conduct of H in making contact with  her  and
    threatening her.  A second document purportedly evidences action  taken
    in consequence of the petition.  It is  purportedly  addressed  to  the
    Prosecution Appeal Department of Kunduz Province for the  attention  of
    the Prosecution Department for the Internal and External Security  from
    the 'Manager of the fight with terrorism' in the  Security  Command  of
    Kunduz Province: it holds to confirm that subsequent to the petition of
    A, enquiries were made that established that H was an active member  of
    the Taliban.  A third document is said to be from the City  Prosecution
    Department stating that an "arrest decision" has been issued in respect
    of H.  A fourth document is supposed to have emanated from the  Taliban
    and makes threats towards both A and SN.


9.   Absent those documents  the  Appellants'  case  essentially  turned  on
    their personal testimonies, and the supporting  testimony  of  SN  (who
    provided a witness statement in these proceedings).


10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made pertinent  adverse  observations  in
    respect of  elements  of  the  evidence.   In  particular  I  note  the
    following:

         "Before me SN was asked what  contact  her  husband  had  with  her
         former colleague previously and how he would have known to locate a
         former colleague after 4  years.   She  told  me  her  husband  and
         colleague have never met and her former colleague lived  in  Kunduz
         but had moved to Mazar at some point.  She did not know  where  her
         former colleague was currently living.  She  was  asked  about  the
         extent of  her  contact  with  her  former  colleague  having  left
         Afghanistan.  She could not give dates when they had  spoken.   She
         did not provide an explanation  how  the  colleague  could  contact
         her." (paragraph 24).


11.  Necessarily these matters go to the question of the circumstances  both
    in which H could have contacted A to attempt to get in contact with  SN
    and the Appellants, and to the nature and means of contact  between  SN
    and A.  Further to this, at paragraph 25 the Judge made  the  following
    observation:

         "The first visit of SN's husband to a former colleague was the same
         day as SN lodged further submissions.  I accept it  was  convenient
         that after four years SN's husband made  contact  with  her  former
         colleague and given SN could not say whether her  former  colleague
         lived in the same area the  Appellants  do  not  explain  how  SN's
         husband could have known how to contact her former colleague."


12.  Plainly this passage in part picks up on the  previous  observation  at
    paragraph 24; but it also appears to imply a cynicism about the  timing
    of the emergence of the new matters  relied  upon  to  distinguish  the
    instant appeals from SN's appeal.   Any  such  cynicism  would  not  be
    obviously misplaced: it does indeed seem to  me  to  be  a  potentially
    adverse feature that these matters came to light at a time when SN  and
    the other Appellants were struggling to establish a basis to remain  in
    the  United  Kingdom.    However,   notwithstanding   the   scope   for
    understandable cynicism, in my judgement if a decision-maker wishes  to
    accord adverse weight to such a circumstance something clearer and more
    definitive would be desirable by way of finding and reasoning than mere
    reference to 'convenience'.  Be that as it may the Judge's comments  in
    this regard are not without merit, and are not in error of law.


13.  At paragraph 28  the  Judge  gave  consideration  to  the  evidence  in
    relation to the telephone calls that it was said had been received from
    Afghanistan.  There was no supporting evidence in this regard;  it  was
    the evidence of the Appellants that a SIM card that  had  been  in  the
    mobile telephone that had received the calls had been destroyed and  so
    it was not possible for them to  produce  supporting  evidence  of  the
    receipt of such phone calls.  In this context the Judge said this:

         "The second Appellant  and  SN  provided  conflicting  accounts  in
         relation to how SN was able to contact her former  colleague  after
         the phone SIM card was destroyed.  SN states she contacted  another
         friend but does not say how she could do that if the SIM  card  had
         been destroyed.  The second Appellant  told  me  that  they  stored
         numbers from the SIM card before it was destroyed." (paragraph 28).

    Then, at paragraph 30:

         "... The Appellants did not provide any evidence to  support  their
         account of the calls either from SN's husband or former  colleague.
         They could have provided screenshots etc.  The apparent explanation
         for the failure to provide evidence of the calls was  that  SN  was
         very cross and did not know what she was doing is at odds with  the
         first Appellant's account that they stored  numbers  from  the  SIM
         card before it was destroyed.  As those accounts differ  I  do  not
         accept  the  reasons  given  why  the  phone  calls  could  not  be
         evidenced."


14.  It seems to me that, in isolation, the Judge's reasoning for not  being
    satisfied as to the explanation for a lack of  supporting  evidence  of
    the telephone contact was sound.


15.  However, I  am  troubled  by  other  aspects  of  the  Judge's  overall
    consideration of the Appellants' cases.


16.  At paragraph 22 the Judge  purports  to  identify  omissions  from  the
    letter of petition of  A,  and  the  overall  narrative  account  being
    advanced by the Appellants:

         "Whilst I have before me the petition of SN's former  colleague  to
         the local security services that does not relay  that  SN's  former
         colleague gave SN's phone number to SN's  husband  but  does  state
         where SN's former colleague lived....  Whilst the Second  Appellant
         relays that SN's former colleague was told by his  father  that  he
         had joined the Taliban and was demanding SN's address,  the  Second
         Appellant does not allege that SN's former colleague was told  that
         he was to join the Taliban  or  that  his  father  had  arranged  a
         marriage for the First Appellant."


17.  It seems to me that the matters identified therein are not  adverse  to
    the Appellants' case. They are not in any  meaningful  way  discrepant.
    There is no particular reason why the details of the petition lodged by
    SN  should  include  all  of  the  information  that  is  part  of  the
    Appellant's narrative  account.  The  differences  are  differences  of
    omission and do ot obviously or sustainably found an adverse inference.
    Nor can it be said that it would inevitably have been the case that the
    behaviour threated by H towards his children  (recruitment  and  forced
    marriage) during subsequent telephone calls to  them  would  have  been
    communicated to A or otherwise included in her petition.


18.   At  paragraph  23  it  seems,  with   respect,   the   Judge   becomes
    unnecessarily distracted by the means by which PN became aware  of  the
    nature of the conversation that had passed between his mother  and  his
    father during the telephone calls.  The Judge says this:

         "Whilst the Second Appellant alleges of the  first  call  from  his
         father that his mother received the call and that his father  spoke
         to his mother and he also relays what his father and  mother  said,
         he does not say how he knew what his father said, he does  not  say
         the call was  made  on  loudspeaker  or  if  his  mother  told  him
         subsequently.  He states his father later spoke to  him  and  after
         that to his sister.  As to the second call again he states that his
         mother received the call  and  his  father  spoke  to  his  mother.
         Whilst he relays what his father and mother  apparently  discussed,
         again he does not say how he knew what his father said, if the call
         was made via loudspeaker or if his mother  subsequently  told  him.
         He states his mother subsequently passed the phone to  him  and  he
         argued with his father."

    I cannot see what possible material difference it makes to the  overall
    narrative  account  as  to  whether  or  not  PN  listened  in  to  the
    conversation between his father and mother on a loudspeaker or had that
    conversation reported to him subsequently by his mother.  If it  was  a
    matter of any moment or material difference it would have been a matter
    simply clarified by asking PN during the course of  his  evidence  what
    the position had been.  I am at a loss  to  understand  why  the  Judge
    appears  to  have  been  distracted  by  this  peripheral,  minor,  and
    ultimately irrelevant point.


19.  This unnecessary and misplaced  focus  is  aggravated  by  the  Judge's
    observations at paragraph 29. The Judge states that the witness SN gave
    no detail of the calls in her witness statement.  However, it is  clear
    that SN's witness statement sought to adopt the contents of  her  son's
    statement (wherein details of the calls are given) rather than  setting
    out  matters  in  repetition.   This  is  apparent  from  the   opening
    paragraphs of SN's witness statement which appears at page  12  of  the
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal:

         "I confirm that I have  been  through  my  son's  statement  and  I
         confirm that the contents of the statement are true and accurate to
         the best of my  knowledge  and  belief  and  I  adopt  this  as  my
         statement."


20.  The Judge also  appears,  at  paragraph  21  of  the  decision,  to  be
    critical of PN's evidence in respect of the receipt of a telephone call
    from A. However, as the Judge records in the same  paragraph,  when  PN
    was asked about  this  he  stated  that  he  had  not  taken  the  call
    personally and was unaware as to how  often  his  mother  had  been  in
    contact with her former colleague.  In circumstances where he is not  a
    direct witness to  the  nature  of  these  particular  calls  it  seems
    inappropriate to imply any criticism of him for not having been  better
    versed in these matters.


21.  What emerges from the foregoing are a number  of  instances  where  the
    Judge has identified  problematic  circumstances  in  relation  to  the
    overall plausibility and credibility of the claim that this family  was
    contacted in turn by a former colleague of SN  and  then  by  H.   Such
    matters are informed by, and  inform,  evaluation  of  the  nature  and
    quality of communication with SN's former colleague  A.  This  in  turn
    informs evaluation  of  the  provenance  of  the  supporting  documents
    purportedly sent by A.


22.  However, in my judgement the Judge's considerations are based  in  part
    on an exploration as to the minutiae of the  making  and  receiving  of
    telephone calls, which with even careful scrutiny does not seem  to  go
    to the core of the narrative account.


23.  It is against this background that the Judge  expresses  the  following
    conclusion:

         "I do not accept the  Appellants'  accounts,  they  are  vague  and
         lacking in detail.  They do not provide explanations where  one  is
         called for and they destroyed evidence, the mobile phone  SIM  card
         which could have verified their account.  The Convention reason and
         risk being dependent on their accounts their asylum  claims  fail."
         (paragraph 32).


24.  In my judgement the problem with this conclusion  is  that  nowhere  in
    terms does the Judge turn to an evaluation, or  state  any  reasons  or
    findings in respect of, the supporting documentation.  A reader of  the
    Decision is left, as it  were,  to  speculate  to  fill  in  the  gaps.
    Moreover  this  is  in  circumstances  where  aspects  of  the  Judge's
    reasoning on matters that might impact upon provenance  is  erroneously
    misplaced or otherwise in error. It was incumbent on the Judge  provide
    clear findings and reasons in respect of the supporting documents,  and
    not to leave it as a matter of  implication  that  possibly  they  were
    rejected because of the lack of detail or vagueness in aspects  of  the
    oral testimonies.


25.  In all such circumstances I find that the decision must  be  set  aside
    for error of law. Because of the nature of the error  the  decision  in
    the appeal is most appropriately remade by way of a new hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


27.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Perry  with
    all issues at large.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 3 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
