
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08469/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th December 2018                         |On 11th February 2019         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     AMZ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. R Solomon, instructed by Courtney Smith & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms. Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. No anonymity direction has previously been made. However, the appeal
       concerns a claim for asylum and international protection and  in  my
       judgement, it is appropriate for an anonymity order to be made under
       Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   AMZ
       is granted anonymity throughout  these  proceedings.  No  report  of
       these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  him.   This
       direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
       being brought for contempt of court.


    2. The appellant is a national  of  Afghanistan.  He  is  said  to  have
       arrived in the United Kingdom on 15th  September  2016,  having  been
       granted a visa to enter the United Kingdom on 7th September 2016,  as
       a Tier 4 (General) student.  He claimed asylum on 3rd  January  2018.
       His claim was refused by the respondent on 16th June  2018,  and  his
       appeal against that decision was dismissed by FtT Judge Chana for the
       reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 21st August  2018.   The
       appellant appeals the decision  of  the  FtT  Judge  to  dismiss  his
       appeal, and the matter comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  the
       decision of the FtT Judge is tainted by a material error of law.


    3. At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I informed  the  parties
       that in my judgement, the decision of the FtT Judge does  contain  a
       material error of law, and that I would set aside that  decision.  I
       said that I would give the reasons for my decision in writing.  This
       I now do.


 The decision of FtT Judge Chana


    4. The account  of  events  that  were  initially  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant in support of his asylum claim are summarised at paragraphs
       [14] to [17] of the decision of the FtT Judge. At paragraphs [18]  to
       [20], the FtT Judge refers to an additional factor that the appellant
       sought to rely upon in support of his claim.  It was  a  matter  that
       had been raised by the appellant just before the  hearing  commenced,
       and caused counsel for the appellant to make an  application  for  an
       adjournment so  that  the  appellant  could  make  another  statement
       addressing this new aspect to his asylum claim.  For the reasons  set
       out at paragraphs [20] and  [21]  of  the  decision,  the  FtT  Judge
       refused the application for an adjournment. There is, and can  be  no
       criticism of that decision.


    5. At paragraphs [22] to [32] of the decision,  the  Judge  records  the
       evidence that was given by the appellant in chief,  and  when  cross-
       examined.  At paragraphs [29] to [32], the Judge notes the  questions
       put by her to the appellant, and his replies.   It  appears  to  have
       been suggested by counsel for the appellant that  the  Judge  was  in
       fact  cross-examining  the  appellant.   The  Judge  records  in  her
       decision that  counsel  "...  became  obstructive  and  continued  to
       interrupt my questioning ...".  There is no criticism in the  grounds
       of appeal, as to the conduct of the Judge during the  course  of  the
       hearing.


    6. The  Judge's  findings  of  fact  and  conclusions  are  set  out  at
       paragraphs [34] to [54] of her decision.  Beyond  accepting,  as  the
       respondent had,  that  the  appellant  had  worked  for  the  'Afghan
       Institute for Strategic Studies' ("AISS"), it appears that the  Judge
       rejected the appellant's account that  his  work  for  AISS  and  the
       publication of a book of which he was a co-author, put the  appellant
       at risk upon return.  The Judge noted that even  on  the  appellant's
       account, the appellant had not received any threats from the  Taliban
       whilst he had worked for AISS, or after the publication of the book.


    7. The Judge considered the appellant's claim that the Taliban's network
       of intelligence and its informers had not found him during the  three
       years in which he had worked in Afghanistan, but did so after he left
       the country, to be totally incredible. She did not find  it  credible
       that the appellant was not targeted while  he  lived  and  worked  in
       Afghanistan, and that it took some  time  for  him  to  come  to  the
       attention of the Taliban.  The Judge found aspects of the appellant's
       account  to  be  internally  inconsistent,  and  at  odds  with   the
       background material.  She concluded that it was not credible that the
       Taliban would send the appellant's father a threatening  letter  that
       the appellant should stop working for foreigners, when the  appellant
       had already left his employment, and Afghanistan, some years earlier.
       The Judge referred to the country guidance set out in AS  (Safety  of
       Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC), noting that  a  person
       who is of lower level interest for the Taliban  (i.e.  not  a  senior
       government or security services official, or a spy) is  not  at  real
       risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul.   At  paragraph  [53],
       the Judge found that it would be reasonable and not unduly harsh  for
       the appellant to relocate within Afghanistan. She stated;


             "...The appellant is an Afghan National, is  educated  and  in
             good health. He speaks the local language and  has  worked  in
             Afghanistan and this will assist him to reintegration into his
             home country."


    8. Having considered the  matters  relied  upon  by  the  appellant,  at
       paragraph [54] of her decision, the Judge stated:


             "The burden of proof lies on the appellant  albeit  to  a  low
             standard. I am not satisfied that the appellant's evidence  is
             credible or that he is telling the truth. Considering all  the
             evidence as a whole, I am not satisfied that, if  returned  to
             Afghanistan,  the  appellant  would  face  a  real   risk   of
             persecution,  death,  or  torture  or  inhuman  or   degrading
             treatment or punishment from anyone. I find that the appellant
             has fabricated his evidence  that  he  is  at  risk  from  the
             Taliban or that he worked secretly for the Indian  embassy  in
             his last desperate attempts to stay in this  country.  I  find
             that the appellant is an economic migrant."


The appeal before me


    9. The appellant advances five grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
       First, the FtT Judge failed to make  findings  of  fact  on  relevant
       matters, and failed to have regard to relevant evidence. Second,  the
       FtT Judge made factual findings on credibility that are not  reasoned
       or   adequately   reasoned.   Third,   the   FtT    Judge    unfairly
       mischaracterised some of the evidence. Fourth, the FtT  Judge  failed
       to consider the  expert  evidence  in  the  round  before  making  an
       assessment of the  appellant's  credibility.  Fifth,  the  FtT  Judge
       failed to properly consider the risk upon  return  in  light  of  the
       relevant country guidance, and the appellant's particular profile and
       characteristics.


   10. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
       by FtT Judge Landes on 15th October 2018. It is fair to say  that  in
       granting permission, FtT Judge Landes considered some of the  matters
       relied upon by the appellant in the grounds of appeal, to  have  more
       merit than others. Although the five grounds of appeal are set out in
       28 paragraphs, Mr Solomon acknowledged that many  of  the  criticisms
       made of the decision of the FtT Judge, are subsumed within the  first
       ground of appeal. That is, in reaching her decision,  the  FtT  Judge
       failed to have regard to the evidence that was before the  FtT  Judge
       when considering the core of the appellant's account of  events,  and
       the risk upon  return.   There  was  evidence  that  was  capable  of
       corroborating the appellant's account, and  the  Judge's  failure  to
       have any or any proper regard to that evidence, has caused the  Judge
       to either misunderstand the  claim,  or  to  reach  findings  without
       considering the material that was capable of  answering  the  Judge's
       concerns.


   11. On behalf of the appellant, Mr. Solomon relied upon  the  grounds  of
       appeal and referred me in particular to the evidence that was  before
       the FtT Judge, at pages  19  to  77  of  the  appellant's  bundle  of
       documents. That evidence included  in  a  witness  statement  of  the
       appellant, but more importantly, included evidence from a  number  of
       other individuals that was capable of corroborating  the  appellant's
       account of events, and the risk upon return.  He referred me to  that
       evidence, and submits that the Judge simply fails  to  refer  to,  or
       engage  with  that  evidence.  He  submits  that  if  the  Judge  had
       considered that evidence, the Judge would not have found the claim to
       be fabricated, or that the appellant is an economic migrant.


   12. On behalf of the respondent, Ms. Vidyadharan refers to paragraph [34]
       of the Judge's decision in which the Judge stated:


             "I have considered all the evidence in this  appeal  including
             evidenced to which I have not specifically  referred.  I  have
             considered the documents provided by  the  appellant  in  line
             with the case of Tanveer Ahmed which states  that  a  document
             that the appellant relies upon must be capable of being relied
             upon."


   13. Ms. Vidyadharan submits that a careful reading of the decision of the
       FtT Judge demonstrates that the Judge properly identified the  issues
       in the appeal, and the areas in which the  appellant's  evidence  was
       internally  inconsistent  and  difficult  to   reconcile   with   the
       background material. She referred to  the  decision  of  Mr.  Justice
       Hadon-Cave in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions)  [2014]  UKUT  00341
       (IAC) which confirms that it is generally unnecessary  and  unhelpful
       for FtT judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.
       What is necessary is for  the  Judge  to  identify  and  resolve  key
       conflicts in the evidence, and explain in clear and brief terms their
       reasons, so that the parties can understand  why  they  have  won  or
       lost.  She submits that here, that is what the FtT  Judge  has  done.
       She accepts that the Judge does not make any express findings  as  to
       whether the appellant was a co-author of a  book  or  the  extent  to
       which that book has been distributed, but the Judge did note that the
       appellant was of no adverse interest to the Taliban whilst he was  in
       Afghanistan despite any involvement as a co-author of that book.  She
       submits that the Judge carefully considered the appellant's  evidence
       about the attempted assassination of [KP], and the evidence about the
       'night letter' received by the appellant's father.  She accepts  that
       the Judge does not refer in the decision, to  the  statement  of  the
       appellant's father, neighbor's, or the letters from AISS, but submits
       that the findings reached by the Judge were  properly  open  to  her.
       Ms. Vidyadharan submits that although  lengthy,  the  matters  relied
       upon by the appellant in the grounds of appeal amount to nothing more
       than a disagreement with findings that  were  properly  open  to  the
       Judge, on the evidence.


Discussion


   14. The assessment of credibility is always a highly fact sensitive task.
        The FtT Judge was required to consider the evidence as a whole.   In
       assessing the credibility of the appellant and the claim advanced  by
       him, the Judge was required to consider a number  of  factors.   They
       include, whether the account given by the appellant was of sufficient
       detail, whether the account is internally consistent  and  consistent
       with any relevant  specific  and  general  country  information,  and
       whether the account is plausible.  Some of those factors may be  more
       relevant in an  individual  case  than  others.   If  an  account  is
       littered with internal inconsistencies that may be enough for a Judge
       to dismiss the evidence of an appellant as incredible.  It  does  not
       follow that a Judge is entitled to dismiss an account in the same way
       simply because the account is implausible.


   15. In HK -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037, the appellant's account had been
       rejected at first instance simply because the facts he described were
       so unusual as to be thought, unbelievable.  The Court of Appeal  held
       that that was not a safe basis upon which to reject the existence  of
       events that were said to have  occurred  within  an  environment  and
       culture that were wholly outside  the  experience  of  the  decision-
       maker.  At paragraph [28] of his judgment, Neuberger LJ stated:


             "Further, in many  asylum  cases,  some,  even  most,  of  the
             appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely but  that  does
             not mean that it is untrue. The ingredients of the story,  and
             the story as a  whole,  have  to  be  considered  against  the
             available country evidence and reliable expert  evidence,  and
             other familiar factors, such  as  consistency  with  what  the
             appellant has said before, and  with  other  factual  evidence
             (where there is any)."


   16. It is right, as Ms. Vidyadharan submits that here, at paragraph [34],
       the Judge confirms that she  has  not  made  findings  without  first
       looking at all the evidence in the round.  Having made that clear,  I
       should be cautious to conclude that she did not adopt that  approach.
       What follows at paragraphs [35] to [50] are findings that  appear  to
       arise from a combination of inconsistencies in the account, a lack of
       detail or sufficient explanation, and matters that  appeared  to  the
       Judge, to be implausible.


   17. In considering the grounds of appeal relied upon by the  appellant  I
       have considered the evidence that was before the FtT  Judge,  and  to
       which the Judge makes no reference at all, in her decision.  At pages
       30 to 32 of the appellant's appeal bundle, there were before the  FtT
       Judge two letters from [KP].  The first is dated  10th  January  2018
       and confirms how he  knows  the  appellant.   In  that  letter,  [KP]
       states:


             "... We have received  multiple  warnings  from  the  relevant
             security authorities about the possible threats from insurgent
             groups. Eventually on 23/09/16, I was  targeted  in  a  failed
             assassination  organized  by  insurgent  groups.  I  was  then
             hospitalized in India and then moved to the United  States  of
             America for the rest of my medical procedures ...


             ...


             I was informed by AMZ that he has  received  the  same  threat
             letter from the terrorists that I have received before  I  was
             targeted ..."


   18. The second letter from [KP] dated 7th July 2018  clarifies  that  the
       Taliban had targeted him in a failed  assassination  attempt  on  the
       evening of 24/09/16, and that he had mistakenly put a wrong  date  in
       his earlier letter.  At paragraph 5(h)  of  the  appellant's  witness
       statement dated 24th July  2018,  the  Appellant  clarified  that  in
       giving his account of that assassination attempt, the  appellant  had
       relied upon the date set out in the first letter received from [KP].


   19. As to that aspect of the appellant's claim, at paragraph [42] the FtT
       Judge stated:


             "... The appellant claims that the Herat office was closed  as
             one of his colleagues, [KP] was assassinated in  Herat  on  23
             September 2016.  However, the appellant changed  his  evidence
             and said that [KP] was a  victim  of  a  failed  assassination
             attempt. Background evidence states that [KP] was the head  of
             Afghan network of civil societies in Herat and that an unknown
             gunman opened fire on him in the evening of 24 September  2016
             and no group has accepted responsibility for the shooting. The
             appellant provided a letter from [KP] dated 10 January 2018 in
             which he stated that he was shot on  23  September  2016.  The
             reports however say that the  shooting  was  on  23  September
             2016. This inconsistency in the appellant's evidence  goes  to
             the appellant's credibility and  to  the  credibility  of  his
             claim."


   20. I can only assume that in that paragraph, the  FtT  Judge  considered
       there to be an inconsistency because the letter from [KP] dated  10th
       January 2018 stated that he was shot on 23rd September 2016,  whereas
       the background material states that the  shooting  occurred  on  24th
       September 2016. The Judge considered the inconsistency to impact upon
       the  appellant's  credibility  and  the  credibility  of  his  claim.
       However, in reaching that decision, the Judge fails  to  engage  with
       the second letter from  [KP]  dated  7th  July  2018,  and  with  the
       explanation given by the  appellant  in  his  witness  statement.   I
       accept that the weight to be attached to  that  additional  evidence,
       would be a matter for the Judge, but in the absence of any  reference
       to that evidence in the decision, I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  the
       Judge did in fact consider that additional evidence.  It was at least
       capable of explaining the inconsistency  in  the  evidence  that  the
       Judge considered to be relevant to the  credibility  of  the  overall
       claim.


   21. Similarly, at paragraphs [45] and [46] of  her  decision,  the  Judge
       considered the appellant's claim  that  his  father  had  received  a
       letter from the Taliban in December 2017  stating  that  his  son  is
       working for  "foreigners".  The  Judge  considered  there  to  be  no
       credible evidence as to how the Taliban would have  found  out  about
       the appellant's activities at the Indian Embassy, and noted  that  if
       the  Taliban  had  known  the  appellant  was  promoting  the  Indian
       government's interests in Afghanistan, they would have sought him out
       earlier.  The Judge did not consider  it  to  be  credible  that  the
       appellant would have been associated with AISS when he was no  longer
       working for them and was in fact in the UK. The Judge did not find it
       credible that  the  Taliban  would  send  the  appellant's  father  a
       threatening letter threatening that the appellant should stop working
       for foreigners when the appellant had already left the  job  and  the
       country, some four years earlier.


   22. I have carefully considered the letter that the appellant claims  was
       received by his father, the translation of which is to  be  found  at
       page 36 of the appellant's bundle.  The document states:


             "[The appellant ]... a resident of Herat province, who  is  an
             associate  of  the  foreign  forces,  has  been   engaged   in
             organizing  political  and   security   meetings   in   Herat.
             According to the Islamic Emirates' Sharia  Law,  he  has  been
             sentenced to a severe punishment. As far as we are  aware  his
             whereabouts remain unknown. In view of his continued  absences
             family members are to be punished."


   23. The content of that document  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the
       description of it  set  out  at  paragraphs  [45]  and  [46]  of  the
       decision.  The Judge did not find "it is credible  that  the  Taliban
       would send the  appellants  father  a  threatening  letter  that  the
       appellant should stop working for foreigners when the  appellant  had
       already left the job and country  some  four  years  earlier.".   The
       letter does not threaten that the appellant should stop  working  for
       foreigners, but claims that the appellant "is  an  associate  of  the
       foreign forces" and "has been engaged  in  organizing  political  and
       security meetings in Herat".  At page 39 of  the  appellant's  bundle
       that was before the FtT, there  is  a  letter  from  the  appellant's
       father explaining the circumstances in  which  the  letter  had  been
       received by him, and the steps that he took to refer  the  matter  to
       the  Police  and  National  Security  Forces.   At  page  42  of  the
       appellant's bundle, there was a letter from a neighbor that  confirms
       that the appellant's family have left Afghanistan  but  "...  Unknown
       groups have been sighted  near  his  home  and  his  house  is  under
       surveillance..".  The FtT Judge fails to make any reference  to  this
       evidence in her decision.  Again, in the absence of any reference  to
       that evidence in the decision, I cannot be satisfied that  the  Judge
       did in fact consider that additional evidence relating to the  letter
       received by the appellant's father.


   24. There was a wealth of other evidence that was before the  FtT  Judge,
       but which simply does not appear to have been considered by  the  FtT
       Judge.  Having carefully considered the evidence that was before  the
       FtT Judge, I accept the  submission  made  by  Mr  Solomon  that  the
       Judge's assessment of the credibility of the  appellant  viewed  from
       different angles is flawed, and when  taken  together,  the  findings
       made by the Judge are unreasonable in  the  Wednesbury  sense.  I  am
       satisfied that in many places, the Judge appears to have made adverse
       findings against the appellant without carefully considering  all  of
       the evidence that was before her, and which was at least  capable  of
       providing some explanation, and answering the concerns of the  Judge.




   25. I accept the submission made by Mr Solomon that when the decision  of
       the FtT Judge is read as a whole, it is clear that  in  a  number  of
       respects the Judge made findings and reached conclusions upon matters
       without proper reference to all the evidence before her.  That is not
       to say that if the Judge had considered that evidence, she was  bound
       to reach a different conclusion.  She may well have reached the  same
       conclusion, but I simply cannot be satisfied  that  she  would  have.
       The resulting unfairness  to  the  appellant  is  apparent  from  the
       findings made by the Judge and the conclusions reached.


   26. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved
       in the making of an error on a point of law and the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  I must then  consider  whether  to
       remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal, or to re-make the decision
       myself.  I consider that where a first instance decision is set aside
       on the basis of an error of law  involving  the  deprivation  of  the
       appellant's right to a fair hearing, the appropriate course  will  be
       to remit the matter to a newly constituted First-tier Tribunal for  a
       fresh hearing.  In reaching my  decision,  I  have  also  taken  into
       account paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of
       25th September 2012.  In my view,  in  determining  the  appeal,  the
       nature and extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  will  be
       extensive. The parties will be advised of the date of the  First-tier
       Tribunal hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


   27. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Chana is set
       aside.


   28. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
       with no findings preserved.

Signed                                  Date          10th December 2018



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable, there can be no fee award

Signed                                  Date          10th December 2018



    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

