
                                    [pic]
IAC-AR-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08046/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2020                  |On 5 March 2020                      |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     MSR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Jorro of counsel, instructed by Hunter Stone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1.   The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh. It is his case that  he  has
    a well-founded fear of persecution there on account  of  his  political
    opinion as a member of the  Bangladeshi  National  Party  ("BNP"),  the
    Bangladesh Nationalist Shecchashebok Dal and the Volunteer Party of the
    UK. He entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  on  7
    November 2013 and his leave in this capacity was subsequently  extended
    until 7 May 2017. On that day he applied for further leave to remain on
    the basis of his family and private life rights.  His  application  was
    refused on 10 January 2018 and he applied for  asylum  on  17  February
    2018.

2.   His application was refused on 9 August 2019 and  he  appealed  against
    this decision. First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond dismissed  his  appeal
    in a decision promulgated no 21 October 2019.  The  Appellant  appealed
    and First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted him permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal on 16 December 2019.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   Counsel for the Appellant relied upon a  skeleton  argument,  dated  11
    February 2020 and both he and the Home Office Presenting  Officer  made
    oral submissions and I have taken these into account when  reaching  my
    decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.   The Appellant's first ground of appeal  asserted  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to take any or any adequate account of highly material  evidence
    or consider  it  in  the  context  of  the  background  evidence  about
    Bangladesh.

5.   In paragraphs 81 to  86  of  the  refusal  letter  the  Respondent  had
    accepted that the Appellant was presently an Assistant  Social  Welfare
    Secretary for the Bangladesh Nationalist Shecchashebok Dal and that  he
    had taken part in demonstrations calling for the release of Khaleda Zia
    and Tarique Rahman. She also accepted that  he  had  submitted  several
    online news and newspaper  articles,  photographs  and  Facebook  posts
    which confirmed that he was engaged in sur place  political  activities
    in the United Kingdom.

6.   The Respondent had also found that the  articles  which  the  Appellant
    had submitted did not  talk  about  him  individually  or  provide  any
    specific details about the nature of his political activities.  I  find
    that this is not the case as translated  extracts  from  two  of  these
    articles, at pages 273 and 279,  name the Appellant as one of  a  small
    number of individuals who had taken part  in  protests  in  London  and
    whose identities were known  by  the  Bangladesh  High  Commission  and
    government intelligence agencies.

7.   In his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond failed to take  into
    account the volume and  detail  of  the  documentary  evidence  in  the
    Appellant's Bundle  and  erroneously  found  in  paragraph  50  of  his
    decision that the local articles merely showed the  Appellant  to  have
    attended events with very many other people.

8.   The Judge also failed to assess whether there was a connection  between
    the Appellant's sur place activities, threats which the  Appellant  had
    received on Facebook, the raid on his family's home in Bangladesh,  the
    false accusations in the FIR, the  warrants  for  his  arrest  and  the
    wanted posters. This was a particularly important lacuna in the context
    of actions against him in Bangladesh following from his  attendance  at
    protest events in London and the  fact  that  the  Human  Rights  Watch
    report "Creating Panic"  Bangladesh  Election  Crackdown  on  Political
    Opponents  and  Critics,  confirms  that  the  present  government   of
    Bangladesh regularly brings false charges against opponents known to be
    abroad, as a means of intimidating and persecuting them. The Judge also
    failed  to  give  appropriate  weight  to  paragraph  6.1.1.   of   the
    Respondent's own CPIN Bangladesh: Opposition to the government, January
    2018, which stated that "the years since the 2014 elections [had]  been
    marked by an increasing tendency to penalize dissent".

9.   This was clearly a basic error of law  as  the  Appellant's  individual
    circumstances had to be considered in the context of relevant objective
    and country evidence.

10.  In relation to the second ground of appeal, it is  the  case  that  the
    Judge concentrated his  analysis  on  evidence  related  to  events  in
    Bangladesh, including the video said to be of a raid on the Appellant's
    home in Bangladesh by the police, the wanted  posters  and  a  hospital
    record of an injury suffered by the Appellant in 2009. When doing so he
    also failed to consider the evidence in the context  of  the  objective
    evidence, such as the Human Rights  Watch  report.  For  example,  when
    considering what weight to give to the video  he  speculated  that,  if
    this was a true record of a police raid, the  family  home  would  have
    been ransacked and his father "roughed  up".  In  the  alternative,  in
    paragraph 34 of his  decision,  he  also  sought  to  re-interpret  the
    incident as being no more than "an over exuberant couple  of  policemen
    knocking on a door at night". The Judge relied on his  own  assumptions
    about what would happen in Bangladesh to find that the scene caught  on
    the video "was a cynically stage-managed event".

11.  The Judge also erred by  appearing  to  acquire  further  corroborative
    evidence  when  his  task  was  to  consider  the  written,  oral   and
    documentary evidence before him in the light of the objective evidence.



12.  For all  of  these  reasons  I  find  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Raymond's decision did contain errors of law.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  Counsel for the Appellant invited me to go on to allow the  Appellant's
    appeal without a further hearing, but I declined to do so as  time  was
    needed to review the evidence  ignored  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Raymond and also the new evidence which the  Appellant  now  wished  to
    rely upon.

(3)  Therefore, as the credibility findings of the  Judge  were  central  to
    the decision, which has been set aside,  the appeal is remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo before  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Raymond   or   Holmes.



Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 20 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


