








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08848/2017



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |                                |
|On 29th April 2019                    |On 03rd May 2019                |
|                                                       |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                  Nadia [H]

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Moriarty, Counsel instructed by Elaahi Solicitors


For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chana promulgated on the 6th June 2018 whereby the judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent
    to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims  based  on  Asylum,   Humanitarian
    Protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Smith on 19th December 2018. Thus the case appeared before me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. Submissions were made by the appellant's representative in part dealing
    with the approach taken in respect of the medical evidence. There  were
    reports  from  a  consultant  psychiatrist,  Professor   Katona,   with
    confirmatory evidence from a consultant psychologist, Dr Thomas.

 5. The respondent's representative accepted that the medical practitioners
    concerned were qualified to make an assessment as to the  mental  state
    of the appellant and were entitled to make that assessment on the basis
    of their interviews with the appellant and their observations  of  her.
    The conclusion by the medical professionals was that the appellant  was
    suffering from schizophrenia.

 6. The judge in the final paragraph of the decision had indicated that the
    medical practitioner's assessment of the appellant was not accepted  as
    there evidence was based on the appellant's version of events which was
    inconsistent. It was accepted by  the  respondent's  representative  in
    part that that may beg the question that the evidence was  inconsistent
    because  the  appellant   was   suffering   from   schizophrenia.   The
    inconsistencies and other evidential  issues  were  specifically  dealt
    with by the medical practitioners, giving  potential  explanations  for
    such contradictions by reason of the appellant's medical condition. The
    practitioners had medically examined the  appellant  and  come  to  the
    conclusion that  the  appellant  was  exhibiting  symptoms  typical  of
    schizophrenia.

 7. In the reports it was noted that there had been a marked  deterioration
    in the condition of the appellant, so much so that the medical  opinion
    was to the effect that the appellant could  not  give  evidence  as  it
    would be too traumatic for her and she would not be able to  cope  with
    giving evidence given her mental condition.

 8.  By  comparison  the  judge  indicated  that  there  was  no  plausible
    explanation provided by the expert as to why the  appellant  could  not
    give evidence. That appears to wholly ignore the medical expert opinion
    as to the mental health of  this  appellant  and  the  ability  of  the
    appellant to function.

 9. There were other issues with regard to other medical evidence.  It  had
    been accepted at the interviewing officer that the appellant had  shown
    a series of burns on her body to the interviewing officer. Dr Bhatt had
    referred to the burns as being part of some traumatic event  which  may
    have causal effect in the appellant's mental condition.  Dr  Bhatt  had
    referred the appellant for mental health assessment. It did not  appear
    to be an issue that the appellant had burns, although the causation for
    those burns was dependent purely upon  the  explanation  given  by  the
    appellant. The burns themselves  would  however  give  some  degree  of
    support to the account given by the appellant.

10. By comparison the judge stated  in  paragraph  39  that  there  was  no
    evidence to demonstrate these burns on the appellant's back. Whilst  it
    may be taken that the judge could have been referring to the  causation
    for the burns, it is not entirely clear. It may be that the  judge  was
    questioning the existence the burns themselves.

11. That having been said given the approach of the judge  to  the  medical
    evidence it was conceded by the respondent's  representative  that  the
    approach by the judge did disclosed an error of law and that  the  only
    proper course was for this matter to  be  remitted  back  to  be  heard
    afresh.

12. The circumstances I rule that there is a material error of law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

13. I allow the appeal to the extent that the decision is set aside and the
    matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

14. None of the findings of fact in the case of preserved.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 29th April 2019

