




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/08745/2017
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                Decision and Reasons     |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 21 February 2018              |                On: 14 March 2018        |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                                    I I K
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, counsel (instructed by Blackrock
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 30  December  1986.
      He appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Moore  who,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  13  October  2017
      dismissed his asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights claims.

   3. Judge Moore had regard to the decision of Judge Monson promulgated  in
      April 2016. The appellant accepted that he  made  an  application  for
      leave to remain as a Tier 1 Migrant in November 2014 but had  disputed
      that he was aware of the  hearing  and  accordingly  did  not  attend.
      Judge Moore did not accept  that  he  would  not  have  known  of  the
      hearing. Notices had been sent separately to his legal  representative
      as well as to the appellant at his last known  address.  According  to
      the appellant, he confirmed at the  hearing  that  he  lived  at  that
      address at the time and continued to live there. He was satisfied that
      adequate notice had been give to the  appellant  but  he  nevertheless
      failed to attend [26].

   4. Judge Moore referred to the finding of Judge Monson that the appellant
      had knowingly and dishonestly provided with his application false bank
      letters and bank statements relating to a non existent  account  which
      he claimed to hold with a bank. Nor did  his  claim  at  the  time  in
      relation to Article 8 constitute more than bare facts  which  did  not
      disclose a viable private life claim under paragraph 276ADE [26].

   5. He stated that in accordance  with  Deevaseelan  he  was  required  to
      consider as a starting point the decision of Judge Monson. He found in
      any event that the appellant in 2014 made an application for leave  to
      remain as a Tier 1 migrant even though  at  the  time  he  would  have
      claimed to be in urgent need of international protection but failed to
      make any asylum claim at the time, preferring to make  an  application
      for leave to remain as an entrepreneur. In his view this was  not  the
      action  and  conduct  of  an  individual  in  need  of   international
      protection [26].

   6. He also noted that with regard to his claim to  be  a  member  of  the
      Chhatra Shibir at [27] that the appellant did not produce a membership
      card was produced as it could not,  according  to  the  appellant,  be
      located by family members in Bangladesh. However, prior to the hearing
      the appellant never claimed to be a member  or  holding  a  membership
      card. He gave evidence that he asked his family to look for  the  card
      but they could not find it.

   7. In the absence of the card the appellant claimed that he received  the
      letter from the Secretary of his Islami Chhatra Shibir confirming  his
      political activities. The Judge referred to the letter  dated  1  July
      2017 which stated that  the  appellant  was  "actively  involved  with
      Bangladesh politics when he was in Bangladesh." The  letter  continued
      that he studied at a college from 2004 until 2006 and  was  an  active
      member of Jamaat-e-Islami,  Bangladesh  student  wing,  and  was  also
      politically active whilst studying at a college between 2007 and 2008.
      There was no specific reference in the letter as to  what  involvement
      the appellant had politically in Bangladesh  or  indeed  that  he  was
      actually a member with a membership card of  the  political  party  he
      claimed to be involved with at the time [27].

   8. He found the letter  from  the  Sylhet  Government  College  dated  18
      February 2009 to be of limited value.  This  simply  stated  that  the
      appellant was a regular student during the academic situation in 2007-
      08. However, the appellant claimed that on account of a gunshot  wound
      he was unable to study at the college due to his injury. There was  no
      mention in the letter as to any absence from college for a  year.  Nor
      was his evidence of an absence  from  the  college  on  account  of  a
      gunshot wound consistent with other evidence given at the hearing when
      he was shot in 2008 that this was after he finished college [28].

   9. He found the letter from Dr Samdany to be  extremely  limited  in  its
      value. There was no reference to any gunshot wound and simply recorded
      that the appellant came to see him after receiving serious injuries on
      his left side hip and left hand knee. The appellant made no  reference
      to any knee injury whatsoever, either  in  his  statement  or  at  the
      hearing. The Judge did not accept that this letter supports his  claim
      that he went to see a doctor as a result of a gunshot wound [29].

  10. Nor was his account of the  gunshot  wound  incident  consistent.  The
      Judge set out the evidence at [30] noting that the  appellant  claimed
      that on account of the passage of  time  the  hospital  where  he  was
      treated was unable to provide documentary evidence of treatment  which
      would have included hospital records and x rays taken at the time.  In
      the letter from Dr Samdany, no reference was made to any x rays taken.
      The appellant claimed that his brother  went  to  see  Dr  Samdany  "a
      couple of months ago" but the doctor said he was unable to provide any
      hospital records or x rays. He found that account to  be  implausible.
      The appellant had claimed that he had the letter from Dr Samdany dated
      15 November 2008 for the past nine years [30].

  11. In the event, Judge Moore found that "negative  credibility  findings"
      undermined the appellant's claims so that he was unable to accept  it.
      He did not accept that he  was  a  member  of  a  political  party  as
      claimed; that he was politically active or that he was shot. Nor would
      he be of adverse interest if returned to Bangladesh [35].

  12. On 15 December 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M  Hollingworth
      granted the appellant permission to appeal stating that in the earlier
      findings, the extent  to  which  the  Judge  sought  corroboration  in
      assessing credibility is unclear and arguably undermines part  of  the
      credibility analysis. Further, the Judge arguably fell into error when
      speculating with regard to s.8 that it may  be  that  the  appellant's
      relative told him not to claim asylum but to get a visa.

  13. Mr Miah, who did not represent the appellant  at  the  first  hearing,
      submitted that the Judge paid mere lip  service  to  the  standard  of
      proof set out at [10].

  14.  There  had  not  been  an  adequate  reasoning  process.  Potentially
      corroborative evidence was overlooked. Nor did the Judge consider  the
      evidence in the round.

  15. The appellant relied on a letter from Sylhet Government College  dated
      18 February 2009 which "certified" that he had been  a  regular  first
      year student in 2007-2008.

  16. Further, it was contended in the skeleton argument before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal, that despite the absence of medical  evidence  relating
      to the alleged gun shot which occurred in 2008  whilst  the  appellant
      was on his way home from university, due regard should be had  to  the
      letters from Dr Samdany confirming that he received  treatment  on  22
      October 2008. He also provided evidence demonstrating his  involvement
      with the Chhatra Shibir and his political involvement prior to  coming
      to the UK.

  17. Mr Miah referred to [24]. There the Judge  found  that  his  delay  in
      claiming asylum undermined his claim that he was  in  urgent  need  of
      international protection. I have set out the Judge's findings in  that
      respect at [34]. Mr Miah submitted that there is no  evidential  basis
      for what amounted to speculation by the Judge.

  18. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis submitted that the  high  point
      in this appeal is the grant of permission.  The  grant  of  permission
      amounts to form over substance. There has been a lawful judgment.

  19. The Judge has properly directed himself. It was  necessary  for  Judge
      Moore to look at the evidence in the round [24].

  20. His findings at [25] that the appellant's account was inconsistent and
      implausible  and that there was a lack in certain respects of reliable
      and credible evidence supporting his  claim  regarding  his  political
      activities, were sustainable. The appellant did not apply  for  asylum
      for some years because he was hoping to complete his  studies  and  go
      back to Bangladesh on the basis  that  the  ruling  party  would  have
      changed. That the Judge also found  to  be  implausible.  He  did  not
      accept that it was ever the intention of the appellant  to  return  to
      Bangladesh [34].

  21. Mr Jarvis submitted that  in  the  circumstances  there  had  been  no
      relevant errors of law.

  22. In reply Mr Miah again submitted that the Judge had given insufficient
      reasoning in relation to findings in the  core  issues.  Further,  the
      finding that the letter from the  Sylhet  Government  College  was  of
      limited value "was in excess of the burden of proof that rested on the
      appellant."

      Assessment

  23. Judge Moore has given a detailed decision in which he has set out  the
      appellant's case, including the documents produced in support  of  his
      claim.

  24. He had proper regard to the  earlier  decision  of  Judge  Monson  who
      dismissed the appellant's claim. He correctly noted that the  findings
      of Judge Monson constitute a starting point.

  25. He was satisfied that the  appellant  had  knowingly  and  dishonestly
      provided with his application for leave as a  Tier  1  Migrant,  false
      bank letters and bank statements relating to a non existent account.

  26. He also found that the application to remain as a Tier 1  Entrepreneur
      at the time  was  inconsistent  with  the  conduct  of  an  individual
      claiming to be in need of urgent international protection.

  27. Judge Moore has set out the appellant's case in detail at [27]. He has
      had proper regard to the letter from  the  Sylhet  Government  College
      dated February 2009. He has also given  cogent  reasons  at  [28]  for
      finding that the letter was of limited value.

  28. He was entitled to accept on the evidence  that  the  letter  from  Dr
      Sandamy did not support his claim that he went to see a  doctor  as  a
      result of a gunshot wound. The appellant had made no reference to  any
      knee injury, either in his statement or  at  the  hearing,  which  was
      referred to in the medical letter. Nor was his account of the  gunshot
      incident consistent. He has given proper reasons for  that  conclusion
      [29]. At [33] he also took into account that if the appellant had been
      shot at by seven assailants, the police would at least have undertaken
      some enquiries.

  29. He had proper regard to s.8 of the 2004 Act at [34]. He  was  entitled
      to take into account the fact that the appellant  entered  the  UK  in
      2009 as a student but failed to claim asylum in 2014, instead making a
      Tier  1  application.  It  was  only  after  he  was  encountered   by
      immigration  officers  in  February  2017  and  was  found  to  be  an
      overstayer, that the claim was made. It was only after his arrest  and
      detention and after being served with a removal notice that he claimed
      asylum [34].

  30. He has given careful consideration to the appellant's claims.  He  has
      set out in detail why, after considering the evidence as a  whole,  he
      did not accept that the appellant was a member of a  political  party,
      was politically active or that he was shot at. The  finding  that  the
      appellant would not be of adverse interest if returned  to  Bangladesh
      is sustainable.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.


      Signed                             Date 9 March 2018

           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




