
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/08204/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 November 2017                        |On 5 December 2017               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                    F BG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Rosemary Bradshaw promulgated on  18  January  2017
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 25
    July 2016 to refuse his asylum claim to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's case is that he is  at  risk  from  the  Etala'at  (the
    Iranian  Secret  Services)  because  of  his  political  activities  in
    opposing the government.  He states that he became involved in politics
    around the presidential elections in 2009 when he supported Mr  Mousavi
    which resulted in his arrest, detention and  sentenced  to  a  term  of
    imprisonment of up to six  months.   On  release  he  had  to  sign  an
    undertaking not to participate in further political activities.

 3. In 2011 he was injured at a demonstration  and  arrested,  interrogated
    and tortured.  He was held for two months by the Etala'at but after six
    months his father was able to obtain his release.

 4. In September 2014 he attended the meeting of six or seven people  at  a
    friend's house to plan a protest about  the  large  salt  lagoon,  Lake
    Urmia later finding out that his  friend  had  been  arrested.   On  23
    September 2014 he was able to  evade  arrest  by  the  authorities  who
    encountered him in the street, opened and fired against on him and gave
    chase.  He was then able to escape the country with the  assistance  of
    an uncle.

 5. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account.

 6. The judge concluded that the appellant's credibility was damaged  by  a
    number of matters, thus giving his failure to claim asylum in at  least
    two  safe  countries,  his  failure   to   claim   earlier   and   from
    inconsistencies in his account.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in her assessment of his credibility:

      i) The judge's conclusions about the  appellant  not  claiming  asylum
         when apprehended at port were  not  open  to  her,  there  being  a
         statement from an officer who noted that the appellant could  speak
         virtually no English and that he claimed asylum only  when  he  had
         the assistance of interpreter.  Thus, he did claim  asylum  at  the
         first opportunity;

     ii) that the judge had erred in concluding that it  was  unlikely  that
         the appellant was not involved with any group in  his  activism  in
         relation to Lake Urmia, there being no evidence  before  the  judge
         that there were groups which were involved or  organisations  which
         were involved;

    iii) that the judge had erred  in  concluding  the  appellant  had  been
         inconsistent regarding access to a  lawyer  and  family  whilst  in
         prison, a proper reading of questions 25 to 27 in interview  record
         indicating that he had been in one prison for two months  and  that
         although not allowed contact, his family sought to have  him  moved
         by payment of a bribe; and after that, he did not access family and
         a lawyer;

     iv) the judge erred in connection with  the  appellant's  contact  with
         family in Iran [ 47], wrongly concluding that it  was  inconsistent
         for him to be in contact with family yet still  being  wary  as  to
         having documents sent to him;

      v) that the appellant had given a significant level  of  detail  about
         what had occurred in 2011, giving such a level of detail that it is
         not something he could have researched and is not information which
         could simply be known due to living in the area and the  judge  was
         wrong to reject the submission to this effect in  her  decision  at
         [49], [50].

 8. On 6 June 2017 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Freeman  granted  permission  on
    limited grounds.

 9. It appears  from  the  appellant's  response  at  question  27  of  his
    interview that in 2011 he was held by the Etala'at  in  their  offices,
    then to a prison for two months and from that he was transferred  to  a
    central prison where he stayed for six months.  He states  "my  cousin,
    who is a lawyer tried to get me out and my dad paid  prison  people  to
    move me to a central prison."

10. It is also of note that he said in response to question  25  "did  your
    family know you were in prison" that  "as  they  found  out  after  two
    months.  I called my brother when I was moved to prison."  Also of note
    at Q21 the appellant said that he was kept for about two months by  the
    Etala'at and then after two months he went to the Etala'at prison.

11. At paragraph [7] of the grounds it is stated "paragraph 43 suggests the
    appellant has been inconsistent regarding his access to  a  lawyer  and
    family.  However when reading question 25 to 27 of the interview record
    it is clear that the appellant  was  in  one  prison  for  two  months.
    Although he was not allowed contact with anyone during  this  time  his
    family sought to have him moved by payment of a bribe.  Once  moved  he
    was able to access his family and a lawyer.  However his access did not
    prevent his family locating  him  during  that  two  month  period  and
    assisting in his move prior to them being able  to  have  contact  with
    him.  There is nothing inconsistent about his answer."

12. Mr Mills accepted that it was difficult  to  see  that  there  was  any
    inconsistency here, contrary to what the judge had  identified  in  her
    decision.

13. It appears that the judge equated access to a lawyer  with  the  lawyer
    being present at the prison r rather than being able to act  simply  on
    someone's behalf.  It was the judge who assumed that the  lawyer  would
    have to have known the prison, again assuming that  the  appellant  was
    seen by the lawyer rather than family contact and the lawyer to act  on
    their behalf.

14. Ms Brakaj submitted that in assuming that the Iranian authorities would
    have been able to  monitor  the  appellant's  communications  over  the
    internet with his mother are predicated in a number of  assumptions  as
    to what methods, encrypted or otherwise, were used and  the  extent  to
    which the Iranian authorities are able or would  expend  the  resources
    necessary to decrypt messages.

15. I find merit  in  this  submission.   Whilst  I  accept,  as  Mr  Mills
    submitted, that the  Iranian  authorities  do  maintain  a  significant
    degree of surveillance, there is no indication that this appellant  had
    any great profile.  It is a matter of public record that many messaging
    services using the internet have end-to-end encryption which,  although
    breakable, require significant input of resources so to do.  Similarly,
    other forms of communication have less degree  of  encryption  and  may
    well easily be broken.  The judge, however,  appears  to  have  assumed
    that any communication could easily be  intercepted  and/or  decrypted.
    Further, communication over the internet  is  entirely  different  from
    sending documents which would require them physically to be taken to  a
    post office or some other office in which it would be noted where  they
    were being sent.  The risks inherent in that are significantly greater.
     There is this, in reality, no inconsistency.

16. I accept that, as Ms Brakay submitted,  the  appellant  did  provide  a
    sufficient degree of detail regarding the events in 2011.  It is  clear
    that, as she submitted, he was able accurately to recall  these  events
    took place on a  Saturday  and  the  degree  and  that  this  is  later
    confirmed by other documents.  This level of detail is,  I  consider  a
    relevant matter.  Whilst a failure to properly consider that is not, as
    Mr Mills submitted, in  and  of  itself  indicative  that  the  judge's
    assessment of credibility was flawed  the  rejection  of  it  is  to  a
    significant extent predicated on other findings.

17. Taking these matters into account, I consider that the judge's findings
    on credibility are flawed for the reasons set out above.  These are,  I
    consider, significant and are such that the overall  conclusion  as  to
    the appellant's credibility with respect at the very least to the  core
    of his claim is unsustainable.   I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
    law and I set it aside.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

     18. (1)  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of
         an error of law and I set it aside.  I remake the decision  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
         Rosemary Bradshaw, for a fresh decision on all issues.

    (2)  For the avoidance of doubt none of the findings of  fact  made  by
         the First-tier Tribunal are preserved.

    (3)  There is no anonymity order.

Signed                                  Dated:  4 December 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

