
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08580/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27th February 2018                    |On 15th March 2018                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                    [a o]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGill, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of [AO] against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Onoufriou,  promulgated  on  13th  October  2017,  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeal against the refusal of his application  for  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom on private and family life grounds.

 2. The Grounds of Appeal which led to the granting of permission to appeal
    were drafted  by  the  Appellant  himself.  They  may  conveniently  be
    summarised as follows.

 3. Firstly, it is said that the judge failed to attach sufficient  if  any
    weight to the economic benefit to the United Kingdom  of  him  and  his
    wife providing care for  his  ailing  mother  in  lieu  of  state-aided
    support.

 4. Secondly, it is said that the judge's approach to  the  eldest  of  the
    appellant's three children ([Az], born on [ ] 2002) was flawed.

 5. I will deal with the grounds in turn.

 6. There is in my judgment nothing in  the  first  ground.   The  economic
    wellbeing of the country is a broad concept  that  involves  much  more
    than a simple accounting exercise.  It may well be that if the economic
    well being of the country were to be measured solely  by  reference  to
    the cost-benefit of the care provided by the appellant  to  his  mother
    then the point would be well made.  However, the general economic  well
    being of the country includes  other  factors,  such  as  the  economic
    necessity of filling gaps in the UK skills and labour market  the  cost
    of providing education  and  health  services  for  the  appellant  and
    members of his family.  The extent  to  which  the  appellant  and  his
    family may fill those gaps and offset those costs by working and paying
    their taxes is not known and cannot be predicted.   It is therefore  to
    be assumed that the consistent application of immigration  controls  is
    necessary in a democratic society for the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
    country.  The judge did  not  therefore  err  in  law  by  making  that
    assumption without further enquiry into the precise value to be  placed
    upon the care that the appellant provides for his mother.

 7. However, the second ground is one that has caused me some anxiety.   By
    way of background, the appellant and his wife have three children. [Az]
    was born on [ ] 2002. He is a boy and has lived in the  United  Kingdom
    since the age of 6 years.  At the time of Judge  Onoufriou's  decision,
    he had been in the United Kingdom for eight years.  [At] was born on  [
    ] 2011. She is a girl.  The third child is [Ah], who born on [ ]  2015.
    She is also a girl.  Both of the girls were born in the United  Kingdom
    and have resided in the United Kingdom ever since.

 8. It was not in dispute before the First-tier Tribunal  that  [Az]  is  a
    "qualifying child" for the purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and also under Section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The matter that concerns  me  is  the
    judge's approach to the position of [Az]. This is set out at  paragraph
    53 of the decision:

         "Despite my findings thus far, the  primary  consideration  is,  of
         course, the children under section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship
         and Immigration Act ("the 2009 Act").  It is otiose to say that the
         children are clearly better off in the United  Kingdom  where  they
         would have probably a higher standard of  education  and  a  higher
         standard of living and, of course, the two elder children will have
         their own friends and particularly  the  eldest  child,  will  have
         activities in which they are involved.  However, the welfare of the
         children is not a 'trump card'.  In the case of  the  eldest  child
         within the context of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), I note he  has  been
         in the United Kingdom for seven years and is under the age  of  18.
         However, I do not consider it would  be  unreasonable  for  him  to
         return to Nigeria.  This is the country where he was born and spent
         the first six years of his life.  He is not totally unfamiliar with
         the culture, having spent his very early years there.  At  the  age
         of 6 he will have  acquired  a  reasonable  awareness  of  life  in
         Nigeria.  He is living within a Nigerian culture with  his  parents
         and their friends, although he is, of course, going to  school  and
         will have assimilated much of the British culture.   However,  like
         many children, he will be  adaptable.   There  are  no  medical  or
         mental issues and therefore as his best interest is to be with  his
         family, I do not consider it unreasonable  for  him  to  return  to
         Nigeria as part of the family unit."

 9. I consider this approach to be flawed for the following reasons.

10. The leading case in relation to the correct approach to the question of
    reasonableness,  both  in  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, is the  decision
    in MA (Pakistan) & Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

11. At paragraph 46 of his judgment Elias LJ said as follows:

         "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
         child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out a proportionality exercise.   Indeed,  the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled 'Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes' in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be 'strong reasons' for refusing  leave
         (para.11.2.4).  These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view  they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in  adopting  a  policy  of  this  nature.
         After such a period of time the child will have put down roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK.  That may be less so when the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality  assessment  [emphasis
         added]."

    It seems to me that paragraph 53 of the judge's decision fails to adopt
    this approach.

12. Firstly, in relation to the age of [Az] when he came to the UK and  his
    age now, it appears to me that the judge followed the very  reverse  of
    the approach commended by Lord Justice Elias. This is because the judge
    appears to have considered the fact that [Az] had spent the  first  six
    years of his life in Nigeria as something that made it more rather than
    less likely that he would be able to adapt to life in Nigeria now.  The
    correct approach, however, was to  have  assumed  that  when  [Az]  was
    living in Nigeria  during  his  early  years,  his  life  would  almost
    entirely have centred on his family.  He would therefore have been able
    more readily to adapt to life in the UK at that stage than he would now
    (aged 14 years) be able to adapt to life in Nigeria. Thus, contrary  to
    the judge's reasoning, the grounds for allowing [Az] to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom with his parents were stronger than they would have been
    had [Az] been born and continuously resided in the United Kingdom to  a
    point just beyond his seventh birthday.

13. Secondly, the reasons given by the judge for not  fulfilling  the  very
    strong expectation that [Az] should be allowed to remain in the UK with
    his parents are, if I may say so, nothing more than 'the usual' reasons
    for holding that removal is proportionate in furtherance of the  public
    interest.  Essentially, those reasons revolve  around  him  having  the
    emotional support of his parents to assist him in  adapting  to  a  new
    life in Nigeria. However, such reasons are likely  to  apply  in  every
    case where parents and their children  intend  to  continue  to  reside
    together as a family and,  whilst  they  may  be  adequate  to  justify
    removal in the case of  a  non-qualifying  child,  they  cannot  in  my
    judgement be characterised as the "strong reasons" that are required to
    outweigh the "very strong expectation" that a qualifying child will  be
    permitted to remain with his or her parents in the United Kingdom.

14. Elsewhere in his judgement, Elias LJ gave a  clear  indication  of  the
    type of  public  interest  considerations  that  might  be  capable  of
    outweighing the very strong expectation that a qualifying child will be
    permitted to remain in the United Kingdom  with  his  or  her  parents.
    These include criminality and such things as a  very  poor  immigration
    history by the child's parents.  To have regard to such matters is  not
    to visit the sins of the parent on the child;  it  is  simply  to  have
    regard to the  weighty  public  interest  that  exists  in  seeking  to
    discourage criminality and the abuse of immigration laws.  However,  no
    such weighty public interest considerations were engaged by  the  facts
    of this appeal.

15. I therefore conclude that the judge's approach to the eldest child  was
    legally erroneous. In my judgement, there were no "strong  reasons"  in
    this case for not fulfilling the  "very  strong  expectation"  that  he
    would be permitted, as a 'qualifying child', to remain with his parents
    and siblings in the United Kingdom. It follows that, applying the  test
    in section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, the only conclusion that the  judge
    could reasonably have come to was that  the  public  interest  did  not
    require the appellant's  removal  given  that  he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child in respect  of
    whom it was not reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

16. This appeal is allowed.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  is  set
    aside and substituted by a decision to allow the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 14th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
