
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08693/2016 (A)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Case Management Review by BT MeetMe          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th January 2021                         |On 2nd February 2021          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                    K A K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DIRECTIONS AND REASONS (A)


IT IS DIRECTED THAT:


     i) The directions of the Upper Tribunal that the appeal will be re-
        heard in the Upper Tribunal, are set aside.


    ii) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


   iii) The parties shall be notified of a hearing date before the First-
        tier Tribunal in due course.  The Tribunal shall arrange a Kurdish
        Sorani interpreter.


REASONS


   1. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He appealed the respondent's
      decision of 4th August 2016 to refuse his claim for asylum and
      humanitarian protection. His appeal was dismissed for reasons set out
      in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes promulgated on
      17th March 2017.  The appellant was granted permission to appeal and
      the decision of Judge Raikes was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge
      Lane for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 6th October
      2017. Judge Lane directed that the decision is to be remade in the
      Upper Tribunal and noted in his decision that the Upper Tribunal would
      soon produce a further country guidance case addressing the issues
      that arise in the appeal.  The appeal was listed for hearing before me
      on 18th February 2020 but had to be adjourned because neither party
      had addressed the issues that now arise in the appeal, following the
      subsequent country guidance set out in SMO & Others.


   2. The hearing before me on 19th January 2021 had been listed as a face-
      to-face resumed hearing at which it was intended that the Upper
      Tribunal would remake the decision as previously directed.
      Unfortunately, because of further restrictions announced in January
      2021 and the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
      the hearing could not proceed as a face-to-face hearing and was
      instead listed as a Case Management Review hearing, using BT MeetMe.




   3. A copy of the Notice of Hearing with the relevant dial-in details was
      sent to the appellant by post on 8th January 2021.  He did not dial-
      in.  I note that directions had previously been issued by Upper
      Tribunal Judge Smith dated 13th October 2020 directing the appellant
      to provide, if possible, the Tribunal and that the respondent with an
      email address at which he can be contacted. He was also invited to
      provide his views as to whether the hearing of the appeal should
      proceed as a face-to-face hearing or whether it might be possible for
      the hearing to be heard remotely.  There has been no response from the
      appellant to those directions.


   4. Having had the opportunity of considering submissions helpfully made
      by Mr Howells, I accept that the most appropriate course is for the
      appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.


   5. The appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity and from Mosul.  As at the date
      of the hearings before FtT Judge Raikes and Upper Tribunal Judge Lane,
      Mosul was described as a disputed area in Iraq.  Since those
      decisions, the guidance has changed.  In SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c);
      identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400, the Country Guidance
      now states that  the situation in the Formerly Contested Areas (the
      governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah and Salah Al-Din) is
      complex, encompassing ethnic, political and humanitarian issues which
      differ by region.  Whether the return of an individual to such an area
      would be contrary to Article 15(c) requires a fact-sensitive, "sliding
      scale" assessment to which several factors identified, are relevant.
      The Tribunal will now have to determine not only whether the appellant
      can internally relocate, but whether the appellant's return to his
      home area would be contrary to Article 15(c).


   6. There has already been a lengthy delay in the disposal of the appeal,
      and it is likely that the First-tier Tribunal will be able to
      accommodate a face-to-face listing of the appeal considerably sooner
      than might be possible in the Upper Tribunal.


   7. It is in the interests of justice for there to now be a timely
      disposal of the appeal.  I am satisfied that a rehearing of the appeal
      is likely to be accommodated in the First-tier Tribunal within weeks
      rather than months. Following the updated country guidance set out in
      SMO & Others and the unforeseen delays that have occurred because of
      the current pandemic, I am satisfied that there has been a change of
      circumstances since the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Lane such
      that the appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to the
      First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade.  The parties will
      be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due
      course.





Signed   V. Mandalia                Date:        19th January 2021




      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

