
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/08274/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2017                       |      On 19 December 2017           |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    m R I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel instructed by SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because this is a protection case and there is invariably a  possibility  in
cases of this kind that publicity will itself create a risk.

This is an appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh against  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
respondent on 26 September  2016  refusing  him  asylum  or  other  form  of
international protection.

Put simply the challenge to the decision is that the  judge's  reasoning  is
inadequate.

I have found this a very difficult case to resolve.  I have noted the First-
tier Tribunal's reasons for refusing to give permission  including  reliance
on R (Iran) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 982 and  Mr  Avery's  entirely
realistic, but ultimately unpersuasive, submissions that  the  Decision  and
Reasons is good enough.  It passes the fundamental test that  the  appellant
knows why he lost.  He lost because he was not believed.

I also note the reasons for  permission  being  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Plimmer who summarised her reasons for giving permission as  it  being
arguable that the fact-finding about the asylum account  is  inadequate  and
arguable that the judge has not given proper reasons for rejecting  evidence
described as "self-serving".

It is indeed arguable.  My difficulty is that I must  resolve  the  argument
and make a decision.

The appellant is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   There  is  evidence  that  he
supports the BNP in the United Kingdom and has supported it  in  Bangladesh.
There is evidence that he has been injured significantly, he says  by  Awami
League Party activists.

The difficulty I have is that although the judge  has  given  clear  reasons
for finding large tranches of the appellant's evidence to be  unreliable  or
unimpressive the only positive reason given  for  disbelieving  him  is  the
lateness of his claim.  Clearly that is potentially an entirely  appropriate
reason but the judge  has  not  examined  the  appellant's  explanation  for
making his claim late.  For much of the time  the  appellant  has  been  the
United Kingdom he had leave to be there. Although  he  could  be  criticised
for not making a claim for asylum if he needed  protection  his  failure  to
claim asylum in the United Kingdom when he was already there lawfully  might
not be as suspicious as, for example, living in the  United  Kingdom  for  a
prolonged period without permission and then claiming asylum only after  his
lack of status came to the attention of the authorities.

I realise that in this case there have been  significant  periods  when  the
appellant was present in the United Kingdom without  leave.   However  I  am
not satisfied that the lateness of the application, without considering  the
explanation for  the  lateness,  is  sufficient  reason  to  disbelieve  the
appellant.

Similarly I am not satisfied that the  weak  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
appellant could be  discounted  lawfully  without  clearly  considering  the
evidence as a whole.

The judge was perfectly entitled to observe, as may well be the  case,  that
false documentation is readily available in  Bangladesh  and  therefore  any
document in  Bangladesh  may  well  be  given  less  weight  than  would  be
appropriate for documentation from countries  where  forgeries  are  not  so
readily  available.   However  the  fact  that  unreliable   or   misleading
documents are readily available does not mean that the particular  documents
relied upon are in any way unsatisfactory.  This is not something the  judge
has explored.

Similarly,  whilst  the  use  of  the  phrase  "self-serving"  is   probably
undesirable, the  judge  has  given  entirely  sensible  reasons  for  being
unimpressed by the evidence provided by  the  appellant's  mother.   He  was
entitled to come to the conclusion that it was written for  the  benefit  of
the Tribunal rather than the  benefit  of  the  appellant  to  whom  it  was
addressed.  However the fact that it is unreliable or of limited value  does
not of itself make it untrue. Neither  does  it  necessarily  undermine  any
other evidence.

I am satisfied that the adverse credibility findings  are  not  set  against
the  apparently  unchallenged  evidence   that   the   appellant   has   had
considerable involvement in political matters in the United Kingdom and  has
made clear assertions of his involvement leading  to  serious  ill-treatment
in Bangladesh.

As I indicated at the beginning I  have  found  this  a  difficult  case  to
resolve.  Perhaps it is almost inevitable that in the circumstances  I  have
to say that the decision is not safe and I set it aside and direct  that  it
be decided again in the First-tier Tribunal.  None of the existing  findings
stand.  The judge dealing with it again must make up his  or  her  own  mind
about the criticisms of the evidence and must be careful to set any  adverse
findings in the context of the evidence as a whole  including  evidence  the
appellant has a damaged finger and scarring on which he relies.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 18 December 2017              |
|Judge                                |                                     |










