
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08726/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 31st July, 2017                            |On 3rd August, 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [G J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Pearce of Asylum Justice


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the  appellant  in
    this appeal and to avoid confusion, I  refer  to  him  as  being,  "the
    claimant".

2.   The respondent is female and was born on [ ] 1956.  She is  a  national
    of the Republic of Georgia and arrived in the United Kingdom in October
    2014.  She claimed asylum on 1st February 2016 but in a decision of 1st
    August 2016 the claimant refused the respondent's asylum claim.

3.   The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and her  appeal  was
    heard at Newport on 7th December, 2016  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Suffield-Thompson.  She found that the decision of the  claimant,  that
    the respondent was not a victim of trafficking, was perverse  when  she
    purported to apply MS (Trafficking - Tribunal's Powers - Art.  4  ECHR:
    Pakistan) [2016] UKUT 00226 (IAC).  Having found  that  the  respondent
    was a victim of trafficking, the First Tier Tribunal Judge then  simply
    allowed the respondent's appeal.

4.   The claimant challenged the decision and in doing so asserted that  the
    judge had failed properly to understand  paragraph  57  of  MS  and  to
    properly apply Wednesbury principles to the  claimant's  decision  that
    the respondent was not trafficked.  Both representatives  agreed  today
    that the determination could not stand and that it should  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.   I  set  the  decision
    aside.

5.   Given the length of time which would  elapse  were  I  to  retain  this
    appeal to myself in the Upper Tribunal, I  believe  it  to  be  in  the
    interests of justice that the matter  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard by a judge  other  than  Judge  Suffield-Thompson.
    Two and a half hours should be allowed for the hearing  of  the  appeal
    and a Russian interpreter is required.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed and remitted to be heard  afresh  by  the  First  Tier
Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 Chalkley
       Date 03/08/2017
