
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08060/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 May 2019                                 |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                   mr P B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Mansouri & Son
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I am tasked in this decision with the re-making of the decision on  the
appeal of the appellant, a national of Iran, against the  decision  made  by
the respondent on 12 June 2018 to refuse his protection claim in a  decision
sent on 22 March 2019 I set aside the decision of Judge Bart-Stewart of  the
First-tier Tribunal for material error of law.  I  did  not   consider  that
there was any material error in the judge's adverse  findings in respect  of
the appellant's claims to have been targeted by  the  regime  as  a  whistle
blower or to have earlier been  involved  in  anti-regime  demonstration  in
2009 or to have then had problems with the intelligence  services  while  he
was  at  university.   Those  adverse  findings  were  sound.  The  error  I
identified was confined to the judge's treatment of  the  appellant's  claim
to have been baptised and to have attended church and  proselytised  in  the
UK.  At para 9, I concluded:


    "9.  Given my finding that  the  judge's  error  was  confined  to  the
    assessment of  the  appellant's  religious  activities  in  the  UK  in
    relation to (i) whether they amount to a genuine conversion;  and  (ii)
    how in any event they would be perceived by  the  Iranian  authorities,
    this  case  can  be  retained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  further
    submissions can be confined to issues (i) and (ii). The  case  will  be
    set down for two hours on the basis that there will  be  at  least  two
    witnesses."


2.   At the hearing before me, Ms Anzani first called the appellant to  give
oral evidence. He confirmed that the contents of his two witness  statements
of April 2018 and September 2018 were true.  Cross-examined by  Ms  Everett,
he said that his motivation for attending the Elim  Iranian  Church  a  year
ago was that he was living in a hostel and having a rough time and  felt  it
would give him peace and quiet. He had chosen  a  Christian  church  because
when he had visited churches in Armenia and Turkey prior to  coming  to  the
UK he had found them peaceful places.  Asked  what  he  said  when  speaking
about his faith to others, the appellant said he talked to  them  about  his
own life and problems and how he had dealt with them.  He talked  about  his
belief in Jesus  Christ  and  the  miracles  described  in  the  Bible.   He
believed Christ was God. He had been brought up in a Muslim culture and  was
taught Islam at school, but the family did not practice  Islam  and  growing
up he was not very interested. Asked about his activities in his church,  he
said that one of them was converting people to Christ.  He felt the need  to
do this because a lot of people were not on  the  right  path  and  becoming
Christian would help.  To be seen to be someone who  converted  you  had  to
live a clean and pure life and obey the 10 Commandments. He  believed  Islam
talked about killing which was wrong.

3.   The appellant said he had not studied other religions.   Asked  why  he
could not  just  leave  others  to  live  a  clean  and  pure  life  without
Christianity, he said they would not have salvation in another life.   Asked
what was important to him about Jesus, he said he had lost his  father  when
he was 17 and he felt he now had a father figure to ask for  forgiveness  if
he made mistakes.

4.   In reply to questions from Ms  Anzani,  the  appellant  said  that  his
activities on Instagram, which was a new idea  he  had  started  2-3  months
ago, consisted of posting parts of the bible every morning. This was it  was
an effective  way  of  getting  points  across  to  Iranians  in  Iran.  His
Instagram account was public, not private.

5.   Asked by Ms Anzani  about  his  activities  on  behalf  of  the  church
outside the church, he said he would  help  set  up  tables  and  distribute
leaflets in Croydon and he would also go to the hostel which was  nearby  to
talk to people.

6.   Asked if he knew why [AG], who had attended as a witness in his  appeal
before the First tier Tribunal, would not be here today,  he  said  he  knew
she had been unable to get time  off  work.  He  had  asked  another  church
colleague to attend instead.

7.   I next hearing evidence from [JH]. He stated in his  witness  statement
that he was one of the leaders of  the  Elim  Iranian  Christian  Fellowship
based in Croydon Community Church. He said he had been instructed to  attend
as his church's representative by Pastor Rev Miltan Danil at  this  hearing.
He knew [AG] was unable to attend because of work today. He  had  known  the
appellant since  April  2018.  The  appellant  was  a  regular  attender  at
discussion groups and Bible Study and he was baptised on 24 June  2018.   In
reply to questions  from  Ms  Everett,  he  said  when  church  members  had
introduced the appellant to Christ he was in a very stressed  situation  and
he felt called.  The  appellant  had  been  very  active  and  he  had  been
mentoring him.  It  was  important  to  the  appellant  to  talk  about  his
Christianity. For the appellant, like others members of the church,  it  was
important to spread the word of God. Mr [H] said he had been  a  Muslim  who
had converted and he believed  Christianity  was  right  compared  to  other
religions. He regarded Jesus as God, being part  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  in
which he was second and he had all the attributes of the Father.

8.   I then heard from Ms [ZT]. In her witness statements she said  she  had
been a member of the Elim Church for 10 years. She  believed  the  appellant
was a model and committed young Christian. She had first met  him  in  April
2018. He was a young member and very willing to help out in anything  to  do
with the church. He had computing skills and helped out a lot with that  and
was also very welcoming to new young members who  attended  the  church  and
visited and asked for information. She had seen  the  appellant  proselytise
many times. She had seen and heard him describe his faith  to  new  visitors
and she had seen how full of  hope  and  faith  he  was  and  he  introduced
Christianity to visitors as having saved him.  She had no  doubt  about  his
commitment and faith.  She was also aware he had  visited  ill  Iranians  in
hospital on several occasions to give them love and support and comfort.

9.   In reply to questions from Ms  Everett,  she  said  she  had  seen  the
appellant proselytising at small community events and he would sometimes  go
out to other Iranians to show the way.   The  Elim  Church  was  almost  all
Iranian which meant they could speak in  Iranian  and  help  each  other  in
suffering knowing they came from a country which did bad things. There  were
around 30-40 members who attended. All were converts. She had  converted  21
years ago.

Submissions

10.  Ms Everett for the respondent said she relied on the findings  made  by
the previous tribunal judge as regards the appellant's  account  of  adverse
experiences in Iran. No error of law having been found in relation to  those
findings, she asked that  I  approach  this  case  on  the  basis  that  the
appellant had been found to lack credibility in some material parts  of  his
claim.

11.  Ms Everett submitted that the two extant issues were: (i)  whether  the
appellant was a genuine convert; and (ii) if not, then whether he  would  be
at risk on return.  She said the respondent would have to accept that  if  I
found the appellant to  be  a  genuine  convert  then  he  was  entitled  to
succeed, in light of existing  Tribunal  country  guidance  and  the  latest
background county information.   If  I  rejected  his  claim  to  a  genuine
conversion, however, I should find that he  could  return  to  Iran  without
danger.

12.   She  accepted  that  as  regards  (ii),  the  CIPIN  evidence   (Iran:
Christians and Christian Converts (v4.0 March 2018) was not entirely  clear,
with para 5.2.1 indicating Iranian authorities  would  know  about  Iranians
attending conferences and seminars but  there  was  no  evidence  they  were
watching Iranian Christian churches abroad. Being baptised would not make  a
difference to perception of the  appellant  if  there  was  no  evidence  of
proselytizing activity.  She did not rely on  the  refusal  letter  on  this
matter because she accepted it did not have anything to say about it.

13.  She submitted that as regards (i), however, even though  allowance  had
to be made for the fact that establishing religious convictions  was  not  a
straightforward  matter  and  there  could  be  many  reasons   why   people
converted,  she  asked  that  I  find  the  appellant's  account   to   lack
plausibility. She accepted that his  evidence  was  broadly  consistent  but
there was a lack of compelling evidence as to how and why he  had  converted
and his account lacked coherence.

14.  Ms Anzani said she agreed with Ms Everett that the issue of  conversion
was a difficult one but the appellant in this case had produced  a  detailed
account and the respondent's  challenges  to  the  appellant's  account  now
seemed to be confined to matters  of  plausibility  which  were  notoriously
elusive. The appellant had given a credible and coherent account of how  his
family background meant that he was not particularly religious.  That  meant
he had more limited knowledge of the Muslim faith when growing up  and  made
it likely he was less aware of the dangers inherent  in  a  conversion  away
from that faith.  The appellant had  shown  considerable  knowledge  of  the
Christian faith and in interview  had  shown  awareness  of  many  Christian
teachings.  Whilst it  was  only  relatively  recently  he  had  decided  to
convert, he had a longer standing interest in Christianity. The evidence  of
the witnesses who had attended to support  his  case  was  compelling.  They
corroborated his account that  he  had  attended  the  Elim  Iranian  church
regularly and had become an active member who had  undertaken  proselytizing
activities. Ms Everett had conceded that if I was  satisfied  the  appellant
was a genuine convert, the appellant was entitled to succeed in his  appeal.


15.  As regards risk on return, the background country  evidence  indicated,
submitted Ms Anzani, that the appellant  was  likely  to  be  questioned  on
return to Iran. Even if his religious activities in the UK are not known  to
the authorities, he could not be expected to lie about his faith.  The  Open
Door source indicated that the regime was unlikely to differentiate  between
genuine and non-genuine converts. The appellant had  been  baptised  in  the
UK; the respondent  did  not  dispute  that.   There  was  a  discrimination
against Christians prevalent throughout Iran and  as  someone  born  into  a
Muslim family the appellant was a risk of being perceived  as  an  apostate.
She reminded me that in my error of law decision I had noted that  the  CPIN
at 8.1.3 stated that:


    "The regime is very suspicious of contact with the outside world.   The
    Iranian regime would not explore the validity of a person's  conversion
    when they return to Iran.  It would  be  accepted  at  face  value.   A
    'convert' who returns to Iran (even if the conversion is not recognised
    as genuine in the place of conversion such as the UK) may be forced  to
    sign a commitment to return  to  Islam.   This  is  likely  to  involve
    detention and interrogation."


and that the CIPIN also set out various ways the regime may become aware  of
a baptism abroad.

16.  So far as concerns the issue of whether the appellant's conversion  was
genuine, she submitted that the witnesses  made  clear  that  he  had  found
solace with fellow  Iranians  in  a  Farsi-speaking  Christian  church.  The
witnesses all spoke of their belief that he was a  committed  Christian  and
also described him as an active church member  who  undertook  proselytizing
activities, which several described.

My assessment

17.  I have to consider the appellant's case in light of the evidence  as  a
whole.

18.  It is accepted by Ms Everett that if I am satisfied that the  appellant
is a genuine convert, he is entitled to succeed in his appeal. If I  do  not
so accept, then I have to go on to consider whether  he  would  nevertheless
be at risk on return.

19.   I  shall  deal  first  with  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  genuine
conversion. In relation to this issue, I have had particular regard  to  his
witness statements, his asylum interview  and  the  oral  evidence  he  gave
before Judge Bart-Stewart. Ms Everett is entitled to say, as she  has,  that
given my earlier decision finding that the judge was entitled  to  find  the
appellant's account of adverse experiences in Iran lacking  in  credibility,
there is established evidence that the  appellant  has  lied  about  certain
matters and so cannot be treated as someone about whom there is  nothing  to
indicate that they are less than truthful persons. I have also  to  bear  in
mind  the  possibility  that  the  appellant  has   become   involved   with
Christianity in order to bolster his asylum claim.

20.  It is accepted by Ms Everett that the  appellant's  evidence  regarding
his conversion and Christian activities has been broadly consistent.

21.  Ms Everett did not seek to argue that his  account  of  his  conversion
and knowledge of  the  Christian  faith  failed  to  demonstrate  sufficient
detail. That  represents  a  different  position  from  that  taken  by  the
respondent in the refusal decision who  considered  that  his  knowledge  of
Christianity was very limited and "not commensurate with someone who  claims
to  have  researched  the  religion  for  approximately   10   years".   The
respondent's  refusal  letter  also  noted  that  the  answers  he  gave  at
interview to several questions about Christianity  were  broadly  consistent
with objective information, but that he  was  "externally  inconsistent"  as
regards the two most important of the 10 Commandments and  that  there  were
several other questions to which the respondent noted the appellant had  not
given full or accurate answers. The  respondent  also  counted  against  the
appellant that he had not shown any interest in Christianity  until  he  had
been in the UK for some seven months. The respondent also considered he  had
not been able to provide a cogent reason for his interests in  Christianity.


22.  Nor did Ms Everett seek to argue the point that  the  evidence  of  the
witnesses did not really tell anything about the impact of his faith on  him
personally. It may well be that she did not pursue this matter  because  she
recognised the difficulties that could arise if reliance was placed  on  the
absence of evidence of genuine faith, given that well-known  limits  to  our
ability in respect of the 'forum internum' to "peer  into  another's  soul".
It was one of the errors of Judge Bart-Stewart that she appeared to  require
this internal dimension to be evidenced in some demonstrable way.

23.  Given that Ms Everett did not pursue any of the concerns voiced by  the
respondent in the refusal decision, it is difficult  to  attach  significant
weight to them, especially given that they were based on what the  appellant
had said at a time when he had only begun attending the Elim  church  for  a
month. I consider it does count against the  appellant  that  even  at  that
early stage he had not been able to show a level of  knowledge  commensurate
with his own claimed interest in Christianity over  the  past  10  years.  I
also counted against him, given this  claimed  interest,  that  he  had  not
shown any interest in attending a Christian church until seven months  after
arrival. At the same time, all of the identified shortcomings in  his  level
of knowledge  of  Christianity  are  ones  consistent  with  what  might  be
expected of a person whose  attraction  to  Christianity  is  not  primarily
doctrinal but experiential. Thus, it was correct of the  respondent  in  the
refusal letter to say that the appellant had not  correctly  identified  the
two most important Commandments taken in numerical order, but  the  question
that had been put to him did not clarify whether it meant importance in  the
established learning or importance in the mind of the appellant.

24.  It seems to me  that  Ms  Everett's  acceptance  that  the  appellant's
account  was  broadly   consistent   and   sufficiently   detailed   reduces
significantly the weight to be given to the shortcomings identified  at  the
interview stage, particularly since on more than one occasion the  appellant
has  faced  cross-examination  during  which  he   was   not   significantly
challenged about these matters.  In adversarial  proceedings  assessment  of
credibility must take  cognisance  of  the  ability  of  the  respondent  to
effectively or not undermine the appellant's evidence.

25.  Given that Ms Everett puts her case solely on  the  basis  of  lack  of
plausibility, it is clearly of some importance to consider and weigh in  the
balance the evidence of the witnesses.  Since  all  of  the  witnesses  were
members of the same church and on the  evidence  this  church  was  made  up
almost entirely of Iranians who had converted, I should state at the  outset
that I have treated this feature as a neutral factor. There is  no  evidence
to indicate that members  of  this  church  work  to  assist  asylum-seekers
irrespective of whether they are genuine or not.

26.  I have already outlined the evidence I heard from Mr [H],  one  of  the
church leaders of Elim Iranian Christian Fellowship, and  Ms  [T],  who  has
been attending this church for some 10  years.  In  addition,  there  was  a
written statement from Pastor Damil.  Pastor Damil wrote at  the  time  that
he had known the appellant for  seven  months  and  had  said  he  sincerely
believed the  appellant  was  a  Christian  believer.  There  was  also  the
evidence of [AG].  As recorded by  Judge  Bart-Stewart,  she  described  the
appellant as very enthusiastic to learn his new faith.  He asked  a  lot  of
questions of the priest and in classes was one of the best students.     She
had taken a group of 2 or 3 people that went out to hand out flyers and  the
appellant was always in that group.   Two  months  ago,  the  appellant  had
suggested to her that they set up a small library and  worship  group.   She
believed the appellant was genuine.  She considered it her duty  that  those
who come to the church are 'introduced to  Christ  and  the  right  path  of
Christianity'.  She considered the appellant  a  believer  when  he  started
attending the church and said  Iranians  already  are  quite  familiar  with
Christianity.  As faith is personal, she accepted that there is  little  she
could say with regards to the appellant's  motives  or  belief.   She  could
only speak to actions, not whether his actions were genuinely  motivated  or
true expressions of faith. Judge Bart-Stewart had not suggested that he  did
not accept her evidence as truthful. Judge  Bart-  Stewart  did  doubt  that
this witness was in a position to know whether the  appellant  was  genuine,
noting, inter alia, that she had confirmed that she would not  know  whether
he had converted to help with  his  asylum  claim.  However,  as  identified
above, I consider it was  an  unrealistic  expectation  of  witnesses  to  a
conversion to prove the sincerity of a person's inner  beliefs.  That  said,
the witnesses in this case were all of  the  view  that  the  appellant  was
genuine.

27.  Alongside the unchallenged evidence of [AG], before me Ms  Everett  did
not seek to challenge the evidence of either Mr [H] or Ms [T].   Given  that
her only real basis of challenge  to  the  appellant's  account  of  genuine
conversion is the lack of plausibility,  this  lack  of  challenge  to  the.
witnesses (all saying that the appellant has been an active member  who  had
proselytised and also all saying they consider him a  committed  Christian),
makes it very difficult to attach significant weight to factors relating  to
lack of plausibility. If such factors pertain to  the  account  he  gave  of
conversion, it was not implausible that, being in an unsettled situation  in
a hostel, he should turn to fellow-nationals sharing the same  language  and
culture who offered him friendship and fellowship in  a  Christian  context.
Given that there was no evidence to  show  he  had  ever  been  a  committed
Muslim, his decision  to  move  more  towards  Christianity  was  again  not
implausible. The delayed timing of his first  contact  with  the  church  is
something that could be said to be implausible (and I have  earlier  weighed
that against his account), but if it  was  prompted  primarily  by  his  own
situation in the hostel, we do  not  have  enough  information  to  conclude
overall that such timing indicated lack of genuine motives.

28.  I have to bear in mind that in an  asylum  appeal  the  appellant  only
needs to establish the credibility of his account (in this case his  account
of genuine conversion) to the lower standard. Given the  position  taken  by
Ms Everett, both as  regards  lack  of  pursuit  of  any  challenge  to  the
appellant's level or quality  of  knowledge  of  Christianity  and  lack  of
challenge to the reliability of the witnesses, there is  really  too  little
on which I could properly reach an adverse  conclusion  in  the  appellant's
case. It is true he has been  properly  found  not  credible  regarding  his
account of adverse experiences in Iran, but that does  not  entail  that  he
should be considered untruthful about all aspects of his account. I  do  not
find  that  the  possibility  that  he  may  have   become   involved   with
Christianity to bolster his asylum claim has been found to be anything  more
than that - a mere possibility.

29.  I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  established  to  the  lower
standard that he has genuinely converted to Christianity.

30.  Given my findings on the issue genuine conversion, it is not  necessary
for me to address the further issue of risk on  return  because  Ms  Everett
accepted that if I found  the  appellant  was  a  genuine  convert,  he  was
entitled to succeed.

31.  To conclude:

    I have already found that  the  First-tier  tribunal  Judge  materially
    erred in law and her decision was set aside.


    The decision I re-make is to allow the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 14 May 2019

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

