
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08779/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 21 December 2018                           |On 18 February 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ZHA
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Hashmi  (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    In this short decision I shall explain why I  have  decided  to  allow
the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal;  to  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal)  and  to  remit  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing of the appeal.

2.    The respondent in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal ("the  claimant")
is a national of Iraq.  He was born on 1 January 1996.  He is  of  Kurdish
ethnicity.   He  entered  the  United Kingdom  (UK)  on  9 January 2018
(unlawfully) and claimed asylum on that day.  In pursuing his claim he  said
that he is from Kirkuk in Iraq; that he had been harassed  by  Shia Muslims
in Iraq because he is a Sunni Muslim; that  he  had  been  ill-treated  and
would be further  ill-treated  upon  return  because  his  father  had  been
involved with the Ba'ath Party; and that his brother had been killed  as  a
consequence of his father's involvement in the Ba'ath Party.

3.    The Secretary of State accepted that the claimant is  Iraqi,  that  he
is of Kurdish ethnicity and that he is a Sunni Muslim.  But  the  Secretary
of State did not  believe  that  his  father  had  been  involved  with  the
Ba'ath Party or that the claimant had been ill-treated whilst in Iraq.   It
follows that the Secretary of State also  disbelieved  the  contention  that
the claimant's brother had been killed  in  consequence  of  the  claimant's
father's claimed involvement with the Ba'ath Party.  The Secretary of State
also seems to have taken the view that the claimant would not be at risk  of
indiscriminate violence if returned to Kirkuk such that the  test  contained
in Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive was not met.   But  anyway,
the Secretary of State thought, if it should be necessary, that he would  be
able  to  relocate  to  Baghdad  or  to  the  part  of  Iraq  under  Kurdish
administrative control which is sometimes referred to  and  will  henceforth
be referred to throughout the rest of this decision as "the IKR".   So,  the
Secretary of State refused to grant the claimant  international  protection.
Dissatisfied, he appealed to the tribunal.

4.    The tribunal held an oral hearing of the appeal on 5 September 2018.
It sent its reasoned decision to the parties on  18 September 2018.   Like
the Secretary of State, it did not accept  the  claimant's  account  of  his
father's involvement with the Ba'ath Party or any consequent risk resulting
from it.  But it accepted that his home area was  Kirkuk  and  that  "Kirkuk
remains  in  a  contested  area  of  Iraq".   It  seems  to  have  accepted,
therefore, that there would be an Article 15(c) risk if he were  to  return
there (see paragraph 46  of  the  written  reasons).   It  then  considered
whether he might be able to relocate within Iraq.  A  key  consideration  as
to that was the question of whether he possessed or  could  obtain  identity
documentation but, in  particular,  what  is  known  as  a  CSID card.   At
paragraph 47 of its written reasons there appears this sentence:

      "I conclude that he has the ability  to  contact  his  father  who  is
      likely to have access to his identity documents including his CSID."

5.    Then, at paragraph 48, the tribunal expressly considered the question
of whether the claimant might be able to relocate to the IKR.  It  listed  a
number of possible relevant considerations  before  closing  that  paragraph
with these words:

      "... I note that AAH had the advantage of a  semi-skilled  background
      and a CSID which were the factors distinguished in his case as  making
      it possible for him to secure employment.  This is  not  true  of  the
      appellant and I accept therefore  that  it  is  unreasonable  for  the
      appellant to relocate to the IKR."

6.    So, the tribunal allowed the claimant's  appeal.   But  permission  to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought and obtained.  One of  the  grounds
advanced was that what the tribunal had said at  paragraph 47  was  to  the
effect that he could obtain a CSID and that such was inconsistent with  what
it had said at paragraph 48.  Permission having been granted  there  was  a
hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that  consideration  could
be given as to whether or not the tribunal had erred  in  law  and,  if  so,
what should flow from that.  Representation at that hearing  was  as  stated
above and I am grateful to each representative.  Mr Diwnycz  simply  relied
upon what had been said in the  written  grounds.   Ms Hashmi  argued  that
matters were not as straightforward as they appeared to be and  that  taking
an overall view and having regard to  relevant  Country Guidance  decisions
(in particular AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT  00212
(IAC) the claimant would not be able to relocate to the IKR.

7.    As I informed the parties at the hearing,  I  have  decided  that  the
tribunal did err in law such that its decision has  to  be  set  aside.   At
paragraph 47 of its written reasons the tribunal did make  a  finding  that
the claimant was in touch with his father or  had  the  ability  to  contact
him, and that his  father  would  have  access  to  his  identity  documents
including his CSID.  So, on any view and  despite  anything  Ms Hashmi  was
seeking to argue to the contrary,  it  was  effectively  deciding  that  the
claimant would be able to access his CSID.  However,  at  paragraph 48,  it
appeared to be proceeding on the basis that he would not be able  to  do  so
and it relied upon his inability to do so with the knock-on  effect  of  the
difficulties it would cause him in  securing  employment,  as  a  reason  of
substance as to why he would not be able to relocate to  the  IKR.   So,  in
short, having made a finding of  importance  it  then  lost  sight  of  that
finding when reaching its conclusion as to internal flight.   That  does,  I
am afraid, despite the fact that  this  is  otherwise  a  characteristically
most careful decision,  render  the  tribunal's  conclusion  on  the  appeal
unsafe.

8.    My having decided to set aside the tribunal's decision there was  some
further discussion as to whether I should preserve certain of the  findings,
whether I should seek to remake the decision myself in  the  Upper Tribunal
or whether I should remit to the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Hashmi urged  me
to remit.  Mr Diwnycz initially invited me to remake  the  decision  myself
after a further hearing in the  Upper Tribunal  but,  by  the  end  of  the
discussion, had taken a more neutral stance.

9.    I have decided to remit because Mr Diwnycz did not  end  up  opposing
that course of action, because the lack of clarity regarding the  claimant's
access to a CSID card will necessitate further findings of fact and because
if there has to be a  further  hearing  (and  both  representatives  thought
there should be) that might as well be before  the  First-tier Tribunal  as
the expert fact-finding body.

10.   So, I direct that there be a full rehearing of the appeal.  That  will
take place in the First-tier Tribunal before a different Judge to  the  one
who dealt with and allowed the appeal.  Nothing shall be preserved from  the
tribunal's original  decision.   I  appreciate  there  might  have  been  an
argument  for  preserving  the  findings  regarding  the  father's   claimed
involvement with the Ba'ath Party but if I am  remitting  it  seems  to  me
sensible to provide the First-tier Tribunal with a blank canvas rather than
to attempt to restrict its expert fact-finding function.   I  make  no  more
directions than that with respect to the rehearing.   No  doubt  the  First-
tier Tribunal will prefer to attend to  the  need  for  listing  directions
itself  in  due  course.  Such  will,  of  course,  cover  matters  such  as
interpretation needs and a time estimate.

11.   Finally, as to anonymity, such was granted by the  tribunal.   I  have
decided to maintain the status quo.  The claimant, therefore, continues  to
benefit from a grant of anonymity.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted and will be reheard afresh  by
a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

The claimant was granted anonymity by the First-tier Tribunal.  I  continue
that grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008.  Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall directly  or
indirectly identify  the  claimant  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies to all parties to this appeal.  Failure  to  comply  could
lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:                                                          Date:    28
December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
