
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/08153/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 March 2018                          |On 11 May 2018                   |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    m a a
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Basith, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James who  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  protection  grounds
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 9 August 2017.


2.   I am grateful to  the  helpful  submissions  from  both  sides  and  in
    particular the helpful and realistic approach taken by Mr Wilding which
    has resulted in broad agreement that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge should be set aside  for  error  of  law,  and  that  in
    consequence the decision in the appeal should be remade following a new
    hearing with all issues at large before the First-tier Tribunal by  any
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge James or First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Robinson (who heard an earlier appeal by the Appellant against  a
    different refusal decision).  In such circumstances I do not propose to
    go into the level of detail as to the background  to  this  case  as  I
    might otherwise have done so.  Nonetheless it is appropriate to set out
    broadly something of the background to the appeal.


3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh whose date of birth  is  given
    as 1 January 1986.  He initially made  an  immigration  application  in
    November 2008  when  he  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  a  working
    holidaymaker.  This was refused in the first  instance  on  6  November
    2008; the refusal was maintained and/or upheld notwithstanding a number
    of challenges by way of appeal and  application  for  judicial  review.
    The Appellant next made a visit  visa  application  in  February  2012,
    which was also refused.  Again, he pursued a challenge to that decision
    and in due course he was granted entry clearance on 9 January 2013.  He
    entered the United Kingdom pursuant to the visitor entry clearance on 9
    February 2013. On 27 March 2013 he applied for asylum.


4.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused on  10  April  2013,
    and a subsequent appeal dismissed by  way  of  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Robinson  promulgated   on   24   April   2013   (ref.
    AA/03479/2013).  Attempts to challenge the decision of  Judge  Robinson
    were unsuccessful and the Appellant became 'appeal rights exhausted' on
    10 May 2013.


5.   Thereafter the Appellant made further submissions  in  respect  of  his
    asylum claim to the Secretary of State  on  13  February  2014.   Those
    submissions were rejected on 5 October 2016.  The  Appellant  commenced
    judicial review proceedings, and on  5  April  2017  -  pursuant  to  a
    Consent Order of that date - the Respondent agreed  to  reconsider  the
    Appellant's  representations.   The  Appellant's  representations  were
    again refused on 9 August  2017,  but  it  was  acknowledged  that  his
    representations amounted to a fresh claim for asylum and accordingly he
    was accorded a further right of appeal to the IAC.


6.   The Appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge James.


7.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds of challenge set out a number of matters both in respect of
    what were said to be procedural unfairness  or  irregularities  in  the
    conduct of the hearing, and by way of challenging the evaluation of the
    evidence and the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


8.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
    on 15 January 2018.  The particular basis on which  it  was  considered
    permission to appeal was warranted is set out in the following terms in
    the decision of Judge Andrew.

         "It is arguable  that  there  was  procedural  unfairness  in  this
         hearing in that the Judge may have excluded evidence being given by
         persons present at the hearing, particularly as it is indicated  at
         paragraph 33 of the decision that they were not  present  when  the
         application for permission claims that they were."


    It is upon this point - which as I have indicated above is not the only
    point pleaded in the grounds - that the parties have focused before me,
    and in respect of which they are in broad agreement.


9.   By way of context I should observe that the  Appellant's  asylum  claim
    is  based  on  political  opinion  and  specifically  his  support  and
    involvement with the  Jamaat-i-Islami  Party  in  Bangladesh.   He  has
    claimed that he has been falsely accused by the Awami League and  false
    cases have been brought against him including by a step-uncle who is  a
    supporter of that organisation.  He fears that he would be at  risk  on
    return.  As part  of  his  case  he  has  produced  various  supporting
    documents with regard to cases being brought against him; he  has  also
    relied upon materials and evidence in respect of the  circumstances  of
    his family.  Of particular recent note, it is said that his father  was
    the victim of a shooting sustaining an injury to his  foot,  which  the
    Appellant suggests is related to his own political activities.


10.  It is proper to note that the Appellant's  first  appeal  found  little
    favour with Judge Robinson.  Judge Robinson accepted that some evidence
    supported the Appellant's claim to have been a supporter of the Jamaat-
    i-Islami and to have attended  demonstrations.   It  was  not  accepted
    however that reliance could be placed upon the  supporting  documentary
    evidence as to the difficulties that the Appellant claimed had befallen
    him in consequence of those activities.  In terms Judge Robinson  found
    that he did not accept "that the court  documents  are  documents  upon
    which reliance can be placed" (see paragraph 60).  The Judge also found
    "I do not accept that false cases have been brought against him in  the
    court by the government members of other political groups or his  step-
    uncle" (paragraph 62), and the Judge did not accept "that the Appellant
    was arrested and detained by the police or that he was in hiding before
    he left Bangladesh" (also paragraph 62).


11.  Necessarily, pursuant to the principles in Devaseelan, the findings  of
    Judge Robinson were the starting point for the consideration  of  Judge
    James - although bearing  in  mind  that  the  Appellant  had  produced
    further documentary material which had persuaded the Secretary of State
    that there was a 'fresh claim'. It is also to be noted that the claimed
    shooting of  his  father  was  an  event  that  postdated  the  earlier
    proceedings.


12.  In support of his second appeal the Appellant had filed  a  substantial
    bundle of documents which included  a  number  of  witness  statements.
    Those witness statements -  and  the  ones  that  are  the  subject  of
    particular consideration by the Upper  Tribunal  -  are  identified  at
    paragraph 32 of the decision of Judge James:

    "In further support of  his  claims  the  Appellant  submitted  witness
    statements from [MA, AM, NG and UG].   All  of  these  statements  were
    unsigned and undated".


    The first three such individuals are the husbands  of  the  Appellant's
    three sisters; the fourth, UG, is the brother of NG.


13.  It is said that all such  witnesses  attended  the  hearing  listed  at
    Hatton Cross on 21 September 2017 before Judge James.  However,  it  is
    said that Judge James, after preliminary discussions,  ruled  that  she
    would only hear evidence from one of the witnesses, that is to say  the
    witness UG.  Indeed, the  Judge  sets  out  her  consideration  of  the
    evidence of UG in the body of her decision.  The Judge deals  with  the
    matter in this way:

    "However not all of these persons were present at the hearing  to  give
    evidence as confirmed by the legal representative at the  beginning  of
    the hearing, three were absent." (paragraph 33).


14.  It is accepted by the Respondent  that  the  Judge's  observation  that
    three witnesses were absent is factually incorrect. All four  witnesses
    had attended the hearing - as, Mr Wilding acknowledged, is confirmed in
    the record of proceedings taken by the Presenting Officer.


15.  Moreover the fact that all had attended  is  reinforced  by  a  written
    submission sent to the Tribunal by the Appellant's representative after
    the completion of the hearing.


16.  In this latter context it is to be noted that this case had  originally
    been listed in front of a different Judge on 21 September 2017 who  had
    been taken ill and had not attended the hearing centre.  The appeal was
    effectively taken as a 'float' case, commencing  in  the  afternoon  at
    something approaching 2.45pm.  At or about 5pm the hearing was ended on
    the  understanding  that  Judge  James  would  accept  further  written
    submissions.  The Appellant's further written submission were  made  by
    way of letter  dated  25  September  2017.   The  written  submissions,
    amongst other things, refer to the substance of  the  matters  set  out
    above with regard  to  the  approach  taken  to  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's brothers-in-law.  Reference is made to a discussion between
    the Judge and the representative as  to  why  the  brothers-in-law  had
    attended the hearing as witnesses rather than the Appellant's  sisters.
    The thrust of the matter - as set  out  in  the  written  submission  -
    appears to be that the Judge determined  that  in  circumstances  where
    some of the evidence of  the  propose  witnesses  was  in  reality  the
    evidence of their wives (the Appellant's sisters), it should have  been
    the case that the wives provided witness statements and/or attended the
    appeal hearing, rather than that their husbands attend to 'report' upon
    their evidence. It was in  this  context  that  the  Judge  purportedly
    identified that of the four witnesses it was only UG who had  something
    particular to say that was unique to him and of which he was  a  direct
    witness - so might properly be a matter upon which he should give  oral
    evidence. The Judge, it is said, declined to hear the evidence  of  the
    other three witnesses.


17.  Support  for  the  circumstance  being  as  described  in  the  written
    submission is provided by way of Mr Wilding's acknowledgment  based  on
    the record of proceedings of the Presenting Officer.


18.  In the circumstances Mr Wilding accepts that it is  plainly  wrong  for
    the Judge to state that "not all of these persons were present  at  the
    hearing to give evidence" (paragraph 33).


19.  This error also means that the Judge in  effect  had  marginalised,  or
    would appear to have marginalised, the evidence of three  witnesses  on
    the basis that their statements were unsigned and undated - even though
    they had attended court willing to support those statements in  person.
    Moreover, no doubt - as is quite common in this  jurisdiction  -   they
    would have signed and dated the witness statements upon  adopting  them
    in oral evidence before the Tribunal.


20.  Having had an opportunity to peruse the Judge's record  of  proceedings
    it seems that it is possible to infer the basis upon which Judge  James
    came to make this particular error.  In the record of proceedings,  the
    Judge clearly indicates that there was  a  discussion  with  the  legal
    representatives at the outset in respect of the witnesses and what they
    might have to say.  In this regard she has noted  that  three  of  them
    were not present and had spoken to their wives about the Appellant's  -
    and their - father being shot in the foot.  It seems to  me  absolutely
    clear that what the Judge meant at the time that she made the  note  in
    the record of proceedings was that the witnesses were  not  present  at
    the event to which they were bearing witness.  As is  observed  in  the
    grounds of challenge, the decision of Judge James appears to have  been
    written up approximately ten weeks after the  hearing.  The  reasonable
    inference is  that  when  the  Judge  came  to  review  the  record  of
    proceedings she interpreted the reference to  being  'not  present'  as
    meaning not present at the hearing, rather  than  not  present  at  the
    event to which they bore witness.


21.  Be that as it may, it  is  common  ground  that  there  was  a  factual
    misunderstanding on the part of the Judge in her  Decision.   Moreover,
    it means that the Judge has not adequately reasoned in the Decision why
    she  elected  not  to  hear  evidence  from  these  witnesses.  It   is
    essentially on these bases that it is accepted by the  Respondent  that
    it is difficult to resist the argument that there was error on the part
    of the First-tier Tribunal of a nature that was material, and that  the
    decision should be set aside.


22.  I did initially think that perhaps this case ought to  be  retained  in
    the Upper Tribunal on the basis that this was a second hearing  of  the
    Appellant's appeal - but in fact it is the first hearing of the current
    appeal.


23.  I have also given some thought to whether or not this matter should  be
    retained in the Upper Tribunal to explore further the issue  identified
    by the Judge with regard to the  giving  of  evidence  by  husbands  on
    behalf of wives.  The Judge described this as a "Russian doll  approach
    to evidence i.e. he spoke to his brother who is married to  the  sister
    of the Appellant to obtain this information" (paragraph  35).  However,
    having given the matter some further consideration, and  upon  scrutiny
    of the relevant witness statements in this case, I  do  not  think  the
    circumstances here are such as to make this a  suitable  case  for  the
    exploration of such an issue.   For  example,  whilst  in  the  witness
    statements of the Appellant's brothers-in-law reference is made to  the
    Appellant's sisters having  spoken  to  family  in  Bangladesh  on  the
    telephone concerning the shooting, it is also said by one  or  more  of
    the witnesses that he himself then also spoke on the telephone  to  the
    family: to that extent the male witnesses are not merely reporting upon
    what their wives have told them, but are also  giving  evidence  as  to
    their own communications - albeit with the same people  to  whom  their
    wives had spoken, and about the same events.


24.  It may be that the individual witness statements may require some  more
    careful and considered analysis.  In this regard it may  also  be  that
    now that the issue has been  raised  in  this  way  by  reason  of  the
    discussion before Judge James, the observations of Judge James  in  her
    decision and the further discussion briefly before the Upper  Tribunal,
    that the Appellant and his representatives may determine it appropriate
    to also file evidence from the Appellant's sisters, and  also  to  have
    them attend the hearing.  That is a matter for the  Appellant  and  his
    advisers to consider in deciding how best to present his case.


25.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, as a general observation it seems to  me
    that Judge James has touched upon a matter that may  be  of  legitimate
    concern when evaluating evidence in  appeals:  the  appropriateness  of
    having a partner (a wife or a husband) give evidence on behalf  of  the
    other  partner  as  to  what  that  other  partner  has  witnessed,  in
    circumstances where there is no particular or obvious  reason  why  the
    more direct witness cannot give  that  evidence  herself/himself.  Some
    detailed guidance from the Upper Tribunal may yet be necessary  in  due
    course: but as I say, I do not consider the circumstances here  warrant
    retaining the case in the Upper Tribunal for such a purpose.  I  merely
    offer the following observation: whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    wide  powers  of  case  management  (Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014,  rule  4),  and
    powers in respect of the receipt of  evidence  and  the  admission  and
    exclusion of evidence (rule 14) such that  it  could  decline  to  hear
    evidence from an offered witness, or decline to admit part or all of  a
    witness statement, it is likely that in  most  cases  where  a  witness
    purports to give testimony on behalf of another  that  this  should  be
    evaluated as a matter of weight rather than admissibility.


Notice of Decision

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.


27.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal before any Judge other than Judge James or Judge Robinson with
    all issues at large.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represent a corrected transcript of ex tempore  reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 8 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

