
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08998/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 October 2018                        | On 25 October 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     FEO
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Witwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. It is appropriate to maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-
    tier Tribunal and I do so but by reference to rule 14(1)  of  the  2008
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.  No person shall disclose the  identity
    of the appellant without consent of the Tribunal.

 2. On 25 April 2018, the appellant was granted permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal against the decision and reasons statement of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal that was issued on  22  March  2018.   Judge
    Hawden-Beal decided the appellant was not a refugee  from  Cameroon  or
    otherwise in need of international protection.

 3. The grounds of appeal raised two interrelated issues.   First,  whether
    Judge Hawden-Beal adequately dealt with the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant would be associate with people  opposed  to  the  Cameroonian
    regime because the father of her child was such a person.  The  grounds
    allege that Judge Hawden-Beal failed to consider the likelihood of  the
    Cameroonian authorities asking questions about the father of her child,
    the father's name appearing  on  the  birth  certificate,  and  thereby
    identifying the appellant's relationship to him.

 4. As I announced at the  hearing,  this  issue  fails  for  two  reasons.
    First, there is no clear evidence that  Ms  Rutherford  canvassed  this
    argument before Judge Hawden-Beal.  The argument does not appear in the
    skeleton argument Ms Rutherford submitted to the First-tier Tribunal or
    in her submissions as recorded at paragraph 22 of  Judge  Hawden-Beal's
    decision and reasons statement.   Ms  Rutherford  said  she  could  not
    recall exactly what she submitted at the hearing but her notes indicate
    that she intended to make submissions on this  issue.   Of  course,  Ms
    Rutherford acknowledges she could not give evidence about what happened
    at the hearing.

 5. Ms Rutherford submitted that, even if the argument had not  been  made,
    it was incumbent on Judge Hawden-Beal to have  regard  to  the  country
    information provided by the appellant.  She  argued  that  the  country
    information revealed that it was reasonably likely the appellant  would
    be questioned about her  identify  and  such  questions  might  include
    questions about the father of her child.  This takes me to  the  second
    reasons why the appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails.  Mr Witwell rightly
    took me to the background country information regarding the  likelihood
    of the appellant being questioned.  The strongest evidence is found  in
    the US Department of State report from 2016.  It describes  how  police
    and gendarmes often extorted bribes at roadblocks and  checkpoints  and
    harassed travellers.  There  were  regular  identification  checks  for
    security purposes.  The evidence did not support the assertion that the
    appellant would face questioning about the paternity of her child.   It
    follows, that the evidence Ms  Rutherford  claims  was  present  before
    Judge Hawden-Beal was not in fact present.

 6. As the grounds are not made out, there is no legal error and  I  uphold
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and I uphold the  decision  of
Judge Hawden-Beal.



Signed                              Date         8 October 2018

         Judge McCarthy
         Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
