
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/08271/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard At Bennett House, Stoke-On-Trent     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th November 2017                      |  On 5th December 2017           |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     V F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms U Miszkiel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Malley, promulgated on 6th June 2017, following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor  House  on  28th  March  2017  and  26th  April  2017.   In  the
    determination, the judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon
    the Respondent Secretary of State subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, and was born  on  18th
    August 1976.  He is of Tamil origin.  He appealed against the  decision
    of the Respondent dated 13th August 2007, refusing his application  for
    asylum and humanitarian assistance.  The appeal was  earlier  heard  by
    Judge Chana and refused on 20th  September  2007.   Subsequent  further
    representations were made, on the basis of medical evidence, which  was
    not previously available, which it fell upon  Judge  O'Malley  to  take
    into account.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he had been transferred to
    the Karuna Group, from where he had escaped, such that he would now  be
    on the Sri Lankan stop list.  He had a very large scar on his left  arm
    as well, which was consistent with injury during combat.   Importantly,
    he had also engaged in illegal departure, which  was  "a  further  risk
    factor" that would render his return back to Sri Lanka  untenable  (see
    paragraphs 34 to 37).

 4. Before Judge O'Malley, there was  also  reliance  placed  upon  the  UN
    Special Rapporteur's report, which identified  that  anyone  deemed  to
    have any link with the LTTE, is now at risk  of  persecution  and  that
    those  detained  in  those  circumstances  are  at  risk  of  degrading
    treatment (see paragraphs 38 to 39).

The Judge's Findings

 5. In a detailed and extensive  determination  (of  108  paragraphs),  the
    judge found large parts of the Appellant's claim to be  untenable  (see
    paragraphs 64, 67, 68, 69, and 74).  The judge did accept, on the lower
    standard, that the Appellant had been detained and beaten because there
    is  a  Medical  Foundation  Report,  prepared  by  Dr  Jessica  Burton,
    detailing the injuries which were said  to  be  consistent,  or  highly
    consistent with his account of beatings (see paragraph 66).

 6. The judge proceeded to allow the Appellant's appeal, however,  only  on
    Article 8 grounds, observing that, "there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
    Appellant would be detained on return as he left  illegally  and  as  a
    failed asylum seeker" (paragraph 88).  In so stating,  the  judge  drew
    heavily from the UK Government's own COIS Report, which had  referenced
    an article from The Guardian (see the COIS at paragraph 12.2.5),  which
    states that, "typically, asylum seekers who are returned to  Sri  Lanka
    are held in police custody or Negombo Prison".   The  judge  also  drew
    upon the Australian Government's, Department  of  Foreign  Affairs  and
    Trade (DFAT) Report on Sri Lanka, which had also been included  in  the
    UK Government's COIS Report (at paragraph 12.2.7),  which  referred  to
    the prospect of detention and jail, together with fines being  imposed,
    upon those who had left the country illegally.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    allowed the appeal under Article 8 only on the basis that the Appellant
    had left illegally and  would  be  detained  on  return.   The  judge's
    conclusion had an inadequate analysis of the current  country  guidance
    case in GJ [2013] UKUT 319.  There was no general  proposition  in  the
    law that failed asylum seekers are at risk of breach of their Article 8
    rights upon return to Sri Lanka.

 8. On 22nd September 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

 9. On 4th November 2017, a well prepared and detailed Rule 24 response was
    entered by Ms Miszkiel, setting out the position with  respect  to  the
    Appellant's claim,  in  relation  to  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  Thereafter, Ms Miszkiel also submitted  a  helpful
    skeleton argument dated 27th March 2017.

Submissions

10. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Bates,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  stated  that  the  reason  why  this
    determination by Judge O'Malley was  unsustainable,  was  that  he  had
    created a new risk category, over  and  above  those  contained  in  GJ
    [2013] UKUT 319, without showing a sufficient basis for this.

11. First, at paragraph 85 of the determination, the  judge  accepted  that
    the Appellant had  left  Sri  Lanka  illegally,  and  then  made  large
    citations from an article in The Guardian (which  was  drawn  from  the
    COIS Report at paragraphs 12.2.4 and 12.2.5), but which overlooked  the
    fact that the "policy summary" at section 3 of the COIS Report, did not
    contain any risk category for people who had simply engaged in  illegal
    exit, and were now facing return to Sri Lanka.

12. Second, there was nothing in the Appellant's expert report  that  would
    have led to such a conclusion.

13. Third, the most that could be said,  was  that  there  was  a  Guardian
    article, which was reported by the Australian  Government's  Department
    of Foreign Affairs and Trade Report, but this only said that  most  Sri
    Lankan returnees "can be charged" under the  Immigrants  and  Emigrants
    Act 1949, upon arrival in Sri Lanka (see paragraph 12.2.7 of  the  COIS
    Report).  This would not have enabled a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    have gone beyond a country guidance case, and concluded that there  was
    an original risk category.

14. Other evidence in the same section of the COIS Report also did not lend
    legitimacy to such a conclusion because at paragraph 12.2.9, there  was
    simply reference to a written statement submitted by  the  Society  for
    Threatened Peoples,  dated  4th  September  2015,  which  stated  that,
    "returning Tamils from abroad continue being arrested at the  airport".



15. In the same way at paragraph 12.2.10, the Immigration and Refugee Board
    of Canada had reported in February 2015,  that,  "sources  report  that
    individuals  returning  from  abroad  are   particularly   subject   to
    screening".

16. None of this was sufficiently compelling as  to  enable  the  judge  to
    create a new risk category, which had not been so  determined,  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in a country guidance case.

17. Finally, all of this had to be considered in the context that the judge
    had, following an extensive determination, found the  Appellant  to  be
    lacking  in  credibility  in  large  parts  of  his  evidence,   except
    recognising that he had engaged in illegal exit from his country.

18. For her part, Ms  Miszkiel,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    submitted that the Grounds of Appeal from the Secretary  of  State  did
    not allege perversity or irrationality.  All that was  being  said  was
    that there was "insufficient evidence".  Yet,  this  was  difficult  to
    understand, in the light of the fact, that the evidence referred to  by
    the judge was expressly drawn from the COIS Report.

19. If it was there, it had a legitimate basis, and  was  available  for  a
    decision-maker to make what he or she could of it.  It was not relevant
    to a decision before the judge.

20. Secondly, the judge had not just confined himself to  the  report  from
    The Guardian or the DFAT Report.  He had gone on to also state that  he
    would "note the conclusions of the Special Rapporteur at paragraph  9",
    and this was the report of Ben Emmerson, the Special Rapporteur in  Sri
    Lanka (see paragraph 86 of the determination), where the  judge  stated
    that,

         "The committee remains seriously  concerned  at  consistent  report
         from national and un sources, ... indicating that torture is common
         practice carried out in relation to regular criminal investigations
         in a large majority of cases by the CID of the police regardless of
         the suspected offence ....".

21. Third, it was entirely  open  to  Judge  O'Malley  to  distinguish  the
    country guidance case of GJ [2013] UKUT 319  because  since  2014,  the
    Appellant's representatives  had  been  writing  a  series  of  letters
    raising a "fresh claim" in relation to risk factors that infringed upon
    the Appellant.

22. Given that humanitarian protection was at stake, the judge was entitled
    to conclude  as  he  did,  and  not  least  because  he  drew  for  his
    conclusions, from the COIS Report.

23. In reply, Mr Bates submitted that the judge's decision, to  expand  the
    risk categories in relation to this Appellant, was unwarranted  in  the
    light of the "policy summary" at section 3 of the COIS Report.  Illegal
    exit was not a risk factor.

24. Second, the judge had effectively created a "floodgate risk  category",
    by not referring to the particular circumstances of the Appellant,  but
    simply stating that illegal exit in itself would attract a risk of ill-
    treatment, such as to engage Article 3 of the ECHR.

25. Finally, if the judge were intending to so  do,  it  was  necessary  to
    undertake a far more extensive analysis of the evidence,  looking  also
    at evidence to the contrary, before concluding as he did.



Error of Law

26. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the commission of an error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such
    that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are as follows.

27. First, the judge's focus (see paragraph 83) was on "whether there is  a
    real risk that the Appellant will be  detained  on  return".   In  this
    regard, he first referred to The Guardian report (which was drawn  from
    the COIS Report at paragraph 12.2.5), which was  to  the  effect  that,
    "typically, asylum seekers who are returned to Sri Lanka  are  held  in
    police custody or Negombo Prison" (paragraph 85).  There is nothing  in
    this extract that refers to Tamil asylum seekers who  have  exited  Sri
    Lanka illegally.

28.  Second,  the  judge  referred  to  the  conclusions  of  the   Special
    Rapporteur, Ben Emmerson, at paragraph 9 of his  report,  when  he  had
    said that, "the committee remains  seriously  concerned  at  consistent
    reports  ...  indicating  that  torture  is  a  common  practice  ...".
    However, there is again, nothing here that suggests that it is  illegal
    exit from Sri Lanka that attracts a consistent pattern of torture.   In
    fact, what the Special Rapporteur is stated as having referred  to,  is
    torture being a "common practice carried out  in  relation  to  regular
    criminal investigations" which does not  suggest  that  it  relates  to
    detainees who have exited Sri Lanka illegally.

29. Third, and in any event, the judge failed to have regard to the "policy
    summary" at section 3 of the COIS Report, and to explain how this could
    be distinguished, on  the  evidence  before  the  judge  (for  all  its
    ambiguities as described by myself here).  The "policy summary"  states
    at the outset that, "a person being of Tamil  ethnicity  would  not  in
    itself warrant international protection"  (see  paragraph  3.1.2).   It
    does go on to say that, "a person who is known to the authorities, such
    as having their name on a 'stop' or 'watch'  list  or  having  a  court
    order or an outstanding arrest warrant against them, is likely to be at
    risk of ill-treatment whilst in custody ..." (see paragraph 3.1.8).

30. However, the judge did not accept any suggestion that the Appellant was
    on a stop or watch list, or that there was a court order or outstanding
    arrest warrant against him.  So for all  these  reasons,  the  decision
    fell into error.

Re-making the Decision

31. I have re-made the decision on the basis of the findings by the  judge,
    the evidence before him, and the submissions that I have  heard  today.
    Ms Miszkiel, in her able and well measured submissions before  me,  had
    submitted that, should I make a finding of an error of law, this matter
    should be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  for  the  latest
    evidence in the form of the expert report of Dr Jessica Burton from the
    Medical Foundation, to be taken into account, together with  any  other
    necessary evidence.

32. However, having given this due consideration, I am  of  the  view  that
    this would be a separate application before the Secretary of State  for
    a protection claim, but that  as  far  as  this  particular  claim  was
    concerned, Judge O'Malley having found large parts of  the  Appellant's
    evidence to be implausible, erred in coming to the conclusion that  the
    Appellant  deserved  to  succeed  simply  on  the  basis  that  he  had
    participated in illegal exit.

33. As a matter of law, there is no basis for such a conclusion, reached in
    a general sense, that is applicable to  all  such  cases,  without  any
    particular distinguishing feature.  That being the  case,  this  appeal
    falls to be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    dismissed.

35. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 1st December 2017




