
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08100/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 May 2019                       |On 26 June 2019                      |
|Judgment given ex tempore            |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     f b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Uddin, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born in 1980.  She came to  the  UK
    on 12 August 2016 by air and claimed asylum on the same day.  Prior  to
    her arrival she had made unsuccessful applications for a visit visa.

 2. A decision was made by the respondent on 4 February 2017 to refuse  her
    protection and human rights claim. Her  appeal  against  that  decision
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha on 20 February 2019.

    Judge Sangha's decision

 3. Summarising Judge Sangha's decision, he concluded  that  the  appellant
    had not given a credible account of  having  converted  from  Islam  to
    Christianity.  He  made  that  assessment  for  a  number  of  reasons,
    including but not exhaustively, what she  had  said  in  her  screening
    interview,  namely  that   her   religion   was   Islam;   because   of
    inconsistencies in her account otherwise and what could  be  summarised
    as implausibilities in her account.

 4. Thus, he referred to her having said in the screening interview  on  12
    August 2016 at question 1.12 that her religion  was  Shia  Islam.   The
    inconsistency was that she claimed to have  converted  to  Christianity
    some four months before she arrived in the UK at the age of 35.  If she
    had converted to Christianity, Judge Sangha's view was that  she  would
    not have said on screening that she was  a  Muslim.   Her  explanations
    were that she was threatened and told that she would  be  kept  in  the
    screening interview area or in detention, as it were, if  she  did  not
    complete the screening interview.  She also explained that she was  not
    feeling well during the screening interview.  The judge rejected  those
    explanations because, amongst other things, she said that she was  fine
    when asked whether she was feeling unwell and whether she was ready  to
    be interviewed.  There were other reasons given for the judge's adverse
    view of what the appellant had said in  the  screening  interview,  for
    example in relation to her not having had contact with her husband  for
    the last 10 years.

 5. Judge Sangha also concluded that the appellant's explanations  for  why
    she converted to Christianity were  inconsistent  with  what  is  known
    about the Christian religion, and he gave specific  examples.   One  of
    the  reasons  that  the  appellant  gave  for  wanting  to  convert  to
    Christianity was in terms of what she said was the  inequality  of  men
    and women in Islam, for example in relation to divorce  and  how  women
    could not talk to God when menstruating. Judge  Sangha  said  that  the
    appellant's answers in that  respect  were  not  satisfactory  and  not
    consistent with background material.  The point  being  made  by  Judge
    Sangha was that the purported reason, or one of them, for converting to
    Christianity, was not in fact borne out by the evidence  and  therefore
    that undermined her credibility as to the reasons for  converting.   He
    also said that she was not able to give any specific detail  about  her
    claimed feelings of emptiness about Islam and feeling that she had been
    misled.  He also referred to what she said about having  been  required
    to learn Arabic.

 6. At [33] Judge Sangha said that her account of how she was introduced to
    Christianity (by a friend named Roya) and converted lacked credibility.
     He found her account in that respect unsatisfactory and her answers in
    relation to Christianity itself did not lend to  her  credibility,  and
    indeed undermined it.  He found that the  appellant  did  provide  some
    consistent answers in the asylum interview in relation to  Christianity
    but a large proportion of her answers were incorrect.  He  referred  to
    specific examples.

 7. He referred at [34] to her having attended a Christian church in Stoke-
    on-Trent and the fact that a letter from the church and photographs had
    been provided. Reverend [JL]'s evidence was that the  appellant  was  a
    genuine Christian convert.   Judge  Sangha  summarised  Reverend  [L]'s
    evidence,  concluding  at  [34]  that  the  evidence  showed  that  the
    appellant had been attending Bible study classes since  September  2016
    which  would  tend  to  suggest  that  she  had  been  learning   about
    Christianity.  He said that he was not surprised  therefore,  that  she
    only displayed such knowledge as she had gained about  Christianity  in
    the asylum interview  commensurate  with  what  she  had  learnt  since
    September 2016.  He referred again to inconsistencies in the interview.



 8. He did not find credible that the appellant failed to share the fact of
    her conversion with her own mother and brother, contrasting  that  with
    her claim that she was able to share that  she  had  been  raped  by  a
    maternal  uncle.   Judge  Sangha  made  a  number  of   other   adverse
    credibility findings in relation to what is said to be the  appellant's
    conversion to  Christianity.   After  having  identified  a  number  of
    features of her account which he said undermined  her  credibility,  at
    the end of [34] he said  this:  "Consequently,  I  do  not  accept  the
    Appellant's claim that she has converted from Islam to Christianity".

 9. He made further adverse credibility findings. It was at [40] that Judge
    Sangha went on to consider the psychiatric report of  Dr  Jethwa  which
    states that the appellant is suffering from depression  and  PTSD.   Dr
    Jethwa's report, which Judge Sangha quoted at this point,  states  that
    those conditions were likely  to  impair  the  appellant's  ability  to
    concentrate and focus on the matter in  hand  and  that  her  PTSD  may
    prevent her from providing complete testimony due to the impact of  re-
    traumatisation on her mental state.  The report goes on to  state  that
    it was  important  for  the  Tribunal  to  be  aware  that  absence  of
    information or inconsistencies in her history could be related  to  the
    trauma of the events that she outlines rather than any such gaps  being
    due to her fabricating any information.  Dr  Jethwa  expressed  concern
    about the re-traumatising effects of giving  evidence  about  her  past
    experiences of being raped.   It  is  also  said  in  the  report  that
    questioning about those matters  could  lead  to  a  worsening  of  the
    appellant's mental  state  and  increase  her  risk  of  self-harm  and
    suicide.

10. At [40] Judge Sangha said that he  had  considerable  doubts  about  Dr
    Jethwa's opinion in view of the fact that the  appellant  was  able  to
    conduct a screening interview on  12  August  2016  and  a  substantive
    asylum interview on 23 January 2017 during which she was given a number
    of breaks and plenty of time in which to give her  account  of  events.
    He also noted that she was able to give a very detailed account to  her
    solicitors who had submitted further  representations  on  her  behalf.
    Judge Sangha further noted that the appellant had  not  mentioned  that
    she was unable to give her account of events either at the screening or
    substantive asylum interview stages.

11. He concluded that "considering all the  evidence...in  the  round"  the
    appellant would not have had "any difficulty" in giving oral  evidence.
    Thus, her evidence could not be tested by cross-examination.

12. Judge Sangha went on to say that for all the same reasons he found that
    the appellant's claim that she has converted from Islam to Christianity
    and  that  she  is  wanted  by  the  Iranian  authorities  was  lacking
    credibility and plausibility and "I therefore reject  it  even  on  the
    lower asylum standard."

13. It was at  this  point  that  Judge  Sangha  then  turned  to  make  an
    assessment of the evidence of the Reverend [L], rejecting  his  opinion
    that the appellant is a genuine Christian convert.   At  [43]  he  said
    that although he had attended to give evidence and he believed that the
    appellant was a genuine Christian convert, that opinion  was  based  on
    his own observation of her whilst she had been attending his church and
    the limited time spent with her.  He observed that Reverend [L] was not
    privy to all the  evidence  that  he  had  before  him.  He  said  that
    considering the evidence in the round he was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had genuinely converted from Islam to Christianity.

14. Reference was then made to what  were  said  to  be  discrepancies  and
    inconsistencies in the appellant's written  evidence  and  he  repeated
    what he found incredible in terms of the screening  interview  and  her
    having said that she was a Shia Muslim.

15. Judge Sangha concluded  that  even  if  the  appellant  was  a  genuine
    Christian convert, in the light of the country guidance decision in  SZ
    and JM (Christians, FS  confirmed)  Iran  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00082  the
    appellant would not be at risk on return.   He  also  referred  to  the
    appellant not having been stopped at  the  airport  when  she  and  her
    daughter came to the UK.  He said that he  did  not  believe  that  the
    Iranian authorities have become aware of her  following  a  raid  on  a
    house church and her house, and concluded that in any event there would
    be no reason why she could not relocate.

16. There was then an assessment of Article 8.

    The Grounds and Submissions

17. The grounds raise a number of points.  Amongst them is  the  contention
    in Ground 1 that the judge failed to have regard to a decision  of  the
    Inner House of the Court of Session, TF and MA v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2018] CSIH 58.  It is argued that  Judge  Sangha's
    decision in terms of its assessment of the evidence of Reverend [L] was
    inconsistent with the guidance given in that case.

18.  Ground 2 asserts that the appellant's evidence should have been put in
    the context of the psychiatric evidence which is quoted in the grounds.
    TF and  MA  is  again  relied  on  in  relation  to  this  point,  more
    particularly in terms of the rejection of an account, merely because an
    appellant has  told  lies.  The  grounds  argue  that  the  psychiatric
    evidence provided an alternative and satisfactory  explanation  for  at
    least some of the inconsistencies that the judge  found.   It  is  also
    asserted in the grounds that Judge Sangha was not entitled to  make  an
    adverse inference from the appellant's decision not to give evidence.

19. Next is it is said that the judge failed to have regard  to  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 in terms of the appellant being
    a vulnerable witness.  Lastly, it is contended in Ground 3  that  Judge
    Sangha's  finding  on  risk  on  return  is  contrary  to  the  country
    background evidence and fails to take  into  account  what  is  in  the
    Country Policy and Information Note at section 5 dated March 2015 about
    abuse suffered by Muslims who have converted to Christianity,  and  the
    risks that such individuals face in terms  of  harassment,  arrest  and
    detention.

20. I heard submissions ably advanced by both  parties.   I  can  summarise
    them in this way.  Mr Uddin relied on the grounds.   He  accepted  that
    the decision in TF and MA was not put  before  Judge  Sangha,  although
    perhaps it is more accurate to say that Mr Uddin could not say that  it
    was.  He ultimately accepted  that  that  decision  was  of  persuasive
    authority only although it was initially suggested that the  judge  was
    bound by it. Mr Uddin also advanced the argument  that  Judge  Sangha's
    assessment of credibility was  made  before  taking  into  account  the
    evidence of the consultant psychiatrist and the  evidence  of  Reverend
    [L].

21. Ms Jones for her  part  sought  to  persuade  me  that  Judge  Sangha's
    decision had been made considering the  evidence  in  the  round.   She
    relied on JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145  (IAC)
    as to the proper approach in the assessment of medical reports, arguing
    that it was clear that  Judge  Sangha  was  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusions that he did.

    Assessment

22. As I indicated to the parties,  I  am  satisfied  that  Judge  Sangha's
    decision involves an error of law requiring it to be set aside.

23. I do not accept that there is any error of law in terms of  his  having
    failed to consider the decision in TF  and  MA.   It  is  not  apparent
    firstly that that decision was drawn to his  attention.   Secondly,  he
    was not in any event bound by it, although it is a decision which would
    have  been  of  high  persuasive  authority.  That  however,  makes   a
    significant difference in terms of the fact that he was not referred to
    it and thus the extent to which he could have been expected to take  it
    into account.

24. I do however, consider that Judge  Sangha's  assessment  was  not  made
    holistically.  More specifically, it  is  plain  that  he  emphatically
    rejected the credibility of the appellant's claim before assessing  the
    expert evidence and the evidence of Reverend [L]. Thus, for example  at
    [34] Judge Sangha said that he did not  accept  the  appellant's  claim
    that she had converted from Islam to Christianity.  It  was  not  until
    three pages further on in his decision that he went on to consider  the
    psychiatric evidence.

25. Now it may be that Judge Sangha had valid observations  to  make  about
    the psychiatric evidence, but  it  has  long  been  recognised  that  a
    decision needs to be made in the context of the  evidence  overall.  It
    was  only  after  rejecting  the  appellant's  credibility   that   the
    psychiatric evidence was considered, at [40].  This is contrary to  the
    proper approach to the assessment of evidence as explained in Mibanga v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

26. In addition, but also on its own  a  sufficient  basis  from  which  to
    conclude that there was an error of law in the judge's decision, is the
    fact that there was no appraisal of the evidence of Reverend [L] within
    the assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility.   The  appraisal  of
    Reverend [L]'s evidence from  [41]  only  came  after  the  appellant's
    credibility had been rejected.

27. Again, it may be that Judge Sangha would have  been  entitled  to  take
    into account the extent to which he  was  in  a  better  position  than
    Reverend  [L]  to  assess  the  evidence  of  the  genuineness  of  the
    appellant's conversion to Christianity because he had  evidence  before
    him which Reverend [L] did not. That however, seems to me to be  beside
    the point.  That evidence needed to be appraised in the context of  the
    evidence overall, and thus before there was an  emphatic  rejection  of
    the credibility of the appellant's account.  That is quite  apart  from
    the argument advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant  in  terms  of  the
    factual inaccuracy in the assessment of the import  of  Reverend  [L]'s
    evidence in terms of the amount of time that he had had to  assess  the
    appellant's Christian beliefs.

28. Whilst  it  is  true  to  say  that  Judge  Sangha's  decision  reveals
    considerable industry in its assessment of the appellant's claim, it is
    nevertheless an assessment that is flawed for the reasons I have given.
     The error of law being material, his decision is to be set aside.

29. Having canvassed with the parties the appropriate course in  the  event
    that I decided that the decision was to be set aside, I  conclude  that
    it is necessary for  the  appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing  before  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sangha, with no findings of fact preserved.   In  coming
    to that conclusion I have had regard to the Senior President's Practice
    Statement at paragraph 7.2 in the light of  the  extent  of  the  fact-
    finding  exercise  that  needs  to  be  undertaken  in  terms  of   the
    appellant's credibility.

    Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision is set aside and the appeal remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo before a judge other than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha, with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 24/06/19
