
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
pa/08929/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 November 2018                      |On 08 March 2019                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    I.F.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms I Sriharan of Counsel instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Veloso promulgated on 23 May  2018  dismissing  the  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated 30 August 2017, refusing asylum in the
    United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  3  March  1992.   He
    claims to have left Afghanistan on 6 October 2016, and to have  arrived
    in the UK on 29 November 2016.  On 1 March 2017 the  Appellant  claimed
    asylum.


3.   The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim is set  out  in  the  various
    documents on file and in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
    The following is a summary. The Appellant has  claimed  that  an  older
    brother who was an officer in the national army  was  executed  by  the
    Taliban who identified  him  from  his  ID  card  when  a  bus  he  was
    travelling on was stopped and searched. He claims that another  brother
    was a police officer who arrested a Taliban commander; some days  later
    his brother received a threatening letter  delivered  to  the  family's
    home demanding the release of the  commander.  Then,  on  28  September
    2016, the family home was attacked  by  the  Taliban;  his  father  and
    brother were shot and killed; the Appellant managed to escape, went  to
    his mother and younger siblings who were elsewhere attending a wedding,
    and then together travelled to his grandmother's house.  The  Appellant
    claims that on the following day he was  informed  by  neighbours  that
    they had overheard a Taliban member speaking about the  Appellant;  the
    Appellant thereafter made arrangements to flee the country,  leaving  a
    few days later.


4.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused for reasons set  out
    in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 30 August 2017.


5.   The Appellant appealed to the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.


6.   It was a feature of the Appellant's appeal  hearing  that  although  he
    attended the hearing centre, he did not enter  the  hearing  room.  His
    counsel communicated to the First-tier Tribunal Judge that it  was  not
    intended to call the Appellant in any event given  the  contents  of  a
    psychiatric report relied  upon;  it  was  the  Appellant's  preference
    because of anxiety to remain outside the hearing  room.  Oral  evidence
    was received from the  Appellant's  brother-in-law.  (See  Decision  at
    paragraphs 7 and 8.) (For completeness I note that Ms Sriharan told  me
    that the Appellant also attended Field House  but  similarly  preferred
    not to enter the hearing room.)


7.   The appeal was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  the  'Decision  and
    Reasons' of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Veloso  promulgated  on  23  May
    2018.


8.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   This
    was refused in the first instance by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert
    on 18 June 2018, but  subsequently  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chalkley on 15 October 2018.


9.   The Grounds of Appeal are pleaded  under  four  headings:  'Failure  to
    properly engage with the Expert Evidence' - which in context refers  to
    a report by a consultant psychiatrist; 'Failure to properly engage with
    the evidence'; Failure to properly engage with case law: AS (Safety  of
    Kabul) Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00118  (IAC)';  and  'Failure  to
    properly engage with case law: Re J (J v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  629  and  Y  &  Anor  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362'.


10.  In my judgement there is no independent substance or merit  in  respect
    of the latter three grounds. I note the following:

         (i) 'Failure to properly engage with the evidence'. In my judgement
         this Ground as drafted reads as an attempt to reargue  the  appeal,
         and in substance constitutes no more than a disagreement  with  the
         outcome. For example, it is submitted that the Judge gave no reason
         for  a  list  of  adverse  conclusions  "apart  from  the  list  of
         peripheral inconsistencies on the part  of  the  Appellant  at  the
         substantive interview", and it  is  argued  that  a  more  detailed
         analysis of the Appellant's case  was  required.  Inherent  in  the
         ground of challenge is a  recognition  that  the  Judge  did  offer
         reasons for her  evaluation  of  the  Appellant's  account.  In  my
         judgement the Ground disputes the weight attached by the  Judge  to
         identified adverse aspects of the  Appellant's  narrative  account.
         The pleading does not articulate an error of law. Moreover,  it  is
         to be noted in context that the Judge's  adverse  conclusions  were
         informed by considerations that went beyond  the  contents  of  the
         Appellant's asylum interview, taking into account, for example, the
         various items of supporting evidence that  had  been  submitted  in
         support of the appeal, and their provenance.

         (ii) 'Failure to properly engage with case  law:  AS'.  The  Ground
         pleads AS in the context  of  the  availability  of  healthcare  in
         Afghanistan. It is noted that the Judge quoted paragraphs 140, 142,
         and 143 of  AS  at  paragraph  54  of  the  Decision,  but  omitted
         paragraph 141. It is pleaded "that the omission of  this  paragraph
         is a serious  and  erroneous  one".  I  disagree.  The  Appellant's
         medical concerns related  to  mental  health  only;  there  was  no
         suggestion of any physical ill-health. In context  it  seems  clear
         that the Judge quoted  paragraph  140  of  AS  as  an  introductory
         paragraph, and paragraphs 142 and 143 as containing  passages  that
         expressly related to  mental  health.  The  omitted  paragraph  141
         relates to healthcare in general terms, and says  nothing  specific
         about mental health. There is nothing of substance in paragraph 141
         that is not covered by the contents of paragraphs 142 and 143.  The
         omission is not remotely material to the facts of the instant case.


         (iii) I note that as an additional point it is referenced  in  this
         Ground that the Appellant's potential access to healthcare required
         to be considered in the context of the family business being "fruit
         selling". Inherent in this is the suggestion that those involved in
         fruit selling are not likely to have significant disposable income.
         I do not accept this premise without more. It seems to me that  the
         business of fruit selling inevitably encompasses a wide spectrum  -
         at one end an individual selling small quantities  in  the  street,
         and at the other end  an  international  trading  company.  If  the
         Appellant wished to make good an argument that healthcare  was  not
         affordable something more would have been required by way of detail
         as to the means of the family members whom the  Judge  found  could
         provide a support network in the event of return to Afghanistan.

         (iv) 'Failure to properly engage with  case  law:  Re  J  etc'.  Ms
         Sriharan acknowledged that this Ground was  essentially  linked  to
         the first Ground in respect of psychiatric evidence. Indeed it  was
         expressly  pleaded  in  the  written  Ground   that   the   Judge's
         "disregarding" of the consultant psychiatrist's report  meant  that
         she "has also disregarded and failed to consider the  evidence  and
         apply it" in relation to guidance and principles to be derived from
         the case law on suicidal ideation and the increased risk of suicide
         upon enforced return. It may be seen  then,  that  this  Ground  is
         essentially contingent upon the first Ground and has, as  it  were,
         no independent life.


         (v) For completeness I nonetheless observe that it seems to me that
         there  is  no  substance  in  the   submission   that   the   Judge
         'disregarded' the consultant psychiatrist's evidence. As  shall  be
         seen below, the Judge had regard to it - but determined that little
         weight could be attached to it 'in the round' (e.g.  see  paragraph
         41). Moreover, it is clear that the Judge was  alert  to  the  case
         being advanced in respect of a medical claim under  Article  3  and
         Article 8 of the ECHR - she set out the Appellant's submissions  on
         this point at paragraph 15 and sought to  address  them  under  the
         heading 'Article 3 ECHR in connection with mental health problems'.
         Further,  irrespective  of  any  other  criticisms  that  might  be
         levelled  at  the  Judge's  approach  to  the  expertise   of   the
         consultant, and the  quality  of  his  report,  the  Judge  clearly
         identified at paragraph 53 of the Decision that the report did  not
         appear to take as a premise the availability of  a  family  support
         network in Afghanistan, over and above the absent indication of any
         relevant expertise with  regard  to  the  availability  of  medical
         treatment in Afghanistan.


11.  Accordingly, in my judgement, the only Ground that raises  anything  of
    arguable substance is Ground 1 - 'Failure to properly engage  with  the
    Expert Evidence'. However, even here I am ultimately not persuaded that
    the Appellant has demonstrated that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  fell
    into error of law in her approach to this aspect of the appeal.


12.  In support of his appeal the Appellant  relied  in  part  upon  medical
    evidence  contained  in  the  Appellant's  bundle.  This  comprised   a
    psychiatric report dated 1 May 2018 prepared by Dr Raj  Persaud  (pages
    60-66), an extract (being page 1 of 6) from the Appellant's GP  records
    (page 67) and two letters from psychologists at the  NHS  Psychological
    Therapies Centre (Waltham Forest) dated 20 July 2017 and 4 October 2017
    (pages 68-70). As is apparent from the  Appellant's  Skeleton  Argument
    before the First-tier Tribunal, it was argued that  any  evaluation  of
    the Appellant's narrative should take account of his mental  health  as
    part of a holistic assessment  of  credibility  (Skeleton  Argument  at
    paragraphs 6-11). Reliance was also placed on the medical  evidence  in
    the context of Articles 3  and  8  irrespective  of  any  risk  to  the
    Appellant of persecution (Skeleton Argument at paragraphs 28 et seq.).


13.  It is clear that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  all  such
    evidence, and did so  in  some  detail:  the  GP  printout  extract  is
    analysed at paragraphs  34  and  35;  the  psychologists'  letters  are
    analysed at paragraphs 36 and 37; Dr Persaud's report is considered  at
    paragraphs 35, 38-41, and again at paragraph 53.  After  consideration,
    the Judge indicated that she gave "little weight in the  round"  to  Dr
    Persaud's evidence. (She  similarly  indicated  that  she  gave  little
    weight to the letters from the Psychological Therapies Centre, although
    no express complaint has been made in the Grounds in this regard.)


14.  The substance of the  criticism  in  the  grounds  in  respect  of  the
    Judge's consideration of the evidence of  Dr  Persaud  is  set  out  at
    paragraphs 3-5 in the following terms:

         "3. It is submitted that the FTTJ has failed  to  have  any  proper
         regard to the A's medical evidence and  improperly  goes  to  great
         lengths to make findings on the psychiatrist and his experience  in
         dealing with Tribunal assessments. Not only are  these  findings  a
         failure to engage with the evidence properly,  but  also  factually
         incorrect.

         4. It is respectfully submitted that the FTTJ failed to  adequately
         and correctly take into account and subsequently attach  weight  to
         the Expert Report of the Consultant Psychiatrist  Dr  Raj  Persaud,
         and the substance of his clinical findings. Instead the learned FTJ
         had at the same time considered  irrelevant  matters  such  as  the
         experience of the Consultant Psychiatrist  who  would  be  able  to
         accurately assess this Appellant's mental health not only by virtue
         of his qualifications  but  also  by  the  very  fact  that  he  is
         extremely  well  known  to  this  Tribunal  and   has   significant
         experience in assessing vulnerable Appellants and producing Reports
         on his clinical findings.

         5. It is  respectfully  submitted  that  the  FTJ  has  misdirected
         herself by focusing on how long the examination was [FTD Para  39],
         when the appellant was first prescribed Fluoxetine  [FTD  Para  35]
         and asking  yourself  whether  Dr  Raj  Persaud  has  in  fact  the
         experience to write an expert report [FTD Para 40 and 41],  instead
         of focusing on the 5 page report that he produced for  the  Appeal.
         In doing so she simply finds due to her  questions  regarding  this
         issue have been in her estimation been unanswered, then that little
         weight be attached to this piece of evidence [FTD Para 41].  It  is
         submitted this finding is an irrational one and a material error of
         law."


15.  In context, the Judge's observations in respect of the evidence  of  Dr
    Persaud were in these terms - firstly at  paragraph  35  in  comparison
    with the GP printout, and thereafter at paragraph 38 et seq:

         "35. The GP printout does not provide an indication as to when  the
         appellant was first prescribed Fluoxetine; the printout  refers  to
         2x 20mg prescribed on 23 April 2018, a mere 2 or so weeks prior  to
         the substantive hearing. Dr Persaud's reference  to  the  appellant
         having been prescribed Prozac (aka Fluoxetine) for  well  over  one
         year is not confirmed by the remaining medical  evidence  (at  page
         62)."


         "38. The appellant did not give oral evidence at the hearing on the
         basis of the contents of Dr Persaud's Psychiatric  report  dated  1
         May 2018. Therein, Dr Persaud report incidence of self-harm and the
         fact that the latter's family was so concerned about his  behaviour
         that they did not leave him unsupervised (page  63).  There  is  no
         confirmation  of  incidents  of  self-harm  in  the  GP   printout,
         notwithstanding the fact that it was printed recently, on 25  April
         2018. This is furthermore at  odds  with  the  appellant's  therapy
         sessions coming to an end in February 2018.  Dr  Persaud  does  not
         mention an interruption of  the  therapy,  instead  refers  to  the
         appellant as 'being seen weekly' (at page 62).



         39. Dr Persaud explained the  following  about  the  appellant  (at
    pages 62 and 64):

             "The client appeared extremely disturbed  in  the  appointment
             was  restless  and  unable  to  communicate  so  most  of  the
             conversation required the brother-in-law who accompanied  with
             another relative to relate  what  was  going  on.  During  the
             appointment the client began eating tissue paper and  appeared
             distracted by what were possibly psychotic experiences such as
             hallucinations which can occur in severe depression or  severe
             PTSD"

             "On assessment today he did appear very 'knocked off'  in  the
             sense of finding it  very  difficult  to  concentrate  on  the
             interview and he looked very distressed. He expressed suicidal
             thoughts and looked hopeless about the future"

         Nothing is known of the length of Dr Persaud's examination  of  the
         appellant or how long he spoke with him and his brother-in-law.



         40. In conclusion, Dr Persaud reports as follows (page 64):

             "My conclusions are that this client continues to suffer  from
             serious psychiatric disorder, including Major Depression"

         Dr Persaud does not provide any details about his expertise  in  or
         experience of preparing Psychiatric reports: whilst  he  lists  his
         various qualifications, nothing  is  known  of  his  experience  in
         diagnosing persons with depression and PTSD, the number of  reports
         he has written and whether he has ever given evidence to a Tribunal
         or a Court as an expert witness.


         41. For the reasons detailed above, I give Dr Persaud's Psychiatric
         and the Psychological Therapies Centre little correspondence little
         weight in the round. No details have  been  provided  as  to  their
         author's qualifications and experience in  diagnosing  such  mental
         health problems. Dr Persaud's report of the appellant  having  made
         self-harm attempts are not confirmed by the other medical evidence,
         including the GP printout. At substantive interview, the  appellant
         confirmed that he had felt  suicidal  during  and  because  of  his
         journey to the United Kingdom, which he defined as 'with hardship'.
         He had not experienced these thoughts since being in this  country.
         Whilst in his witness  statement,  he  stated  that  he  felt  like
         killing himself (page 58 of the Bundle), this has not been recorded
         in the GP printout or any of the  letters  from  the  Psychological
         Therapies Centre. His medication is limited to Fluoxetine 40mg.  He
         is not on any anti-psychotic medication and there is no mention  of
         any hospitalisation."


16.  Further, in the context of return to Afghanistan the  Judge  notes  the
    following at paragraph 53:

         "In his report, Dr Persaud  stated  as  follows  (page  64  of  the
    bundle):

             "... I don't think that he would  survive  being  returned  to
             Afghanistan because of the  mental  problems  and  his  health
             would deteriorate dramatically, particularly if he is returned
             without the support of people who are aware of just how unwell
             he is ...

             I don't think that he is liable to receive the correct medical
             treatment that he is likely to require in Afghanistan and this
             includes proper counselling  and  therapy  and  antidepressant
             medication prescription and monitoring"

         There is no indication from his conclusions  that  Dr  Persaud  has
         taken into account  the  presence  of  the  appellant's  family  in
         Afghanistan, namely his mother, uncle and his wife and family,  who
         would obviously be aware  of  his  state  of  health.  He  has  not
         provided any indication of his knowledge, expert or  otherwise,  on
         the situation in Afghanistan with regards to  the  availability  of
         medical treatment."


17.  I do not accept that the Judge is to be  criticised  in  general  terms
    for not having had regard to the evidence or Dr  Persaud,  or  for  not
    having made findings on it: the Judge plainly considered the  evidence,
    and made a finding that  little  weight  was  to  be  attached  to  the
    evidence. Nor do I accept that  the  Judge  is  to  be  criticised  for
    observing that there was no indication on the face of the report as  to
    how long the examination took: the Judge is factually correct that  the
    report is silent on the length of examination, and therefore it is  not
    discernible to what extent each of the Appellant and his brother-in-law
    engaged with the psychiatrist; the length of any assessment is  plainly
    a relevant factor  in  considering  the  quality  of  that  assessment.
    Moreover, the failure to note such a matter on the face of  the  report
    is a feature that detracts from its thoroughness.


18.  I do not accept that the Judge's indisputable  observation  that  there
    was a tension between the reference by  Dr  Persaud  to  the  Appellant
    having been prescribed fluoxetine for well over a year by May 2018, and
    the other available medical evidence on file, is to be characterised as
    a 'misdirection', as is pleaded at paragraph 5 of the Grounds. In  this
    context not only is it not discernible from the GP  record  that  there
    was any such prescription prior to April 2018, the  Appellant  did  not
    even receive a diagnosis - and then only of low mood  -  until  October
    2017 when he was referred to the  community  mental  health  team.  The
    letters from  the  psychologists  whilst  summarising  the  Appellant's
    circumstances, symptoms, and therapy, do not mention any medication  at
    all.


19.  In a similar way it seems to me that it was  entirely  appropriate  for
    the Judge to identify at paragraph 38 that there was a tension  between
    the incidents of self-harm referenced in Dr Persaud's  report  and  the
    absence  of  any  such  references  in  the  other  medical  documents.
    Necessarily this raised issues either as to  the  thoroughness  of  the
    report, or the accuracy of what was  reported  to  Dr  Persaud  at  the
    assessment. It seems to me that this is a matter that  casts  doubt  on
    the reliability of the report even if it does not in itself cast  doubt
    on the expertise of Dr Persaud. Similarly, Dr Persaud  seemingly  being
    unaware that the Appellant's therapy  had  stopped  is  a  matter  that
    detracts from the value of the report, even if it does  not  inevitably
    detract from the expertise of Dr Persaud.


20.  Indeed, it does seem to me that the  focus  of  the  challenge  assumes
    that because the Judge concluded that little weight was to be  attached
    to Dr Persaud's report she was inevitably doing so because she attached
    little weight to his expertise. However,  in  circumstances  where  the
    factual content of a report is  not  readily  reconcilable  with  other
    supporting evidence, a decision-maker may yet conclude that the  report
    is not reliable without necessarily questioning the  expertise  of  the
    author.


21.  Be that as it may, Ms  Everett,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  very
    fairly acknowledged that she had some reservations  about  the  Judge's
    observations in respect of Dr Persaud. She accepted that  he  was  duly
    qualified and presently a practising psychiatrist, and that as much was
    stated on the face of the report. However, she did not accept that  the
    unnecessary observations at paragraph 40 in respect of the  absence  of
    details about expertise or experience in preparing reports, and whether
    he has ever given evidence to  a  tribunal  or  Court  were  ultimately
    material.


22.   I  also  acknowledge  that  I  was   initially   troubled   by   these
    observations. Indeed, they seem 'at odds' with what is otherwise a full
    and careful evaluation of the evidence by the Judge. However, I  accept
    Ms Everett's  submission  to  the  effect  that  ultimately  the  Judge
    declined to attach significant weight to the report of Dr  Persaud  not
    because of a lack of qualification on his part but because  there  were
    contradictions in the factual matrix such that the  foundation  of  the
    report was not reliable.


23.  Indeed Ms Everett highlighted  further  aspects  of  the  report  which
    suggested that its author had not been fully apprised  of  the  factual
    matrix - irrespective of whether  that  be  by  reason  of  a  lack  of
    thoroughness on his part, or not having been  provided  with  full  and
    adequate  information.  For  example  the  report  comments  that   the
    Appellant "has developed psychiatric disorder in the form of depression
    and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder", before  immediately  going  on  to
    state that the mental health impact is confirmed in particular  by  the
    letters from the psychologists. However,  whilst  the  first  of  those
    letters refers to the Appellant  having  initially  been  placed  on  a
    waiting list for therapy with  a  "working  formulation  of  a  Complex
    Bereavement /sub-clinical PTSD", the letter (as identified by the Judge
    at paragraph 36) does not  go  on  to  diagnose  either  full  PTSD  or
    depression. In this context it is curious that Dr Persaud expresses  an
    opinion as to the diagnoses of the  Appellant's  GP  and  local  mental
    health services, rather than identifying what diagnosis they  had  made
    as a matter of fact: "... diagnosed by myself and in my opinion his  GP
    and local mental health services...". In my judgement the fact that the
    author of the report expresses an opinion as to  what  diagnosis  might
    have been made rather  than  identifying  as  a  matter  of  fact  what
    diagnosis had been  made  is  unorthodox  and  undermines  the  overall
    reliability of the report. Moreover the opinion  expressed  as  to  the
    diagnosis  is  at  odds  with   the   diagnosis   identified   in   the
    psychologists' letters - which are the only other source of a diagnosis
    available to the Tribunal, and in the absence  of  any  other  evidence
    presumably to Dr Persaud. Whilst, of course, it would be  open  to  any
    healthcare  professional  to  disagree  with  the  opinion  of  another
    healthcare professional it seems to me that in the context of preparing
    an expert report it would be necessary to acknowledge the fact of  such
    a disagreement, and explain the basis of the difference in opinion.


24.  It is also to be noted that in expressing an opinion as to the risk  to
    the Appellant's mental health if returned  to  Afghanistan  Dr  Persaud
    comments "Given past suicide attempts he is likely to  make  a  suicide
    attempt...". However nothing in the other medical evidence, or  in  the
    report of Dr  Persaud,  identifies  any  previous  suicide  attempt  or
    attempts.  Necessarily  this  significantly  undermines   the   opinion
    expressed, and the overall reliability of the report.


25.  Further to the above and in any event, I can identify  nothing  in  the
    psychiatrist's report that expressly seeks to address  or  explain  the
    discrepancies  in  the  Appellant's  narrative  account  presented   at
    interview. Indeed it is not clear that Dr  Persaud  was  instructed  to
    express an opinion in this regard. To that extent, whatever else  might
    be  made  of  the  report,  it  does  not  assist  in  reconciling  the
    discrepancies  that  were  considered  damaging  to   the   Appellant's
    narrative account of events in Afghanistan.


26.  Accordingly, notwithstanding any reservation in respect of the  Judge's
    observations  as  to  the  lack  of  information  as  to  Dr  Persaud's
    familiarity with preparing reports for legal  proceedings,  I  find  no
    basis for impugning the Judge's overall conclusion that  little  weight
    was to be attached to the report  in  the  round  when  evaluating  the
    Appellant's narrative account.


27.  Moreover I accept that the  Judge  was  correct  to  identify  that  Dr
    Persaud had not professed any expertise in relation  to  healthcare  in
    Afghanistan, and did not obviously take into account  the  availability
    of family support in Afghanistan in the event of return.   The  Judge's
    two observations at paragraph 53 - that Dr Persaud does  not  give  any
    indication that he has taken into account the  presence  of  family  in
    Afghanistan, and more particularly "has not provided any indication  of
    his knowledge, expert or otherwise, on  the  situation  in  Afghanistan
    with regards to the availability of medical  treatment"  -  are  in  my
    judgement unimpugnable. Indeed I do  not  understand  them  to  be  the
    subject of express challenge before the Upper  Tribunal.  Moreover  the
    opinion as to risk on return is manifestly further  undermined  by  its
    significant  reliance  upon   supposed   past   suicide   attempts   in
    circumstances where no such past suicide attempts have been  identified
    in any of the materials.


Notice of Decision

28.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    therefore stands.


29.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 6 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
