
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08069/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21st February 2019                  |On 15th March 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  Avan [M]
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Laura Gardner (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Howells (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    C H O'Rourke, promulgated on 30th July 2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Columbus House in Newport on 26th July 2018.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq, a female, and was born on 3rd April
    1988.  She has a husband and two children in the UK who are all British
    citizens and are all resident in this country.   She  appealed  against
    the decision of the Respondent refusing her  claim  for  asylum,  being
    dated 18th June 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  due  to  her  marital
    situation, and coming from the  Kurdish  region,  she  is  at  risk  of
    "honour-based" violence and she cannot rely on the  protection  of  the
    authorities there.  She comes from Erbil.  This is in the KRG.  She  is
    a Muslim.  She has a fear of her father.   He  has  mistreated  her  on
    account of the Appellant's relationship with her husband which has  not
    been accepted.  There had been an escalating threat  of  violence  over
    time.  Her father had  decided  that  the  shame  of  divorce,  if  the
    Appellant were to be divorced from her husband, would  be  better  than
    the shame of being abandoned by her husband, who had taken her children
    and gone to the UK without her.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had little hesitation in  rejecting  the  Appellant's  asylum
    claim based upon "honour-based" violence.  Detailed and lengthy reasons
    were given for this (see paragraph 23).  In short, the judge  concluded
    that the Appellant's husband had returned to the  UK  with  both  their
    children, despite the younger child being only about 11 months  old  at
    the time.  He had done so rather than leave  the  children  with  their
    mother, the Appellant, and  this  indicated  that  there  was  a  "pre-
    arranged plan for the Appellant to join them in the UK, not related  to
    any alleged 'escalation' of hostility from her father"  (see  paragraph
    23(v)).

 5. That left the question of the Appellant's appeal under Article  8,  and
    the judge held, that with the asylum  claim  having  fallen  away,  the
    public interest in  favour  of  immigration  control,  as  mandated  by
    Section  117B  could  not  be  overlooked  because  it  must  be  given
    significant weight in the proportionality exercise.  It was a matter of
    choice for the children's parents, whether they should return with  the
    Appellant back to Iraq, or stay with their father in the  UK.   If,  on
    the other hand, the children did not wish to be  separated  from  their
    mother, then "it would be reasonable for them to accompany her  to  the
    KRG" (see paragraph 29(iii)).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

 7. The grounds of application suggest that the judge erred in law  in  two
    vital respects.  First, that under Regulation  16  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016, evidence has to be shown  of
    "strong reasons" as to why the children should be  separated  from  the
    Appellant.  The judge ought to have considered Regulation 16.  The fact
    that the Secretary of State had not made a specific  decision  in  this
    regard was not a reason not to consider it given that this was  a  One-
    Stop Procedure appeal.

 8. Second, that the judge had failed, in relation to Article  8  ECHR,  to
    have regard to the Secretary of State's policy and  the  relevant  case
    law on this issue.  The judge identified Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act.  However, what was overlooked there was that this makes  it  quite
    clear that in the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
    then the public interest "does not require the person's removal"  where
    two conditions are satisfied.  The first of these is that  there  is  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the qualifying child.
     The second is that it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to
    leave the United  Kingdom.   In  this  case,  both  the  children  were
    qualifying  child.   They  were  British  citizens.    Parliament   had
    indicated that the public interest did not require  the  removal  of  a
    person who has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a
    child where it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave.
    Although the judge stated (at paragraph 28(vi)) that the  Secretary  of
    State's representative at the hearing had accepted  that  the  children
    are not required to leave the UK, it did not mean that the judge  could
    then in turn say that it was open to the children to leave  with  their
    Appellant mother if they so  wished.   The  Secretary  of  State's  own
    policy makes it clear that British children cannot be expected to leave
    the UK.

 9. On 4th September 2018 permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that it was unclear why the judge refused to consider  the  Appellant's
    removal might breach the 2016 Regulations.  Furthermore, the judge  had
    not identified "powerful reasons" being needed to justify that  it  was
    reasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK.  The 2016
    Regulations were mentioned in the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   Therefore,  a
    decision should have been made  by  the  judge  in  relation  to  them.
    Moreover, the judge considered and  gave  reasons  why  there  were  no
    "powerful" reasons.  Nevertheless the point was arguable.

10. A Rule 24 response dated 2nd October 2018 makes it clear that the judge
    did not address Regulation 16.  However this did not make any  material
    difference to the  outcome  of  the  decision.   This  is  because  the
    Appellant could not succeed  under  Regulation  16  and  in  particular
    Regulation 16(5).  British citizen children could continue to reside in
    the UK with their father, if the Appellant was removed from the UK.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 21st February 2019, Miss Gardner, submitted
    that  there  were  two  issues  before  this  Tribunal.   First,   that
    Regulation 16 should have been considered.  It is  not  enough  to  say
    that the Appellant would have failed, in any  event,  under  Regulation
    16(5), as maintained in the Rule 24 response, if it is not  even  clear
    that Regulation 16 as a whole has been considered in the  first  place.
    What is important about Regulation 16(5)  is  the  principle  that  the
    children would not be able to reside in the UK  without  their  mother,
    and this needed a consideration for the simple  reason,  that  although
    their father had left Iraq to bring the children to the  UK,  when  the
    youngest was only 11 months old, this was a matter of just four months.
     As against that, what was now being said was  that  if  the  Appellant
    mother was to leave the UK and return back to Iraq, this would be for a
    much longer period, and at a  time  when  the  children  had  grown  up
    somewhat, and the period of separation was likely to be protracted  and
    indeterminate.

12. Second, the other issue was the decision in relation to Article  8,  in
    relation to two British citizen children, both of whom were  qualifying
    children, neither issue of which was in dispute.  Under Section 117B(6)
    there had to be "strong reasons" for suggesting that children should be
    removed from the jurisdiction in those circumstances.

13. For his part, Mr Howells relied upon the Rule 24 response.  He made the
    following two submissions.  First, that  the  judge  did  not  consider
    Regulation 16, but that this was not  a  material  error,  because  the
    Appellant would not have been able to succeed under Regulation 16(5) in
    any event, given that there was another carer, namely,  the  children's
    father, who could look after the two young children, if the mother were
    to be removed.

14. Second, that the judge's findings are  summarised  at  paragraph  28(c)
    when he makes it clear that returning back to Iraq:

         "... would be a choice for their parents, with either the  children
         returning with their mother, or as entire family  to  the  KRG,  or
         remaining in their father's sole care in  UK,  as  they  have  done
         before,  until  their  mother  can  comply  with  entry   clearance
         requirements."

15. In reply, Miss Gardner submitted that the Appellant's father  had  left
    Iraq with the two children, to come to the UK in December  2017.   Just
    four months after that, the Appellant, their mother, came  to  the  UK.
    In these circumstances, it cannot realistically be maintained that  the
    situation here is the same as what it was  before.   The  fact  remains
    that as was made clear in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, there have
    to be:

         "Powerful reasons why, having regard in particular to the  need  to
         treat  the  best  interests  of   the   children   as   a   primary
         consideration, it may be thought that once they have been in the UK
         for seven years, or are otherwise citizens of the UK,  they  should
         be allowed to stay ..." (see paragraph 44 of that decision).

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, there is the simple point that if  the  Appellant  had
    argued in the grounds of application that Regulation  16  of  the  2016
    Regulations fell to be applied, in  relation  to  two  British  citizen
    children, who were so young that they were dependent upon their mother,
    who was their carer, then that provision had to be in terms considered.
     It was not.  Unless it was considered, one could not  properly  decide
    whether the application would fail under Regulation 16(5).

17. Second, the decision by the judge, particularly in circumstances  where
    the Secretary of State had already accepted that the children would not
    be expected to leave the UK, was contrary  to  the  Home  Office's  own
    policy for British  citizen  children.   Moreover,  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  was  such  that  the  Appellant  could
    succeed under the Immigration Rules, because  she  was  not  liable  to
    deportation, and had a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a qualifying child, with respect to whom it was not clear  at  all
    whether it would be reasonable to expect such  a  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  The matter has simply not been properly explored.

18. The whole question of whether the children can properly be expected  to
    leave the UK, in circumstances where they are British citizen  children
    and settled here, needs  further  examination.   The  children's  "best
    interests" would not be met here if they  were  to  return  with  their
    mother to Iraq and their father to remain in  this  country,  and  this
    cannot just be described  as  "her  husband's  choice"  (see  paragraph
    29(iii)).

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision shall be  set  aside.   I  remake  the
    decision on the basis of  Practice  Statement  7.2(a)  and  remit  this
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge C H O'Rourke.

20. An anonymity direction is made.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

21. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th March 2019



