
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08107/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 18 February 2019                           |On 21 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                KRISHNAN [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                       DECISION OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF
             THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse him international protection or leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on 13  December  2018,  Judge  O'Garro
    considering that the First-tier  Judge  had  arguably  failed  to  have
    regard to the respondent's supplementary refusal letter  of  23  August
    2018, and/or properly considered the medical evidence of  Dr  Lawrence,
    especially with regard to Article 3 ECHR (see  [38]  and  [42]  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision).

 3. By a Rule 24 Reply dated 13 February 2019,  the  respondent  concurred.
    He did not oppose the appellant's application for permission to  appeal
    and invites the Upper Tribunal to remit the protection and human rights
    appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  afresh,  without  a
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal, in  the  interests  of  justice  and  of
    saving costs for both parties.

 4. Pursuant to rule 40(3) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 (as amended), the  Upper  Tribunal  is  not  required  to  provide
    written reasons for its decision under paragraph 40(2)(a) of the Rules,
    where the decision is made  with  the  consent  of  the  parties  (rule
    40(3)(a)) and both parties  agree  that  no  written  reasons  need  be
    provided.

 5. In this case, both parties agree that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside.   I am satisfied that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal can  properly  be  set  aside  without  a  reasoned
    decision notice.   I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal, with no findings of fact or credibility preserved. The appeal
    will now proceed to the stage in which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will
    remake the decision to  allow  or  dismiss  the  appeal  on  the  basis
    described in the grant of permission.

 6. Pursuant to rule 40(3) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008, no written reasons will be provided unless, within 3 days of  the
    sending out of this decision, either party indicates  in  writing  that
    they do not consent to the appeal being disposed of in the  manner  set
    out at (5) above.

 7. If in consequence an oral hearing is required, but the outcome  is  the
    same, the Upper Tribunal will  consider  making  an  order  for  wasted
    costs.



Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                    Date:          18  February
2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



