
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08219/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd March 2018                            |On 30th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                    [A t]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Ferguson, instructed by Londonium Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Maxwell promulgated on 12 October 2017, in which the Appellant's appeal
    against the decision to refuse a protection and human rights claims was
    dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on [ ] 1976, who claims to
    have arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 October 2000 with  valid  entry
    clearance as a spouse to 17 March 2006.   The  Appellant's  application
    for indefinite leave to remain made on 9 March 2006 was  refused  on  5
    September  2006  and  her  appeal  against   refusal   was   ultimately
    unsuccessful.  An application for  leave  to  remain  on  compassionate
    grounds outside of the Immigration Rules on 10 January 2008 was refused
    on 2  December  2009  and  a  subsequent  appeal  was  dismissed.   The
    Appellant then made an application for leave to remain on  private  and
    family life grounds on 16  September  2011  which  was  refused  on  23
    November 2011.  Most recently,  the  Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  10
    February 2017 on the basis that she feared persecution, namely the risk
    of FGM from family members on return to Nigeria.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 11 August 2017 on  the  basis
    that the Appellant's claim to be at risk of FGM was not consistent with
    background country material which showed that it  was  more  common  in
    infancy or before  marriage  rather  than  used  as  a  punishment  for
    presumed promiscuity after marriage.  The  Respondent  considered  that
    section 8 of the Asylum Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc)  Act
    2004 (the "2004 Act ") applied to the Appellant who  claimed  that  she
    had been notified of the risk to her in2011 but did  not  claim  asylum
    until 2017.  In addition, the Respondent considered that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection in Nigeria and also that she had  the  option
    of internally relocating to another area where  she  would  not  be  at
    risk.  The Respondent also refused the human rights claims on the basis
    of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights,  the
    conclusions on which are no longer specifically challenged.

 4. Judge Maxwell dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    October 2017 on all grounds.  Overall, it was  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had made a credible asylum claim,  in  particular,  that  her
    credibility had been damaged by section 8 of the 2004 Act;  that  there
    was a lack of supporting evidence to the claim and  paragraph  339L  of
    the Immigration Rules did not assist her; there was little evidence  of
    the Appellant's family situation or any recent contact  with  them;  it
    was not known whether the Appellant's uncle whom she  feared  was  even
    still alive and even if the claim was credible, there was no real  risk
    on return.  The First-tier Tribunal also found that the Appellant would
    be able to internally relocate within Nigeria.  Findings were also made
    on the Appellant's human rights claim  on  the  basis  of  private  and
    family life which have not been challenged in this further appeal.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on  two  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in attaching too much weight to  the  application
    of section 8 of the 2004 Act and secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal
    erred in failing to consider risk on return having  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been persecuted in the past, which was  relevant  despite
    the passage of time since then.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hollingworth on  15  December
    2017 on all grounds.

 7. At the oral hearing, Counsel for the Appellant made oral submissions on
    the first ground of appeal, accepting that the second ground of  appeal
    did not make sense by reference  to  paragraph  30  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision which made it clear that the past treatment  relied
    upon was against the Appellant's paternal cousin at least 25 years ago,
    probably longer and was not past persecution of the Appellant  herself.
    It was however submitted that this was a relevant factors  to  consider
    in the round as part of the credibility assessment  and  whether  there
    would be a real risk of persecution on return.

 8. As to the first ground of appeal  was  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in using  section  8  of  the  2004  Act  as  the
    starting point of the credibility assessment,  contrary  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in SM (section  8:  Judge's  process)  Iran  [2005]
    UKAIT 116.  It was submitted that using  this  as  the  starting  point
    prejudiced the remainder of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and
    distorted the fact-finding process.  If credibility had  been  assessed
    by reference to all evidence in the round, then the Appellant may  have
    been considered credible and may therefore have been  able  to  benefit
    from the provisions of paragraph 339L of  the  Immigration  Rules  such
    that she would  not  have  been  required  to  substantiate  her  claim
    further.

 9. Counsel for  the  Appellant  also  submitted  that  the  Appellant  was
    consistent in stating that FGM was  used  for  punishment  as  well  as
    prevention  and  although  the  background  evidence  only  refers   to
    prevention,  it  could   possibly   be   both   and   the   Appellant's
    categorisation should not undermine her claim to be at  risk.   It  was
    however accepted that the argument was not put in that way to the First-
    tier  Tribunal  but  it  was  suggested   that   if   the   Appellant's
    categorisation could have been interpreted as consistent with FGM being
    used as a preventative measure then it  may  be  an  error  of  law  to
    concentrate only on the view that undermines the Appellant's claim.

10. On behalf  of  the  Respondent,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    submitted  that  the  Judge  had  directed  himself  appropriately   in
    paragraph 23 of the decision, considering everything in the  round  and
    there is nothing to suggest that  he  did  otherwise  in  reaching  his
    decision.  Further, there were  multiple  additional  reasons  why  the
    Appellant was not found credible outside of the application of  section
    8 of the 2004 Act and this is the type of case and length of delay that
    would always be considered egregious and affecting credibility.

11. In any event, at paragraph 31 of the decision the claim  is  considered
    in the alternative with a finding that even if the Appellant's fear was
    genuine, the Judge was not satisfied, even to the lower standard,  that
    there was any reasonable basis for such fear, therefore she  would  not
    be  at  risk  on  return.   Further  in  paragraph  32,  there  is   an
    unchallenged finding that the Appellant would  be  able  to  internally
    relocate within Nigeria.  For these reasons the protection appeal  must
    fail.

Findings and reasons

 1. As to the first ground of appeal, it is well-established that section 8
    of the 2004 Act should not be the starting point in  the  determination
    of credibility of an Appellant, although  it  is  a  factor  which  any
    Tribunal is required to take  into  account  as  a  matter  of  primary
    legislation.   Further  the  provisions  in  paragraph  339L   of   the
    Immigration Rules should be considered after an overall  assessment  of
    credibility has been conducted not in reliance on the applicability  of
    section 8 of the 2004 Act alone.  However, in the  present  appeal  the
    order in  which  consideration  of  the  various  factors  relating  to
    credibility appear in the written decision can have no material  effect
    on the outcome of the appeal for three main reasons.

 2. First, Judge Maxwell provides detailed reasons in paragraphs 28  to  30
    of his decision as to  why  the  Appellant's  fear  on  return  is  not
    considered to be genuine.  These reasons  include,  that  (i)  she  has
    failed to produce the original the letter that she  states  formed  the
    basis of her fear and  the  envelope  which  she  claimed  it  came  in
    predated the  letter  itself;  (ii)  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's uncle whom she specifically claim to fear is still alive  -
    she had had no contact with him for over 12 years and he would  now  be
    over the age of 80, which reduce the likelihood of any real  risk  from
    him; (iii) there is no evidence of the  Appellants  cousin  having  any
    particular role that will enable her to be traced in Nigeria  and  (iv)
    it had been 10 years since the Appellant's divorce, six years from  the
    last communication from her father and no directorates were  ever  made
    to the Appellant herself.  These reasons  are  more  than  adequate  of
    themselves for an adverse credibility finding even if delay or  section
    8 had not been taken into consideration at all.  I do not find that the
    fact finding process was distorted and even if credibility had not been
    considered in the round, the same adverse findings were not  only  open
    to the Judge but inevitable on the evidence before him.

 3. Secondly, as found in paragraph 31, even if  the  Appellant's  fear  is
    genuine, Judge Maxwell was not satisfied  that  any  fear  such  had  a
    reasonable basis.  The adverse credibility findings would therefore  be
    immaterial to the outcome of her appeal which would  be  dismissed  for
    this reason in any event.

 4. Thirdly, as found in paragraph 32, the Appellant  could  in  any  event
    internally relocate within Nigeria and it would not be unduly harsh for
    her to do so.  The Appellant has not challenged this finding which is a
    further reason why in any event her protection appeal was bound to fail
    and would be dismissed regardless of any adverse credibility finding.

 5. As to  the  second  ground  of  appeal  in  relation  to  claimed  past
    persecution, the written grounds of appeal are  confused  and  bear  no
    relation to the actual claim of the Appellant that it  was  her  cousin
    who was subjected to FGM over 25 years ago.  As  originally  put,  that
    ground of appeal is mistaken and without  merit.   So  far  as  Counsel
    sought to claim  at  the  oral  hearing  that  there  was  perhaps  two
    different  interpretations  of  the   Appellant's   categorisation   of
    punishment which could include prevention, there is nothing to  support
    that contention and it was not  put  in  that  way  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I find no error of law in the consideration of this part  of
    the Appellant's claim and in any event, for the reasons  already  given
    above, any such error of law  could  not  have  been  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                  Date: 25th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

