
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/08529/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 June 2017                          | On 04 July 2017                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                   Mr T M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gillespie promulgated on  3  April  2017  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's protection appeal following a refusal to grant asylum on 29
    July 2016.


2.   The Appellant is a minor born on 6 April 2001.   He  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  He presented to Stoke Newington police as a child  asylum
    seeker on 10 December 2015.  On  19  January  2016  an  initial  health
    assessment was conducted and a screening interview  took  place  on  29
    January 2016.   An  SEF  was  completed  on  17  February  2016  and  a
    substantive asylum interview was held on 15 June 2016.

3.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused for reasons set  out
    in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL')  dated  29  July  2016,  but
    nonetheless the Appellant was granted discretionary leave to remain  as
    an unaccompanied minor.  He appealed to the IAC against the refusal  of
    asylum.  His appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in  the  Decision
    of Judge Gillespie.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal which  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew on 12 May 2017.  In  such  circumstances  the  appeal  was  duly
    listed and called on before me today.


4.   There was no attendance by or on behalf of the Appellant.  A  telephone
    message had been received indicating that there was to be no attendance
    but very little further information was contained.   I  caused  further
    enquiries to be made and in consequence a fax has now been received  by
    the Tribunal from the Appellant's foster carer which is in these terms:
    "The above Appellant has a hearing today 27/6/17 but he  has  no  legal
    aid as his solicitor has refused to proceed the  case.   Hence  can  we
    please adjourn the hearing until we can have a solicitor present."


5.    Mr  Avery  for  the  Respondent  resisted  the  application   for   an
    adjournment.


6.   I have reached the conclusion that the appeal should not  be  adjourned
    today.  I do so bearing in  mind  that  there  was  no  express  reason
    offered for the failure of the Appellant to attend in  person  today  -
    whether that be in the company of his foster carer or a  social  worker
    or otherwise.  Moreover, no details have been presented with regard  to
    relevant  dates  as  regards  the  withdrawal  of  legal  support,  and
    therefore it is not possible to discern to what  extent  the  Appellant
    has been diligent in seeking further representation; accordingly  I  am
    not satisfied that he has been denied a proper opportunity of  securing
    further legal  representation.  Moreover,  as  Mr  Avery  observes,  in
    circumstances where  his  current  advisers  have  declined  to  extend
    further services under the legal assistance, or legal aid, scheme it is
    not readily ascertainable on what basis he would be able to secure  and
    fund further representation.  Certainly nothing has been  said  on  the
    Appellant's behalf as to what steps or measures or what prospects there
    might be in this regard.


7.   I also take into account that the Appellant  has  had  the  benefit  of
    legal advice hitherto including in the drafting of grounds of appeal.


8.   I emphasise that I have in my consideration of  all  of  these  matters
    borne in mind the Appellant's status as a minor.


9.   However, in my judgment no good reason  for  non-attendance  today  has
    been shown and no good reason for  granting  an  adjournment  has  been
    shown.  In those circumstances I am of the view that it is  appropriate
    to proceed with the appeal in the Appellant's absence.


10.  In this regard Mr Avery on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  resisted
    the Appellant's appeal, arguing that the Appellant's grounds of  appeal
    that had succeeded  in  securing  permission  to  appeal  in  substance
    essentially amounted to a disagreement with the findings and conclusion
    of the First-tier Tribunal and did not identify an error of law.


11.  I turn then to a consideration of the challenge set out in the  grounds
    of appeal under five discrete grounds.


12.  The first ground of appeal is that  the  Judge  "failed  to  take  into
    account at all or properly that the Appellant is a  child"  and  it  is
    argued that "this  is  pervasive  throughout  the  determination",  see
    grounds of appeal at paragraph 3.


13.  It is argued that in rehearsing the applicable law at paragraphs  8  to
    12 of the decision the Judge  failed  to  make  any  reference  to  the
    Appellant's age.  It is also said  that  the  Appellant's  age  is  not
    referenced until paragraph 15 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  at
    which point, if anything, his age is referenced in a  manner  seemingly
    adverse to the plausibility of the Appellant's  account.  Criticism  is
    also made in respect of the second reference to the Appellant's age  at
    paragraph 18.


14.  In the premises it seems to me unattractive on the one  hand  to  argue
    that the Judge failed to take into account the Appellant's age, but  in
    so doing then to cite two examples where the  Judge  plainly  did  have
    regard to the Appellant's age. The grounds cannot have it both ways.


15.  Be that as it may, I make the following observations.

    (1)  At paragraph 1 the Judge cites the Appellant's date of birth.


    (2)  At paragraph 3 he refers to the fact  that  the  Appellant  is  "a
         minor".


    (3)  In this regard also the Judge observed that the Appellant did  not
         give evidence on the advice of Counsel by reason of being  a  minor
         and that this was legitimate and justifiable.  This  suggests  both
         that the Judge was alert to the fact that the Appellant was a child
         and  also  alert  to  the  appropriateness  of  adopting  different
         procedural considerations compared with the appeal of an adult.

    (4)   Also  at  paragraph  3  the  Judge  refers  to  the   Appellant's
         "allegations of fact" being contained in the screening  and  asylum
         interviews, the Appellant's witness statement and the testimony  of
         the Appellant's social worker.  Necessarily all of these  documents
         refer to the Appellant's age.


    (5)  It may also be noted that the preceding includes  a  reference  to
         the Appellant's social worker, who attended and  gave  evidence  at
         the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  fact  that  the
         Appellant is in the care of a foster carer under the supervision of
         a social worker is also referenced at paragraph 6 of the First-tier
         Tribunal's decision.


    (6)  At paragraph 7 the Judge refers to  the  grant  of  leave  to  the
         Appellant as "an unaccompanied minor".


    (7)  See  similarly  paragraph  21  where  reference  is  made  to  the
         Respondent's   acknowledgement   that   the   Appellant    is    an
         "unaccompanied  child".   Indeed,  the  substantial  focus  of  the
         "secondary ground of protection advanced  by"  counsel  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal set out across paragraphs 21 to 28 and covering
         some three pages of the twelve page decision is exactly focused  on
         the circumstance of returning a minor to Afghanistan.


    (8)  At paragraph 14 the Judge  refers  to  the  Appellant's  counsel's
         submission "that any perceived deficiencies in the evidence of  the
         Appellant are to be considered in the light of the Appellant's  age
         and vulnerability as a witness".  This is followed at paragraph  15
         by the Judge stating: "I acknowledge the force and  correctness  in
         principle of" such an argument.


    (9)  At paragraph 18, having just referred in  the  final  sentence  of
         paragraph 17 to aspects of the Appellant's narrative having  "every
         appearance of  a  colourable  and  fictitious  account"  the  Judge
         states: "This appearance is in no way diminished  by  consideration
         of the Appellant's age both at the time of the events  and  at  the
         time of interview."  It seems to me that this  phrase,  underscored
         by the  Judge's  express  acknowledgement  of  the  correctness  in
         principle of the need to consider the Appellant's evidence in light
         of his age and vulnerability, makes it absolutely  plain  that  the
         Judge was both alert to the requirement to make due  allowance  for
         the Appellant's minority and also indeed had express regard to  the
         Appellant's minority in evaluating his testimony.  (I note  that  a
         further criticism is made in respect of this passage  at  paragraph
         18, which I address below.)


16.  In all such circumstances, in my judgment, it is  wholly  unsustainable
    to suggest that the Judge did not take into account that the  Appellant
    was a child.  Indeed, contrary  to  the  submission  contained  in  the
    grounds it is in fact "pervasive throughout the determination" that the
    Judge was well aware that the Appellant was a child.  Moreover,  it  is
    also clear that the Judge expressly acknowledged the need to  make  due
    allowance in light of the Appellant's age and vulnerability.


17.  I have noted above that a further criticism is made in respect  of  the
    Judge's observation that the appearance of a colourable and  fictitious
    account is not diminished by consideration of the Appellant's age.  The
    grounds argue in this regard  that  "the  Judge  has  fallen  into  the
    classic error of considering that a factor does not  displace  negative
    findings rather than taking the factor into account before  making  the
    findings", see grounds at paragraph 8.


18.  I disagree that the passages relied upon are illustrative  of  such  an
    error. I note the following:

 1) At  paragraph  12  the  Judge  observes  that  the  evaluation  of  the
    Appellant's case is to be "undertaken as a single exercise", which is a
    clear echo of the 'single composite question' endorsed  in  Karanakaran
    [2000] EWCA Civ 11.

 2) At paragraph 13 the Judge says: "I have  taken  into  account  all  the
    available evidence in the round" before going  on  to  say  this:  "The
    order in which I address the factors is not indicative of any  relative
    amount of weight attached to them but is adopted purely for convenience
    of exposition."


 3) Similarly, at paragraph 15 the Judge refers to his "anxious scrutiny of
    the evidence as a whole" before offering that his conclusion as to  the
    falseness of the Appellant's account was "for the cumulative effect  of
    the various reasons adumbrated below".



19.  In such circumstances, and indeed reading the decision as a  whole,  in
    my judgment, it is clear that at paragraphs 17  and  18  the  Judge  is
    setting out  in  a  linear  fashion  -  as  the  format  of  a  written
    determination inevitably demands -  matters  that  he  has  taken  into
    consideration 'in the round'.


20.  Ground 2 argues that the Judge "has applied an  incorrect  standard  of
    proof", see grounds at paragraph 10.  Whilst  in  this  context  it  is
    acknowledged on behalf of the Appellant  that  the  Judge  included  an
    appropriate self-direction as to onus and  standard  of  proof,  it  is
    submitted by reference to a number of examples that he in fact  applied
    a different standard of proof.


21.  No criticism is made of the Judge's  self-direction  at  paragraph  12,
    which, as  I  have  already  observed,  accurately  echoes  the  single
    composite question identified by Lord Justice Simon Brown, as  he  then
    was, in Ravichandran and endorsed by Lord Justice Sedley in Karanakaran
    [2000] EWCA Civ 11, see paragraph 19 of Lord Justice Sedley's judgment.


22.  Further to this the Judge correctly identifies at paragraph 13 that  he
    is required to take into account all the  available  evidence  'in  the
    round', and that it is his task to attach such weight as  he  considers
    appropriate to the  disparate  elements  that  combine  in  the  single
    composite question.


23.  It is against this background that I turn to  a  consideration  of  the
    examples that, it is said, indicate a misapplication of the standard of
    proof.  These examples are  cited  at  paragraph  12  of  the  grounds.
    Firstly it is said  that  the  Judge  uses  the  following  phrases  at
    paragraph 15 which are illustrative of a misapplication of standard  of
    proof:  "Greater  improbability",  "seriously  improbable",   and   "so
    exceedingly unlikely".


24.  Paragraph 15 of the Judge's decision so far as is relevant is in  these
    terms:

         "I consider the account by the Appellant of his alleged exposure to
         harm  to  be  false.   Assuming  the  truth,  as  conceded  by  the
         Respondent, of the claim as to the  Appellant's  father's  business
         and of the threat to his family arising therefrom there is all  the
         greater improbability in the proposition that the  Appellant  would
         defy safety and his father's  injunction  to  slip  away  from  his
         bodyguards and go alone into the city.  This is by no means a fatal
         aspect of the case but it is a feature of the  Appellant's  account
         that gives rise to legitimate query and cause  for  concern.   That
         cause for concern is all the greater  in  respect  of  the  alleged
         second occasion of kidnap.  It is seriously improbable that, having
         once  survived  unscathed  the  extremely  frightening   experience
         alleged, the Appellant would knowingly expose  himself  to  similar
         risk a second time.  It seems to me so  exceedingly  unlikely  that
         the Appellant, a teenager  with  the  capacity  to  understand  the
         consequences of his action, informed as this capacity  was  by  his
         own experiences, would  place  himself  at  such  risk,  that  very
         serious doubt must arise as to whether the claim is true."


25.  In my judgment the use of the comparator  term  'greater'  in  'greater
    improbability' is indeed in  context  indicative  of  no  more  than  a
    comparison.  This is not an illustration of an application of  standard
    of  proof.   The  phrases  'seriously  improbable'   and   'exceedingly
    unlikely'  are  terms  essentially  comparable  with  the  standard  of
    'reasonable likelihood'.  To say something is seriously  improbable  or
    is exceedingly unlikely is in effect to say that it is  not  reasonably
    likely.


26.  As the Judge observes, his  analysis  at  paragraph  15  leads  him  to
    consider that "very serious doubt" arises as to  the  veracity  of  the
    Appellant's account,  a  factor  he  takes  forward  into  his  overall
    consideration.  So we see, for example, in the following paragraph  the
    Judge identifying "other very significant reasons to doubt the truth of
    the claim".  Not one of these matters is in and of itself said to be  a
    conclusion of the claim but represent in the Judge's evaluation adverse
    signifiers in the overall assessment.  This is an entirely  appropriate
    methodology, and essentially consistent with the approach identified in
    Karanakaran.


27.  The grounds also argue that the  Judge  in  using  the  phrase  "is  so
    lacking in credibility that it cannot possibly be true" at paragraph 18
    of the decision again indicates a misapplication  of  the  standard  of
    proof.  However, it seems to me that this phrase  actually  equates  to
    something even more emphatic than 'not reasonably likely true',  and  I
    cannot see that it is either illustrative of an error  of  approach  or
    that it could be said to be in any way a material error in the  overall
    consideration.


28.  It is also pleaded that at paragraph  17  the  words  "his  account  is
    irreconcilable with  a  release  for  a  ransom"  is  indicative  of  a
    misunderstanding or misapplication of the standard  of  proof.   In  my
    judgment this is not in substance an illustration of the application of
    the  standard  of  proof.   Instead,   to   characterise   matters   as
    irreconcilable is merely to observe that one element does not match  or
    fit with another element.  Even if there were more to  this  point,  in
    isolation it would not provide a reliable indicator that the Judge  had
    otherwise wrongly applied the standard of proof.  Moreover, in  context
    it would clearly be an immaterial error because, as may  be  seen  from
    the immediately preceding sentences in paragraph 16, it  relates  to  a
    matter - release consequent upon payment of a  ransom  -  not  actually
    alleged by the Appellant but rather  raised  as  a  suggestion  in  the
    Skeleton Argument.


29.  With all due respect to the drafter  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the
    practice of scanning a decision to  alight  upon  particular  words  or
    phrases that in isolation may not congruently accord  with  the  phrase
    'reasonable likelihood'  is  not  to  be  encouraged,  particularly  in
    circumstances where it is otherwise acknowledged  that  the  Judge  has
    unimpeachably directed himself as to the burden  and  the  standard  of
    proof.  In such circumstances it will only be in the  rarest  of  cases
    that the use of such language will be any sort of reliable indicator of
    a misunderstanding of the standard  of  proof  to  which  a  Judge  has
    expressly directed him or herself.


30.  Ground 3 argues that the Judge "has effectively gone behind the  agreed
    facts in the case rendering the determination unfair".  This submission
    arises in the context of the apparent concession made in the RFRL based
    on an application of the principle of the benefit  of  the  doubt  with
    reference  to  paragraph  339L  of  the  Immigration  Rules,   to   the
    Appellant's assertion that his father had been involved in  a  business
    providing security services to the Americans: see paragraphs 17-21  and
    32-34 of the RFRL.


31.  The grounds of appeal direct attention to  the  following  passages  in
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  At paragraph 14, "I consider
    myself bound by the decision of  the  Respondent  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant's father may have operated a business such as claimed" and at
    paragraph 15, "assuming the truth, as conceded by  the  Respondent,  of
    the claim as to the Appellant's father's business".  It is argued  that
    such language gives the impression that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    in fact disbelieved the Appellant in this  regard.   Why  else,  it  is
    asked rhetorically, would he have to observe that he considered himself
    bound or why else, it is again asked  rhetorically,  does  he  have  to
    assume the truth of the matter?


32.  For my part I consider the suggestion the Judge has gone behind  agreed
    facts quite simply to be nonsense.  It is manifestly the case that  the
    Judge has proceeded on the basis of an acceptance of  those  facts  and
    uses language to that effect, "I consider myself bound".  It could  not
    be clearer.  There  could  only  possibly  be  any  substance  to  this
    challenge if it was possible to attach mala fides to the words utilised
    by the Judge.  The grounds do not  go  so  far  as  to  make  any  such
    suggestion.


33.  Similarly, at paragraph 15  in  commencing  "assuming  the  truth"  the
    Judge is proceeding to analyse matters in a manner entirely  consistent
    with the concession as to the Appellant's father's business.


34.  Even if it were otherwise it seems to me that there  would  be  nothing
    objectionable in a  Judge  expressing  reservations  in  respect  of  a
    concession but nonetheless proceeding on the basis of  the  concession.
    Of course theoretically it is not incumbent upon the Judge to accept  a
    concession providing if minded not to do so due notice is given to  the
    parties so they may modify their presentation of the case  accordingly.
    It should also be noted that where - as here - a Judge forms an adverse
    view  as  to  an  appellant's  credibility,  the  foundation  for   any
    concession made by the Respondent will likely be  undermined;  in  such
    circumstances there would  be  nothing  amiss  in  a  judge  expressing
    reservations in respect of a concession even if prepared to accept it.


35.  Approximate analogy in this context may be drawn with a magistrate  who
    excludes damaging evidence on grounds of inadmissibility and goes on to
    evaluate a case on the basis of the admissible  evidence.   He  or  she
    puts out of mind any doubts or reservations that might arise from or be
    engendered by the inadmissible evidence, and determines  the  cases  on
    the basis of that which  is  admissible.   Here,  irrespective  of  any
    personal view as to the concession, the Judge expressly states that  he
    proceeds on the basis of its acceptance.

36.  Ground 4 argues that the Judge's findings "or at least  some  of  them"
    are not "evidence-based".  In this regard in particular focus  is  made
    on the Judge's evaluation of the Appellant's conduct  in  twice  moving
    around free of the bodyguards that his father had provided to  him  and
    the fact that on each of those occasions the Appellant  found  himself,
    on his case, the victim of adverse actions by members of  the  Taliban.
    In my judgment this ground amounts to no more than a disagreement  with
    the Judge's findings and the outcome of the appeal.


37.  Moreover, it seems to me that it is a disagreement,  in  itself  flawed
    in its reasoning.  If, as he did, the Judge takes  the  view  that  the
    second  arrest  is  "extremely  improbable"   then   necessarily   this
    undermines the credibility of  the  Appellant's  evidence  generally  -
    including in respect of his claim as to the first arrest.  It seems  to
    me that this is the substance of the Judge's analysis at paragraphs  15
    and 20 of the decision. I have cited paragraph 15 above,  and  so  here
    merely emphasise this: "It is seriously improbable  that,  having  once
    survived unscathed the extremely frightening  experience  alleged,  the
    Appellant would knowingly expose himself to similar risk a second time.
     It seems to me so exceedingly unlikely that the Appellant, a  teenager
    with the  capacity  to  understand  the  consequences  of  his  action,
    informed as this capacity was  by  his  own  experiences,  would  place
    himself at such risk, that very serious doubt must arise as to  whether
    the claim is true".   The notion that it was "so exceedingly  unlikely"
    that the Appellant would have wandered off again without his bodyguard,
    informed as to his own experiences of the consequences of such conduct,
    appropriately and unimpeachably undermines the credibility of the first
    claimed incident, and suitably informs the conclusion at paragraph 20:

         "In conclusion, I hold it so far  removed  from  the  conduct  that
         might be expected of a young  person  in  the  Appellant's  claimed
         position that he would so defy instruction and imperil  himself  as
         to venture abroad without his bodyguard that I do not  accept  that
         such occurred even once, let alone twice.  I hold it so contrary to
         what one might understand of the practice of the  Taliban  and  the
         background evidence that the Appellant would be released relatively
         unharmed twice in circumstances suggesting that the  Taliban  might
         have feared that they missed their mark  or  in  other  unexplained
         circumstances that it could not have happened.  I  therefore  agree
         with and endorse the findings of the Respondent as to the  lack  of
         truthfulness of the claim of past exposure to persecution or  other
         harm."


38.  Ground 5 raises a challenge to the  'secondary  argument'  advanced  on
    behalf of the Appellant, which was to  the  effect  that  even  if  his
    personal narrative was rejected there was still a risk  of  persecution
    to him if he were to be returned to  Afghanistan  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor without access to the support of family or an adult.   The  Judge
    concluded that the Appellant had not satisfied him in this regard.


39.  Whilst it may be that there is scope for some criticism  of  the  Judge
    with regard to the clarity of identifying the absence of cooperation of
    the Appellant with regard to tracing, bearing  in  mind,  for  example,
    that the Appellant appeared to have given full details  of  his  family
    during the interviewing process, it seems to me  that  ultimately  this
    matter is adequately covered by  the  substantial  adverse  credibility
    assessment that has been made in respect of the Appellant's case.


40.  In  particular,  in  this  regard  the  following  may  be  noted  from
    paragraph 25:

         "The Appellant has made no attempt to give any details by which his
         family might be contacted.  It seems to me inconceivable that if he
         has a married adult cousin in  the  United  Kingdom  the  Appellant
         would be sent unaccompanied to  the  United  Kingdom  without  some
         degree of arrangement with the family in  the  United  Kingdom  and
         without  some  means  of   communicating   with   the   family   in
         Afghanistan."
    In this regard it is to be noted from the interview record at questions
    37 and 120 and the screening interview at paragraph 3.4 that it was all
    along the plan that the Appellant should come to the United Kingdom  to
    stay with his cousin.  It is reasonable to  infer  from  this,  as  the
    Judge has done, that there was some communication  between  the  family
    members in Afghanistan and the UK prior to the Appellant's arrival, and
    nothing  has  been  demonstrated  to  explain   or   show   that   that
    communication has broken down or is no longer possible.


41.  Similarly, it seems  to  me  entirely  sustainable  for  the  Judge  to
    conclude in these terms  at  paragraph  28:  "At  the  very  least  the
    Appellant has failed to lead satisfactory  evidence  to  prove  to  the
    lower standard that he would on return  to  Afghanistan  be  unable  to
    contact his parents and would be a young person alone."


42.  In all those circumstances I find no error of law on the  part  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It follows that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands.


43.  Before leaving this case, I make two observations.   I  emphasise  that
    these matters have not informed my  analysis  of  the  'error  of  law'
    arguments, but I raise them lest this case sees  some  further  life  -
    perhaps either in the context of this  appeal  or  when  the  Appellant
    comes to apply for further leave to  remain  towards  the  end  of  the
    period of his discretionary leave - such that there may be some  future
    occasion when the factual merits of the case are reconsidered.


44.  The first matter is this.  It is to be noted from  the  initial  health
    assessment conducted on 7 January 2016 (Annex  E  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle) that shortly after his claimed arrival in  the  United  Kingdom
    the Appellant underwent an assessment in which amongst other things  he
    gave his medical history as including  the  following:  "Reports  being
    abducted and beaten 2-3 years ago.  His left arm was fractured  and  he
    had surgery to put in a metal plate which was later removed.   He  does
    not have any loss of power or altered sensation in the  affected  arm."
    'Two to three years' prior to the Appellant's  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom would mean that the Appellant would have been 11  or  12  years
    old at the time of the break of his arm.


45.  This circumstance, which does not  seem  to  have  been  alighted  upon
    either by the Respondent or in turn by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    is not readily reconcilable with  the  chronology  of  the  Appellant's
    narrative in support of his asylum claim.  In his asylum claim  he  has
    asserted that his arm was  broken  during  the  course  of  the  second
    abduction by the Taliban and that it was one or two months  later  that
    the decision was made for him to leave the United Kingdom. The RFRL and
    indeed the case before the First-tier Tribunal appeared to  proceed  on
    the premise that  the  Appellant  left  Afghanistan  approximately  two
    months after this second detention and therefore approximately, on  his
    account, two months after breaking his arm.

46.  It may  well  need  to  be  considered  in  due  course  what  possible
    explanation there might be for such an apparent discrepancy.  It  might
    be thought, for example, that a person  arriving  so  shortly  after  a
    serious injury - as the narrative claim would seem to have it  -  would
    be able to present at  an  initial  health  assessment,  an  arm  still
    suffering from the postsurgical effects of having a metal plate  either
    inserted or later  removed.  If  it  be  the  case  that  one  possible
    explanation is that the abduction and assault did indeed take place two
    to three years prior to the arrival in the United  Kingdom  this  would
    then point in the direction of the Appellant having been able to remain
    in Afghanistan for a substantial period of  time  without  any  further
    incident.  Either way, as I say, this matter appears problematic in  an
    understanding of the Appellant's claim and is yet to be addressed.


47.  The second matter that it seems to me may  need  further  consideration
    is this.   It  is  the  Appellant's  case  that  his  father's  company
    collapsed and was no longer operating.  If that be the case  it  rather
    begs the question of why there would be  any  continuing  risk  to  the
    Appellant in circumstances where the father's conduct has ceased to  be
    such as would make him the subject of adverse interest on the  part  of
    the Taliban.


48.  Be that as it may, these matters are not for  determination  today  and
    are only raised as potential issues that may require  consideration  in
    due course.


49.  For the reasons already given the appeal today is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

50.  The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no errors of law  and
    stands. The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represents a corrected transcript of reason  give  ex  tempore  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 4 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
