

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/08329/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision Promulgated         |
|On 23 October  2017                        |  On 24 October 2017           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                                  M. T. T.
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C. Hulse, counsel instructed by Qualified Legal
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. As it was common ground and agreed between the parties that First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Greasley made an  error  of  law  in  determining  this
      appeal, and that  the  error  was  material  to  the  outcome,  it  is
      necessary for me only briefly to identify the nature of that error and
      to make clear the scope of the hearing that must now follow.

   2. The appellant, who is a citizen of  Vietnam,  arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom in January 2014 and was admitted as  a  student.  In  February
      2015 he returned to Vietnam for a short holiday. He said that when the
      motorcycle upon which he was a pillion passenger  stopped,  he  became
      aware of police officers seeking to extort money from the occupants of
      a car that had been stopped in  connection  with  an  alleged  traffic
      violation. When he saw that one of the police officers about to attack
      one of those people he intervened and as a consequence was struck with
      a baton and arrested for obstructing the police. He was then  detained
      and ill-treated at the police station before being  charged  with  the
      offence of obstructing justice. That incident, he said, occurred on  3
      March 2015 and he returned to the United Kingdom on 19  March,  as  he
      held a return ticket for that date.  After  he  had  returned  to  the
      United Kingdom he became aware that a summons  against  him  had  been
      issued in Vietnam.


   3. The appellant next came to  notice  when  he  was  encountered  on  26
      January 2016, according to the  respondent,  working  unlawfully  and,
      having been served with notice of liability to be removed, he  claimed
      asylum a few days later. As well as relying upon his fear  of  arrest,
      having left Vietnam after having been charged with an offence, he said
      also that he  was  at  risk  of  persecutory  ill-treatment  from  the
      authorities on account of his political opinion, because he had posted
      anti-government material on social media.


   4. The judge dismissed the appeal because he did not accept  to  be  true
      the appellant's account of the incident with the police  officers  and
      because he considered it to be  very  unlikely  that  the  authorities
      would become aware of the views expressed  by  the  appellate  on  his
      Facebook page.


   5. The first of the grounds upon  which  the  appellant  sought  and  was
      granted permission to appeal  is  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
      dismissing the appeal on the basis that the account  of  the  incident
      with the police officers  was  untrue,  because  in  the  reasons  for
      refusal letter this account had been accepted by the  respondent  and,
      as the appellant's account of that incident had not been challenged in
      cross examination at the hearing, he  had  no  reason  to  suppose  he
      needed to say anything further in evidence to persuade the judge  that
      these events had in fact occurred.


   6. In my judgment, that complaint is plainly made  out.  In  the  refusal
      letter, under a heading "What is accepted",  the  respondent  includes
      the appellant's account of the incident with the police officers,  his
      arrest, the fact that he sustained injuries during  the  incident  and
      that he charged with a criminal offence. Although the  judge  was  not
      bound by that acceptance to also  accept  without  question  that  the
      account was true, in not making clear to the appellant his concern  as
      to whether this had  in  fact  occurred,  the  appellant  has  plainly
      suffered unfairness and we simply do not know what else  he  may  have
      said in support of his account had he known that it was in issue,  and
      so we do not know either whether, had he said  more  about  this,  the
      judge would have been persuaded to take a different view.


   7.  That alone is sufficient to establish that the decision of the  judge
      to dismiss the appeal cannot stand. But  the  determination  discloses
      other errors. It appears that the only real reason given by the  judge
      for setting aside the acceptance of the respondent of the  appellant's
      account and finding his account to be untrue is his delay in  claiming
      asylum and, in the circumstances of this case that was simply  not  an
      adequate basis upon which  to  arrive  at  a  comprehensively  adverse
      credibility finding.


   8. Further, the judge has failed altogether to determine the claim raised
      on the basis of rights protected buy article  8  ECHR,  despite  there
      being before him evidence from the appellant's girlfriend, Ms N.


   9. For these reasons alone, which are  not  the  only  concerns  properly
      identified by the grounds, the judge has made  errors of law  material
      to the outcome of the appeal and his decision to dismiss the appeal on
      asylum and human rights grounds cannot stand.
   Summary of decision:
  10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley made material errors of law and his
      decision to dismiss the appeal must be set aside. His determination is
      to be set aside in its entirety.

  11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.


Signed           [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date: 23 October 2017
