
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08458/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On February 26, 2018                      |On March 01, 2018                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   ALI [J]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity order.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.   He  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely on July 6, 2015 and claimed asylum the following day. His
    claim was based on the fact he was a Sunni Muslim of Kurdish  ethnicity
    who lived in Zumar in the Nineveh Governorate. In August 2014 Zumar was
    attacked by ISIS and the appellant fled. The appellant feared  that  if
    he was returned he would be killed by ISIS who posed a risk  throughout
    Iraq. He also claimed he would be unable to return to the  IKR  because
    his grandfather was a member of the Baath party  under  Saddam  Hussein
    and he would face persecution because of this.

 3. The respondent refused his protection claim on December 4,  2015  under
    paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on August 10, 2016 under Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pickup (hereinafter called
    "the Judge") on January 17, 2017  and  in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    January 31, 2017 the Judge refused the appeal on all grounds.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision on February 7, 2017. Permission to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on June 29, 2017 who
    found it arguable the Judge erred (a) by failing to consider  the  risk
    to him at the date of return in light of the fact he  did  not  have  a
    CSID; (b) by finding he  could  return  to  Baghdad  when  arguably  he
    satisfied risk factors (a) to (f) as set out in AA Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT
    00544 and (c) by making contradictory findings.

 6. In a Rule 24 response dated July 18, 2017 the respondent accepted there
    was an error in law and invited the Tribunal to list the matter  for  a
    decision to be taken on remittal.

 7. This matter came before me on  December  8,  2017.  The  appellant  was
    unrepresented and whilst he spoke  some  English  he  clearly  was  not
    proficient enough to  take  part  in  a  full  hearing.  He  needed  an
    interpreter.

 8. In light of the concession above I found there was an error of law  and
    listed the appeal for  submissions  on  the  feasibility  and  risk  on
    return. I advised the appellant he should seek legal advice and details
    of legal firms in Liverpool were provided to him.

 9. At today's resumed hearing he indicated that  although  he  had  sought
    representation neither of the firms he  had  approached  were  able  to
    assist him due to workload. As this case was based on submissions  with
    reliance placed primarily on case law and country evidence I  indicated
    to the appellant that I intended to proceed with  today's  hearing  and
    would have regard to all relevant information. The appellant  indicated
    that he was content for the hearing to proceed.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Bates relied on the original decision letter and submitted that  the
    appellant's appeal was factually straightforward. He had claimed a fear
    of ISIS and that as this organisation no longer posed the risk they had
    when he left, he submitted there was  no  article  15(c)  risk  to  the
    appellant. He submitted that the  appellant  would  in  due  course  be
    returned, as a Kurd, to the IKR  and  that  his  return  would  be  via
    Baghdad airport. He argued that the appellant would not have to  remain
    in Baghdad but would transit through  the  airport.  Whilst  he  denied
    having knowledge of the location of his family it was important to note
    that he had had the financial support of his father who  had  now  been
    granted British citizenship. Mr Bates also submitted that the appellant
    had taken no steps to trace his family through the auspices of the  Red
    Cross. Although he now claimed he was estranged  from  his  father,  Mr
    Bates invited me to attach no  weight  to  this  and  described  it  as
    convenient. He submitted that as a Kurd he would be able to  enter  the
    IKR and obtain documents. He would not be removed as a Kurd and he  had
    the option of financial support from his own father. Applying case  law
    and the latest country evidence he submitted  the  appellant  could  be
    returned to Iraq.

11. The appellant maintained there was still an  outstanding  problem  with
    ISIS and wherever he returned to Iraq he would  be  at  risk.  He  also
    highlighted the fact that his grandfather was a  member  of  the  Baath
    party and consequently he would be unsafe in  the  IKR.  He  maintained
    that he had been  estranged  from  his  father  since  just  after  the
    decision letter and he could not turn to him  for  financial  or  moral
    support. He had no contact with his uncle, mother or sister and did not
    know whether they were alive or dead.

    FINDINGS

12. The appellant left Iraq on May 27,  2015  and  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on July 6, 2015 and claimed asylum the same day. The respondent
    accepted his account was consistent with  background  evidence.  During
    the hearing before the First-tier Judge the appellant raised,  in  oral
    evidence, that  he  was  unable  to  travel  to  the  IKR  because  his
    grandfather was a member of the Baath party. The Judge had  noted  that
    he had told the interviewing officer that he had no fear of persecution
    on the basis of his grandfather and the Judge found his  oral  evidence
    to be entirely inconsistent with his asylum interview.

13. In challenging the Judge's  decision  no  issue  was  taken  with  this
    finding. His grounds of appeal were based on a return to Baghdad or his
    home area. Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer gave  permission  that  it  was
    irrational to suggest the appellant could relocate to  Baghdad  and  on
    the basis the Judge had made contradictory findings on the  appellant's
    ability to speak Arabic.

14. In the circumstances I am satisfied that in remaking this decision I am
    only concerned with those matters highlighted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer and conceded by the respondent in the Rule 24 letter dated July
    18, 2017.

15. Mr Bates accepted the appellant could not be returned direct  to  Erbil
    because he neither had the relevant documents that would enable such  a
    return nor did he originate from the IKR. However, Mr  Bates  submitted
    that a return via Baghdad would be possible.

16. The issue in this appeal is not whether  ISIS  continue  to  present  a
    threat to the appellant or the public at large but whether  he  can  be
    returned to Iraq. Case law does not support  the  appellant's  fear  of
    persecution. The real issue  is  whether  there  is  an  article  15(c)
    threat.

17. In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) the Tribunal gave
    guidance on return to Baghdad. At section D(15) of the  head  note  the
    Tribunal provided guidance to assist in determining  whether  a  person
    could be returned to Baghdad. The appellant did not  have  a  CSID,  he
    spoke limited Arabic, he had no family members or  friends  in  Baghdad
    who would be able to accommodate him or sponsor him and he was  from  a
    minority community (Sunni Muslim with Kurdish ethnicity).

18. In AA (Iraq) v SSHD and SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 the  Court  of  Appeal
    held (amending AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC)  by
    consent) that a CSID was not simply a return document.  It was feasible
    that someone could acquire  a  passport  or  a  laissez-passer  without
    possessing or being able to obtain a CSID.   The country  guidance  was
    revised as follows:

      a) Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region  (IKR)  will
         be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to  Baghdad.  The  Iraqi
         authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United  Kingdom
         to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a  current  or  expired
         Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer;

      b) No  Iraqi  national  will  be  returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents;

      c) In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)  and
         Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
         1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by
         reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of  a
         current or expired Iraqi passport  or  a  laissez  passer,  if  the
         Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account
         of a lack of any of those documents;

      d) Where P is  returned  to  Iraq  on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport.

      e) Regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it will  be  necessary
         to decide whether P has a CSID, or will  be  able  to  obtain  one,
         reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A CSID is generally required
         in order for an Iraqi  to  access  financial  assistance  from  the
         authorities; employment; education; housing; and medical treatment.
         If P shows there are no family or other members likely to  be  able
         to provide means of support, P is in general likely to face a  real
         risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any
         funds provided to P by the Secretary of  State  or  her  agents  to
         assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that
         P will still have no CSID.

19. Based on the case law above and the fact the appellant has many of  the
    factors highlighted in section D(15) of the head note  to  AA  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG it seems to me that the appellant  would  be  unable  to
    return to Baghdad.

20. The fact the appellant may be able to obtain employment  would  not  be
    sufficient to counter the concerns  highlighted  above.  There  is  the
    possibility of some financial support from his father but firstly,  the
    appellant maintains he is  currently  estranged  from  his  father  and
    secondly, there is no evidence that his father would be able to support
    him to any extent even if they were in contact with each other.

21. I find that even if he had financial support from his father  requiring
    him to permanently reside in Baghdad  would  be  a  breach  of  Article
    15(c).

22. The second argument advanced is that the appellant would be returned to
    the IKR. The respondent accepts that he did not live in the IKR and she
    also accepted that people fled Zumar,  his  hometown,  in  August  2014
    after an attack by ISIS. The appellant claims that he lost contact with
    his family and applying the lower standard of proof I  accept  this  is
    reasonably likely.

23. The appellant was criticised by Mr Bates for not seeking to locate  his
    family using the Red Cross and whilst I take on board  that  submission
    the reality is that he is not in contact with any family  in  Iraq  and
    there is a question mark  over  what  support  is  available  from  his
    father.

24. He has no documents that would be  acceptable  to  the  authorities  on
    return. In particular, he does not have a passport or laissez passer.

25. In light of the fact he is not a former resident of the IKR his initial
    return will be to Baghdad. Mr Bates invited  me  to  find  that  whilst
    permanent  residence  in  Baghdad  may  not  be   possible,   temporary
    residence, before travelling to the IKR, may be possible.

26. According to AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  944  no  Iraqi  national
    will be returnable to Baghdad if not in possession of either a passport
    or a laissez passer. However, a protection claim cannot succeed  simply
    due to the absence of such a document.

27. The appellant does not have a  CSID.   Such  a  document  is  generally
    required in order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance from  the
    authorities; employment; education; housing; and medical  treatment.  I
    do not find it reasonably likely that he will be able  to  obtain  one,
    reasonably soon after his arrival in Iraq.

28. As I accept there are no family or other members to whom he can turn to
    in Iraq then he is likely to face a  real  risk  of  destitution  which
    would amount to serious harm.

29. There is no evidence his father would be able to support  him  and  the
    Court of Appeal stated in AA that funds provided by  the  Secretary  of
    State or her agents to assist his return are reasonably likely to  have
    been exhausted before he would have been able to sort out a CSID.

30. Accordingly, whilst in theory he is returnable to the IKR, I find  that
    given his own personal  circumstances  he  will  have  difficulties  in
    obtaining a CSID and that assumes he overcame the hurdle of obtaining a
    passport or a laissez passer.

31. I therefore find return to either Baghdad or the IKR would place him at
    risk of serious harm thus entitling him  to  protection  under  Article
    15(c).

    DECISION

32. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

33. I have set aside the previous decision and I  remake  it  allowing  the
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

Signed                              Date     26/02/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as no fee was payable.


Signed                              Date     26/02/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
