
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08639/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Done without a Hearing at Field House|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2021                   |On 16 February 2021                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     TS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I make this
order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker. It is surprising the First-
tier Tribunal did not order anonymity.

2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Sri Lanka against a decision of the
First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision of the
Secretary of State refusing his claim for international protection.

3. I have decided to make the decision without a hearing.  I have reminded
myself of the decision of the Administrative Court in JCWI v The Upper
Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2020] EWHC 31013 (Admin).
Nevertheless Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
provides for a decision to be made without a hearing provided regard is had
for views expressed by the parties.  I also remind myself that Rule 5A was
introduced with effect from 10 April 2020 under the heading "Coronavirus
temporary Rule (decisions without a hearing)" which expands the power of
the Tribunal to make a decision without a hearing.  I do not regard this
matter as "urgent" but it is high time it was resolved and indeed part of
the delay is attributable to awaiting the outcome of the litigation leading
to the decision named above.  The parties were given notice of the
possibility of a disposal without a hearing.  The appellant responded with
detailed submissions which I have noted and according to the Tribunal's
records the Secretary of State did not respond at all.  I took the
precaution of checking with the Tribunal clerk before I started dictating
this decision and there is no record to indicate there has been any
response to directions.  In those circumstances I see no need to set out
the history of the directions being given.  They followed what has now
become the standard form in cases that are thought to be possibly suitable
for disposal without a hearing. Such a disposal is suggested and the
parties are given an opportunity to respond and notice taken of any
response that is made.  The Secretary of State has not taken advantage of
the opportunity of responding.  I have to say that does not surprise me.
Her resources, like the Tribunal's, are very limited and this would have
been a difficult decision to defend.

4. I see no point in giving a long and detailed judgment.  The essential
point is that the judge is said to have made unlawful adverse credibility
findings.  The fundamental problem, identified in the grounds, is that in
fact, if not as a matter of direction, the judge has not taken a view of
the evidence as a whole before reaching credibility conclusions but has
made adverse credibility findings and then reflected on them in the light
of further evidence which she found to be unsatisfactory at least in part
because it did not support the already made adverse credibility findings.

5. The most troublesome paragraphs, as they ought to be, are identified in
the grounds.  Paragraphs 43 and 44 of the Decision and Reasons are
particularly troublesome.  There the judge said:

  "43.   I therefore reject the entirety of the appellant's claim regarding
  the events that he claims occurred in Sri Lanka.  I am not persuaded that
  he has ever been of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.  Consequently
  I dismiss his evidence regarding his detention and torture.  Although I
  am aware that he has been diagnosed with PTSD and depression I am not
  satisfied that these were caused by the treatment described by the
  appellant.  I find that Dr Zapata also acknowledges in his report that
  the appellant's adjustment disorder could be attributed to him living in
  a foreign country.

  44.    With regards to the scars on his body Dr Martin is clear that
  there is other possible causation for Scars 2 and 3.  Although he finds
  Scars 1 are typical of unwillingly and deliberately caused injuries he
  does not entirely rule out accidental causes.  In any event, given the
  concerns that I have regarding the appellant's credibility, I am not
  satisfied that Dr Martin's conclusions can outweigh these."

6. Paragraph 43 rather suggests that the judge did not have Dr Zapata's
evidence in mind when she made her adverse credibility findings.  Paragraph
44 shows without doubt that the judge did not consider the medical evidence
before determining credibility.  Given that the scars are identified with a
high recognition of "typical" this is a concerning error.

7. There are other grounds but I do not see any point in saying any more.
This case turned on credibility and without in any way seeking to suggest
that the appellant is credible or incredible the reasons for disbelieving
him are unsound in law.  I set aside the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal.  Further, given that this is fundamental to the case and has not
been done properly I find it just to return to the matter to the First-tier
Tribunal to be heard again.  No findings are preserved.

Notice of Decision

8. This appeal is allowed.  I set aside the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal and direct the case be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 February 2021                |



