
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08190/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 August 2017                      |On 04 September 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                               Rahema Nakajiri
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Dolan of Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
                    Solicitors (Balham High Rd)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sullivan promulgated on  7  March  2017  in  which  she  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department refusing to grant her asylum in the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 2 July 1958.  She  entered
    the United Kingdom  in  June  2004  pursuant  to  a  visit  visa.   She
    overstayed the period of that visa and did nothing  to  regularise  her
    immigration status until she made a claim  for  asylum  on  29  January
    2016, almost twelve years after her initial entry.  She was interviewed
    in relation to her asylum claim on 5 July 2016. The Respondent  refused
    the application for reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'  letter
    ('RFRL') dated 26 July 2016.


3.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.  Her appeal was dismissed by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan for the reasons set out  in  her  Decision
    and Reasons.


4.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert  in  respect  of
    two of her three grounds of challenge.  In material part the  grant  of
    permission to appeal is in these terms:

         "The judge made adverse credibility findings.  Ground 1 takes issue
         with the finding that the Appellant and her  witnesses  lied  about
         her relationship in the UK and that there  had  been  a  'concerted
         effort' to mislead the Tribunal.  Whilst credibility was clearly in
         issue in the appeal and there was no obvious  procedural  error  on
         the part of  the  judge,  as  alleged,  it  is  arguable  that  the
         reasoning at paragraph 18(c)  of  the  decision  is  inadequate  to
         support the above finding.
         Ground 2 may also be arguable.  Ground 3 is not:  a  Judge  has  no
         duty to put to the Appellant doubts  as  to  credibility  that  may
         emerge from the evidence."




5.   The substance  of  'Ground  2'  is  not  identified  in  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal.  In the grounds of appeal themselves  it  carries
    the heading "The assumption that  a  lesbian  relationship  must  be  a
    sexual relationship".


6.   Before considering the grounds upon  which  permission  to  appeal  has
    been granted, I  make  the  following  brief  observations  by  way  of
    context.

    (i) The Appellant was supported in her appeal by  three  witnesses  who
    are identified in the Judge's  decision  at  paragraph  11  as  Mr  Sam
    Kabuye, Mr Edwin Sesange and Ms Mawuda Nakamatte (the  latter  of  whom
    the Judge has thereafter denoted by the initials MN).

    (ii) It was said that the Appellant had had a lesbian relationship with
    Ms Nakamatte.


    (iii) The other two witnesses were called for contextual support as  to
    the Appellant's sexuality.


    (iv) Mr Sesange had provided a letter in support (pages  C1-C3  of  the
    Respondent's bundle).  The letter is dated 1 July 2016 and  Mr  Sesange
    wrote in his capacity as the director of an organisation called  Out  &
    Proud Diamond Group.  Much of that letter rehearses  information  about
    the group and the involvement of Mr Sesange and their respective status
    and standing as a campaigning organisation.  The  latter  part  of  the
    letter makes some observations about the risk to homosexuals in Uganda.
      There  are  four  short  paragraphs  within  the  letter  that   deal
    specifically with the Appellant in these terms:

         "I can confirm that the Appellant identifies herself as an out  and
         proud lesbian.  She openly shares her journey of feeling  attracted
         to the same sex persons and reconciling her  culture  and  religion
         with her sexuality.
         The Appellant has been a member of OPDG since December  2015.   She
         is equality and justice driven, kind, respectful and always willing
         to  help  among  others.   We  have  supported  her  to  get  legal
         representation; we have supported her with reconciling her religion
         with her sexuality.
         She regularly attends our weekly meetings that are  held  on  every
         Saturday of the week and our social events that take place at  G-A-
         Y.
         The Appellant has come to understand that LGBTI  rights  are  human
         rights.  She is gaining the tools of campaigning for  the  equality
         and justice for LGBTI people."

     (v) Mr Kabuye also provided  a  letter  in  support  (page  C4  of  the
    Respondent's bundle).  He writes in a personal  capacity  in  a  letter
    dated 1 July 2016.  He expresses amongst other things  the  opinion  "I
    believe her to be a homosexual who would be at risk of  persecution  or
    worse if she is denied asylum in the UK."


7.   'Ground 2' of the grounds of challenge was amplified  first  before  me
    today by Mr Dolan.  I also propose to deal with that ground first,  and
    without any further detailed explanation  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision, for the simple reason that it seems to me that it can
    be disposed of with some alacrity as essentially being misconceived.


8.   In support of this ground Mr Dolan has provided to me today an  extract
    from published Home  Office  policy  dated  3  August  2016,  which  in
    particular states the following: "An LGBT person's  sexual  orientation
    is  not  solely,  or  even  necessarily  partly,   defined   by   their
    participation in sexual behaviour."


9.   I have  no  difficulty  in  accepting  the  essential  premise  of  the
    submission that Mr Dolan seeks to mount: it is possible to identify  as
    being homosexual  whilst  not  participating  in  any  sort  of  sexual
    conduct.


10.  However, Mr Dolan seeks to argue that the Judge in  effect  misdirected
    herself in this appeal by failing to  recognise  such  a  circumstance.
    Reliance in this regard is put entirely on the  following  sentence  at
    the beginning of paragraph 21  of  the  Judge's  decision:  "I  am  not
    satisfied  that  the  Appellant  and  MN  were   ever   in   a   sexual
    relationship."  Mr Dolan seeks to argue  that  the  Judge  has  thereby
    conflated sexuality with sexual behaviour.


11.  I quite simply do not accept that this passage in the Judge's  decision
    is evidence of any such conflation.  Rather, it seems to me  absolutely
    transparent that it is a finding on the  Appellant's  case.   It  is  a
    rejection  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been  in   a   sexual
    relationship with Ms Nakamatte.


12.  Whilst I note that the witness statements that were  filed  in  support
    of the appeal were not explicit as to whether or not the Appellant  and
    Ms Nakamatte had enjoyed a sexual relationship, it is absolutely  clear
    that the oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge was to that
    effect - and indeed it has not been suggested otherwise in the  grounds
    of challenge.  In particular the Judge refers at  paragraph  18(c),  to
    which I will come in more detail in due course, to  the  evidence  from
    both the Appellant and Ms Nakamatte that they  had  been  in  a  sexual
    relationship from June 2016 until August 2016.


13.  Accordingly I find that the sentence at  paragraph  21  upon  which  Mr
    Dolan seeks to found his challenge is no more than  a  finding  on  the
    Appellant's case, and is in no way evidence of the  Judge  misdirecting
    herself as to law.


14.  'Ground 1' seeks to  challenge  what  Mr  Dolan  characterises  in  the
    heading to that Ground as the  Judge's  "finding  of  a  conspiracy  to
    mislead the Tribunal".  In this regard the grounds of  appeal  rely  in
    particular upon the following sentence, to be found at the beginning of
    paragraph 18: "I find that there has been a concerted effort to mislead
    this Tribunal about the Appellant's circumstances, particularly in  the
    United Kingdom."  (e.g. see Grounds at paragraph 6).


15.  Reliance is also placed on the closing  sentence  of  paragraph  18(c),
    quoted in the Grounds at paragraph 6 with added emphasis thus:  "...  I
    did not find the Appellant's evidence credible.  I find  that  she  and
    [Ms Nakamatte] have lied about this relationship and that Mr Kabuye and
    Mr Sesange have repeated those lies to support the  Appellant  in  this
    asylum claim."  Paragraph 8 of the Grounds goes on to assert  that  the
    Judge "therefore, alleges a conspiracy involving four people".


16.  The  grounds  otherwise  then  express  particular  concern  about  the
    seriousness  of  such  an  allegation,  particularly  in  light  of  Mr
    Sesange's position as a director of a pressure  group  and  campaigning
    organisation.  It is suggested that  there  are  significant  potential
    repercussions  for  those  involved  in  the  Judge's   allegation   of
    conspiracy.  The grounds go on to argue that the Judge's  decision  was
    in breach of procedural fairness for failing to put the  allegation  of
    conspiracy to the witnesses so that they might have the opportunity  of
    addressing it.


17.  I reject the substance of this challenge.  It  seems  to  me  that  the
    grounds are in danger of hyperbolic  characterisation  of  the  Judge's
    findings, and are otherwise  misconceived  in  law,  in  particular  in
    respect  of  the  procedural  unfairness  point.   In   reaching   this
    conclusion I have had particular regard inevitably to the  findings  of
    the Judge, and have considered those particular passages that have been
    alighted upon by Mr Dolan in drafting the grounds of appeal  -  and  in
    amplification before the  Tribunal  today  -  in  the  context  of  the
    particular paragraphs in which they are to be found, and  also  in  the
    overall context of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


18.  At paragraph 17 of the  decision  the  Judge  makes  reference  to  the
    evidence of Mr Kabuye and Mr Sesange, and summarises aspects  of  their
    evidence in the following phrase:  "In  short  they  give  evidence  as
    people in whom the Appellant confided about her sexuality."  It may  be
    seen that to some extent that echoes the phrase  that  I  have  already
    quoted from Mr Sesange's supporting  letter  to  the  effect  that  the
    Appellant identifies herself as an out and proud lesbian.  In  context,
    it appears that the evidence of Mr Sesange is to the effect  that  that
    is how the Appellant has chosen to describe herself to him.


19.  Paragraph 18 is the following terms:


         "I find that there has been a  concerted  effort  to  mislead  this
         Tribunal about the Appellant's circumstances, particularly  in  the
         United Kingdom.  There are in my view discrepancies which go to the
         heart of her claim to be a lesbian.


         a)    The  Appellant  claims  first   to   have   encountered   the
             organisation 'Out & Proud' in December 2015;  Mr  Kabuye  said
             that he first met the  Appellant  at  'Out  &  Proud'  at  the
             beginning of 2015, possibly in January.


         b)   The Appellant claims to have had a single lesbian relationship
             in the United Kingdom, that  with  MN.   It  was  Mr  Kabuye's
             evidence that  the  Appellant  had  had  a  relationship  with
             someone called Madeleine, then saying that Madeleine  was  the
             lady outside (a reference to  MN).   He  also  said  that  the
             Appellant had  had  a  previous  relationship  in  the  United
             Kingdom with a lady who had died but whose  name  he  did  not
             know.  He also referred to MN as 'one of her [the Appellant's]
             ex-fianc�es'.


         c)   Throughout their oral evidence both the Appellant and MN  said
             that they had been in a sexual  relationship  from  June  2016
             until August 2016.  That accords with the information in their
             respective witness statements.   There  was  no  ambiguity  in
             their  evidence  or  hint  of  any   volatility   during   the
             relationship.  According to their oral  evidence  and  witness
             statements this was  a  sexual  relationship  lasting  2  -  3
             months.  I particularly asked MN whether it would be  true  to
             say that on 5 July 2016 she and the Appellant  were  still  in
             sexual relationship; she said that they were, for three months
             from June to August.  Having heard all of the oral evidence  I
             asked the Appellant's representative to recall  the  Appellant
             to deal with question 199 asked at the  interview  on  5  July
             2016, namely the Appellant's denial of any relationship in the
             United Kingdom at that time.   It  was  then  the  Appellant's
             evidence  that  in  interview  she  did   not   disclose   her
             relationship with MN because she and MN were unsure about  the
             relationship at the time.  I  did  not  find  the  Appellant's
             evidence credible.  I find that she and  MN  have  lied  about
             this relationship and that  Mr  Kabuye  and  Mr  Sesange  have
             repeated those lies to support the Appellant  in  this  asylum
             claim."




20.  The Judge then went on at paragraphs 19-21 to  consider  other  aspects
    of the Appellant's case, concluding at paragraphs 21 and  22  that  she
    did not accept that the Appellant was a lesbian.


21.  In my judgment, at the core of the Judge's decision is the  matter  set
    out at paragraph 18(c).  She clearly indicates that she heard  evidence
    both from the Appellant and MN to the effect that they were in a sexual
    relationship at the time that the  Appellant  was  interviewed  by  the
    Respondent, and the  Judge  considered  this  to  be  -  as  indeed  it
    obviously was -  discrepant  with  the  information  imparted  at  that
    interview  in  which  the  Appellant  denied   being   in   a   current
    relationship.  The Judge invited explanation for this discrepancy, even
    going so far as to recall  the  Appellant,  and,  in  my  judgment  was
    perfectly entitled to reject the proffered explanation.  Indeed,  there
    is no direct challenge to this  aspect  of  the  Judge's  analysis  and
    reasoning in the grounds of appeal.  Instead, as indicated  above,  the
    challenge focuses upon what is said to be  the  Judge's  finding  of  a
    conspiracy - or a 'concerted effort' - amongst witnesses to mislead the
    Tribunal.


22.  In the first instance it seems to me that there is  some  ambiguity  in
    the closing words of paragraph 18(c) - "I find that  she  and  MN  have
    lied about this relationship and that Mr Kabuye  and  Mr  Sesange  have
    repeated those lies to support the Appellant  in  this  asylum  claim."
    This passage may be capable of being construed as  indicating  that  Mr
    Kabuye and Mr Sesange have knowingly repeated lies, that is to say have
    themselves  also  lied.   Alternatively,  it  might   also   bear   the
    construction that they have simply repeated the lies of  the  Appellant
    and MN on the basis that they themselves had  been  lied  to  when  the
    Appellant confided in them about her sexuality.  However, ultimately it
    seems to me - as explored below - it matters not which construction  is
    to be placed on that particular sentence. Nonetheless, in deference  to
    the submissions I have heard I make the following observations.


23.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe urges upon me the notion that the Judge was  saying
    no more than that the Appellant and MN had lied and that Mr Kabuye  and
    Mr Sesange had, as it were,  innocently  gone  along  with  those  lies
    because they had taken the comments of the Appellant  and  MN  in  good
    faith.  She suggests that such a construction is appropriate  given  in
    particular the Judge's observation at paragraph 17 that "in  short  [Mr
    Kabuye and Mr  Sesange]  give  evidence"  as  to  what  "the  Appellant
    confided about her sexuality".


24.  Mr Dolan suggests that the Judge was making a  finding  that  all  four
    witnesses had lied and had done so by way of a "concerted effort".   In
    this regard he notes in particular that at paragraph  18(b)  the  Judge
    identifies problematic issues in  respect  of  the  consistency  of  Mr
    Kabuye's evidence such that  it  did  not  appear  congruent  with  the
    evidence of the Appellant.  This would tend to indicate that the  Judge
    thought that Mr Kabuye was in some  way  at  least  an  unreliable  and
    possibly an incredible witness. Accordingly, when the Judge  refers  to
    Mr Kabuye in the closing sentence of paragraph 18(c) she was  doing  so
    in a critical manner suggesting that he too was lying; and if  that  be
    the case then it is a reasonable inference  that  in  referring  to  Mr
    Sesange collectively with the other three in that sentence,  the  Judge
    was also indicating that Mr Sesange was telling lies.


25.   I  acknowledge  the  ambiguity.   I  am  minded  to  find  Mr  Dolan's
    construction  more  persuasive  than  that  of   Ms   Willocks-Briscoe.
    However, it must be borne in mind that in  looking  at  passages  in  a
    judgment or decision, the Tribunal is not  embarked  on  a  process  as
    rigid as that as construing a statute. More particularly in any  search
    for meaning and relevance the Tribunal is not confined to consideration
    of one clause of one sentence.  Accordingly,  whilst  I  am  minded  to
    prefer Mr Dolan's suggested construction, I do not conclude  and  I  am
    able to say with any confidence that this  particular  passage  in  the
    Judge's Decision is indicative of finding that Mr Sesange had conspired
    in an attempt  to  deceive  the  Tribunal  rather  than  simply  having
    repeated in good faith what had been told to him.  Indeed, absent  this
    particular passage there is  no  specific  criticism  of  Mr  Sesange's
    evidence. As such, the  ambiguity  persists  and  is  not  resolved  by
    attempting finely to construe the Judge's sentence.


26.  Whilst ambiguity - or a lack of clarity in reasons and findings  -  may
    be problematic in some instances, on the fact here I  do  not  consider
    that to be so. In my judgement it is immaterial whether this was indeed
    a concerted effort to mislead the Tribunal on the part of two, three or
    four persons.  The point that Mr Dolan seeks to draw from his contended
    meaning is that if the Judge were minded to conclude that three or four
    people were conspiring to mislead the Tribunal then the  allegation  of
    such conspiracy should have been put  to  them.   It  follows  that  in
    substance Mr Dolan is suggesting that in some  way  the  Judge,  having
    reserved her decision,  should  have  upon  reflection  reconvened  the
    hearing to afford either or both Mr Kabuye and  Mr  Sesange  a  further
    opportunity to explain themselves with a view possibly to  putting  the
    Judge's mind to rest in respect of any such conspiracy.


27.  It seems to me that that is a fundamentally misconceived  approach  and
    does not properly reflect the nature of decision-making in the Tribunal
    or the procedures operated by the Tribunal. The words of Judge  Lambert
    in refusing permission to appeal on Ground 3 may usefully be  recalled:
    "a Judge has no duty to put to the Appellant doubts as  to  credibility
    that may emerge from the evidence".


28.  Moreover it seems to me that in the drafting of the grounds  of  appeal
    Mr Dolan has in emphasising the supposed finding of conspiracy  of  all
    witnesses  perceived  the  Judge's  reasoning  as   being   first   the
    identification  of  a  conspiracy,  and  then  second,  the  consequent
    disbelieving of the Appellant.   However,  in  reality  the  matter  is
    stated by the Judge the other way around.  The  Judge  has  disbelieved
    the Appellant (primarily because her evidence and that of  her  claimed
    lover was discrepant in respect of a core element): that is the primary
    finding of fact. If the Judge has indeed also concluded that Mr  Kabuye
    and Mr Sesange were knowingly complicit in such an attempted deception,
    such a conclusion is essentially  a  secondary  finding  reached  as  a
    matter  of  logical  inference  from  the  primary  finding.    It   is
    inappropriate to put this on the basis that the Judge has impugned  the
    witnesses before making her findings;  rather,  any  impugning  of  the
    witnesses arises as a consequence of the findings that the Judge made.


29.  In this context, as I say, it is to be  emphasised  that  there  is  no
    particular challenge to the Judge's analysis of the discrepancy between
    the Appellant and her supposed lover.  In many respects it seems to  me
    that that in itself destroys the substance of  the  Appellant's  claim.
    The Judge is perfectly entitled to reach such a conclusion.  If  it  be
    the case - and, as I say above, it remains unclear whether  it  is  the
    case - the Judge finds as a secondary (rather than a  primary)  finding
    that it is to be consequently inferred that there has been a  concerted
    effort amongst more than just the Appellant and Ms Nakawatte, but  also
    involving at least one and perhaps both of the other  witnesses,  well,
    so be it.  It is quite simply not the case that when  a  Judge,  having
    reserved a decision, forms an adverse opinion of any particular witness
    or witnesses that the appropriate procedure is to reconvene the hearing
    in order to explore  matters  further.   That  would  make  proceedings
    wholly unwieldy, and is not an example of anything  that  I  have  ever
    personally come across within this jurisdiction.  Whilst  hearings  may
    be reconvened in some rare cases, for example where  in  light  of  new
    evidence or materials filed with the permission of the  Tribunal  after
    the hearing issues arise that require the  input  of  the  parties,  or
    where the preparation  of  a  Decision  is  overtaken  by  new  country
    guidance or significant relevant events in the country of return, I  am
    not remotely familiar with  the  notion  of  an  appeal  hearing  being
    reconvened in order to explore further the credibility of a witness  or
    witnesses because a Judge is minded to  reach  an  adverse  credibility
    assessment.


30.  I have noted the concerns  expressed,  perhaps  more  on  Mr  Sesange's
    behalf than on the Appellant's behalf, of the potential damage  to  him
    in the event that he wishes to appear in further cases  as  a  witness.
    Bluntly, that is not my concern and nor should it  properly  have  been
    the concern of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   It  seems  to  me  that
    there is nothing in the potential repercussions of the Judge's  finding
    that means that she should have adopted something different by  way  of
    the standard procedures that were applied in determining this case.


31.  For all the reasons stated I  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision contains no error of law and is not to be set aside.


Notice of Decision

32.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    stands. The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


33.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing


Signed:                                 Date: 1 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

