
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08420/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th July 2017                             |On 20th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

         Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 [ETINES K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr W Bhebhe (DDR legal LLP)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    against the Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper.  Following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 27th March 2017, in a Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated on 10th may  2017  Judge  Cooper  allowed  this  Protection
    appeal.

 2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I shall continue to refer to the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent  although  she  is  in  truth  the
    Appellant before the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe, had made a  protection  claim  on
    grounds that she feared her ex-husband's  family  in  Zimbabwe  and  on
    account of her Sur Place political activities in the UK.

 4. The Appellant had  a  significant  immigration  history.  She  arrived,
    having been  successful  in  an  appeal  against  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's refusal to grant her leave to enter as a spouse, in May 2010.
    In 2012 she applied for leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules
    which was refused. In 2014  she  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    stateless person which was refused. In 2015  she  applied  for  an  EEA
    residence card claiming a  derivative  right  of  residence  which  was
    refused and later in 2015 she applied for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds which was rejected as invalid.

 5. Her last application, the refusal of  which  is  the  subject  of  this
    appeal,  was  an  application  in  January   2016   for   international
    protection. The application was refused on 27th July 2016.

 6. In the Decision and Reasons the First-tier Tribunal rejected her  claim
    to be at risk in Zimbabwe on account of her claimed  fear  of  her  ex-
    husband's family.

 7. The Judge then went on to consider her Sur Place claim. In doing so the
    Judge came to the conclusion, at  paragraph  53  of  her  Decision  and
    Reasons, that it was reasonably likely that the Appellant  only  joined
    ROHR in February 2016 in order to support  her  protection  claim.  The
    Judge noted that she made her claim for  asylum  in  January  2016  and
    joined the  organisation  in  February  2016.  She  further  found,  at
    paragraph 59, that the Appellant only became involved with the Zimbabwe
    Vigil (ZV) as a means of enhancing an otherwise hopeless  asylum  claim
    and  that  her  credibility   was   undermined   by   the   significant
    inconsistencies in her various accounts.

 8. The Judge was clearly unimpressed by this Appellant.  The  Judge  noted
    some inconsistencies between a letter sent in support of her claim  and
    the Appellant's own evidence. However, at paragraph 60, the Judge found
    that the documentary evidence before her indicated that  the  Appellant
    had, since February  2016,  been  participating  regularly  at  the  ZV
    outside the Embassy and that  she  had  attended  other  demonstrations
    elsewhere organised by either ROHR or  ZV.  The  Judge  said  that  the
    letter from ZV  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  makes  new  supporters
    welcome,  sings  and  dances  and  staffs  the  front   table   thereby
    interacting with passers-by and fundraising. She arrives early  to  set
    up and stays to pack up at the end of the vigil. This, the Judge found,
    was supported in part by some of the photographs she relied upon  which
    showed her dancing, holding banners and at the table. The  Judge  noted
    the Appellant provided a considerable degree of detail  about  the  two
    demonstrations she had attended by the time of her asylum interview  in
    July 2016 and that the details she provided were  consistent  with  the
    reports of the demonstrations at the time

 9. At paragraph 61 the Judge  noted  that  the  ZV's  letter  indicated  a
    password was required to view the Flickr photographs  but  nevertheless
    found that it may well be, whether  by  infiltration  or  other  means,
    Zimbabwe's intelligence services might have  access  to  that  password
    although she acknowledged that there was no evidence  before  her  that
    that was the case. However, even without access to the photographs  the
    Judge was satisfied that it was reasonably likely the  Appellant  would
    be perceived as being associated with ROHR and the ZV. The  Judge  said
    the Appellant is personally named in a significant number of  ZV  diary
    reports between February 2016 and February 2017.  The  Judge  expressed
    herself satisfied that a simple  search  of  the  Appellant's  name  on
    Google would in all probability result in her being identified as being
    actively involved with the ZV. The Judge found that if the intelligence
    services had access to the photographs then the Appellant  was  clearly
    identifiable in a number holding placards and banners calling  for  the
    release of Itai Dzamara, against human rights  abuses  and  challenging
    the presidency of Robert Mugabe.

10. The Judge properly considered case law including the  leading  case  of
    Danian [2002] Imm Ar 96 and other associated case law and came  to  the
    conclusion that the Appellant would be at risk on return because it was
    reasonably likely that she would be identified as a person who has been
    active against the regime in the UK. The Judge was clearly reluctant to
    allow the appeal on the basis of her findings about this Appellant  but
    on the evidence and in accordance with case law including EM (Zimbabwe)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 1294 that was a conclusion properly open to the Judge.

11. The Secretary of State's grounds for  appeal  which  indicate  that  on
    return, if questioned, the Appellant would tell  the  truth  which  was
    that she had only made the claim to bolster a  false  asylum  claim,  I
    find to have no merit. The fact that her activities would become  known
    to the authorities, which on the findings  of  the  Judge  they  would,
    would be sufficient, bearing in mind the  low  standard  of  proof,  to
    enable her appeal to succeed. That is what the Judge found and I cannot
    say that her conclusion was perverse, irrational or against the  weight
    of evidence or case law. Accordingly, the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    is dismissed.

Notice of Decision


    The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order but  as  the  Appellant
    has been successful in her appeal one is no longer justified.


Signed                              Date 20th July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
