



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/08733/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport          |    Decisions and Reasons         |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 23 October 2017                        |    On 04 December 2017           |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     a k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Foster, Counsel instructed by Hoole & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. His  claims  for  asylum  and
   humanitarian protection were refused by the Respondent on 5 August  2016.
   He was granted discretionary leave to remain until he reached the age  of
   17.5. The Appellant appealed against the decision to  refuse  him  asylum
   and humanitarian protection under section  82  (1)  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (NIAA). His appeal was dismissed  on  all
   grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge M M Thomas in a decision promulgated
   on 10 May 2017.  The Appellant sought permission to appeal  against  that
   decision and permission was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Finch  on
   renewal of the application to the Upper Tribunal.

2. The Appellant argues  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal erred in law in the approach to his  claim  to  be  at  risk  of
   persecution due to being westernized; erred in the treatment of the  risk
   to him under Article 3 ECHR and erred in the consideration  of  paragraph
   276 ADE (1) (vi) of the Immigration Rules.


3. Permission was granted  on  the  grounds  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   arguably failed to focus on the risk the Appellant may face  in  Kandahar
   as a young man whose father had worked as an interpreter  for  Government
   forces in the current situation in that area of Afghanistan. Further,  in
   considering the question of whether it would be a breach of Article 3  to
   remove the Appellant, it was  considered  arguable  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal failed to take into account the fact that  the  Appellant  would
   not have any relatives to rely on in Kabul  and  had  never  been  there.
   Permission was granted also because the Judge arguably failed to consider
   objective evidence which indicated that he was  likely  to  face  serious
   challenges in obtaining employment and  accommodation  in  Kabul  despite
   being young and having obtained some skills here.


4. The Respondent's Rule 24 Response states  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge directed herself appropriately, considered the Appellant's evidence
   and assessed whether the Appellant's father's role as an  interpreter  in
   the past would put the Appellant at risk giving adequate reasons for  the
   findings made. The Judge also adequately considered Article 3 and Article
   15 (c) and found that the Appellant would not be at risk.


   The Hearing


5. Ms Foster relied  on  her  grounds  of  appeal.  She  submitted  that  in
   considering the risk to the Appellant the Judge failed  to  consider  the
   current  situation  in  the  province  of  Laghman  and  when  the  Judge
   considered  the  risk  of  destitution  she  failed   to   consider   the
   consequences of the fact of the absence any connections. In  relation  to
   imputed political opinion, the First-tier Tribunal proceeded on the basis
   that the Appellant's father was murdered  at  paragraph  31  and  32  and
   concluded that the account  was  not  credible  on  the  basis  that  the
   Appellant was able to live in the family home and had family  there.  The
   error came because there was no consideration of  Laghman  Province.  She
   referred me to paragraph 7.2.1 of CIG at  page  221  of  the  Appellant's
   bundle. The Judge did not specifically refer  to  the  province.  Of  the
   Taliban controlled areas the two of the  most  volatile  were  Kunar  and
   Nangarhar and Laghman was directly next to them and there was a real risk
   that it had a strong Taliban presence. The court  had  proceeded  on  the
   basis that the Appellant's father was killed by  the  Taliban.  Where  an
   individual was targeted there was no  protection.  This  was  a  material
   error which made a difference to the result.


6. The next ground was the consideration  under  Article  3  of  relocation.
   Internal flight was assessed in relation to Kabul. It was accepted by the
   First-tier Tribunal that the lack of family networks for single men could
   have  an  impact.  The  'After  returns'  document  confirmed  this.  The
   Appellant had no family connections in Kabul and had  never  been  there.
   The country guidance showed that a single, young, westernized  man  could
   be at risk of destitution. The Judge concluded at paragraph  61  that  he
   had lived independently and this was one sentence that showed a disregard
   for the situation in the country guidance which showed that  there  would
   be serious problems and the mere fact that his 'pathway plans' showed  he
   was independent was not enough. It was a material error and  did  make  a
   difference.
7. Mr Diwnycz relied on the Rule 24 response and  made  no  concessions.  He
   agreed that there should be a remittal if an error were found.

Discussion

8. Ground 1 asserts that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law at  paragraphs
   39 to 47 of the decision in failing to engage with the argument  advanced
   that the Appellant had been shaped by living in the UK since the  age  of
   14 and identified as Westernized. It is said that no finding is  made  on
   this nor consideration given to the risk that might flow in  Afghanistan.
   Rather, the fact that he was of working age was advanced as  establishing
   that there would be no real risk. It is said  that  the  Judge,  although
   referring to the 'After Return' report at [58] of the decision,  did  not
   identify its contents and it was not referred to in the  section  of  the
   determination   concerned   with   risks   on   return   consequent    to
   Westernization. It is also said that it is implicit that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal was aware that there were real risks to the Appellant if he  did
   not change his behaviour and conduct but failed to consider  whether  the
   Appellant should be required to amend  an  immutable  characteristic  (HJ
   (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC).


9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge deals with the Appellant's contention  that
   he would be at risk because he would be perceived  as  a  person  who  is
   westernized at paragraphs 39 to 46 of  her  decision.  She  set  out  the
   characteristics that were identified by the Appellant to make him  likely
   to be at risk on return. She took account of the evidence  to  which  she
   was referred by both parties at pages 195  and  196  of  the  Appellant's
   bundle. She analysed that evidence at paragraph 42 of the decision.  That
   evidence was from the Country Policy and  Information  Note  Afghanistan:
   Fear of anti-government elements (AGEs) from  December  2016.   She  then
   took into account the Appellant's care plans and pathway plans  completed
   by social services during the time he had been in their  care  and  noted
   that it was confirmed that the Appellant met regularly with other  Afghan
   nationals for Mosque, sports and at college. She noted that the Appellant
   attended mosque on a weekly basis and was aware of his cultural  heritage
   and concluded that he had retained his cultural identity.


10. Her  reasons  for  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  not  at  risk  of
   persecution on grounds of asserted westernisation were that he  lived  in
   Afghanistan until he was 14 years old and therefore had lived within  the
   Afghan society and culture during a significant  part  of  his  formative
   years; he knew what the cultural norms and parameters would be and he was
   keenly aware of the difference between the British and  Afghan  cultures.
   She found this to be of key significance and found that he was very aware
   of how he would need to adapt his conduct and behaviour to fit in  again;
   he observed cultural holidays and festivals and continued  to  speak  his
   own language.


11. The argument advanced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the
   Appellant would be perceived as being westernized  (paragraph  8  of  the
   skeleton argument). The Judge engaged with  this  argument.  All  of  the
   reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal were grounded  in  the  evidence
   both in relation to the  Appellant's  personal  characteristics  and  the
   situation in Afghanistan and amount to adequate reasons for finding  that
   he would not be at risk because as being westernized. The grounds  assert
   that  fact  that  the  Appellant  is  of  working  age  is  advanced   as
   establishing that there would be no risk. However, at paragraph 45 of the
   decision, the Judge is referring to the section of the CIG at page 195 of
   the Appellant's bundle which deals with persons perceived as  westernized
   and states in this context that men of working age are more likely to  be
   able to return alone and reintegrate  successfully.  It  cannot  be  said
   therefore that the  Judge  erred  in  taking  this  into  account  as  an
   irrelevant consideration.  I also find that the First-tier  Tribunal  did
   not conclude that the Appellant was at risk of persecution due  to  being
   westernized but could act discreetly to avoid this risk but rather  found
   that he had retained his cultural identity and therefore would not be  at
   risk. The findings do not offend against the principle  in  HJ  (Iran)  v
   SSHD [2010] UKSC.


12. The grounds further criticize the First-tier  Tribunal  for  failing  to
   specifically refer  at  paragraph  45  of  the  decision  to  the  issues
   identified in the 'After return' report at page 337  of  the  Appellant's
   bundle.  The First-tier Tribunal found, at paragraph 45  that  she  could
   not  identify  an  issue  with  reintegration  on  grounds  of  perceived
   westernization for the reasons she set out at paragraph 43 and  44  where
   she had found that he retained his cultural identity.  This  finding  was
   made with reference to the CIG report which stated that  men  of  working
   age were more likely to be able  to  integrate  successfully.  The  Judge
   dealt fully with the  'After  return'  report  when  considering  whether
   return to Kabul would be a  viable  internal  relocation  alternative  at
   paragraph 58 of her decision. It is clear that at  paragraph  45  of  her
   decision she was dealing with  the  issue  of  the  perception  of  being
   westernized and took into account the evidence to which she was  referred
   to by both parties as recorded at paragraph 41 of the decision.

13. Ground two asserts that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  her
   consideration of Article 3 ECHR. In particular it is  asserted  that  the
   Judge determined that the Appellant was from a large family and there was
   no  difficulty  in  returning  to  Laghman  province  despite  continuing
   fighting in the province, the activities of the Taliban in the region and
   the Appellant being unaware of where  his  family  resided.  It  is  also
   argued that the First-tier Tribunal placed  insufficient  weight  on  the
   present circumstances  in  Afghanistan  exemplified  by  the  failure  to
   consider the 'After Return' report. It is further argued that the failure
   to consider this objective material is  unreasonable  and  a  failure  to
   identify relevant  facts  and  such  failure  flows  into  the  erroneous
   assessment of undue harshness and internal relocation.


14. The Appellant was 18 years old at the date of the  hearing.  The  First-
   tier Tribunal dealt firstly with Article  15  (c)  of  the  Qualification
   Directive at paragraphs 49 to 62 of the decision and then with Article  3
   at paragraph 65 of the decision. Her finding in respect of Article 3 that
   the Appellant would not face a real risk of serious harm flowed from  her
   previous findings in respect of risk. The Appellant argued that there was
   a serious and individual threat to his life by reason  of  indiscriminate
   violence relying on evidence of the security  situation  in  Afghanistan,
   including  Kabul.  The  Tribunal  assessed  the  relevant  case  law   at
   paragraphs 53 and 54. She addressed his argument that  that  the  sliding
   scale  principles  should  be  applied  on  the  basis  of  his  personal
   circumstances at paragraph 57. She specifically referred  to  the  'After
   Return' document relied on by the Appellant  and  the  sections  she  was
   referred to regarding employability and the lack of personal  support  or
   contacts that could impact on this. She assessed the Appellant's maturity
   and employability with reference to the evidence from his social  workers
   and found on the basis of this evidence that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
   person lacking in maturity  but  had  engaged  with  social  services  in
   establishing his independence and building on his employability. She also
   assessed his educational achievements. The findings in  relation  to  his
   maturity were adequately reasoned and  took  into  account  the  relevant
   evidence to which she had been referred.


15. She further found at paragraph 61 that  he  would  have  family  support
   and, contrary to the assertion in the grounds  of  appeal  that  he  knew
   where they lived. This finding in turn,  was  based  on  her  finding  at
   paragraphs 37 and 38 that she did not find it credible  that  he  had  no
   family in Afghanistan because at the time of his screening  interview  he
   had said he had extensive family in Afghanistan but had only made efforts
   to trace two family members through the Red Cross. She further found that
   the likelihood was that in view of the costs incurred  in  arranging  his
   exit  from  Afghanistan,  familial  connection  would  be  denied.  These
   findings in relation to the existence of family were neither perverse nor
   inadequately reasoned.


16. The First-tier Tribunal considered the evidence she was referred  to  in
   relation to Kabul at paragraph 55 of the decision, addressed the relevant
   case law at paragraph 56, and assessed his ability to integrate into that
   city at paragraph 61. In so doing she took into account  his  ability  to
   live independently, manage his personal care and budgeting,  his  absence
   of health issues and that in  the  most  recent  pathway  plan  dated  30
   November 2016, on a scale of 0 to 10,  10  being  where  social  services
   would not be required, he scored 9.


17. On the basis of  these  findings,  she  concluded  that  there  were  no
   personal characteristics or circumstances that gave rise to a 'serious or
   individual' threat to his life or person and he would not be at risk  for
   the purposes of  Article  15  (c)  and  that  as  he  would  be  able  to
   reintegrate and adopt to life in Afghanistan it would not be unduly harsh
   or unreasonable for him to return even if there was no family support.


18. Ms Foster argued that the First-tier Tribunal did not address  the  risk
   to the Appellant in  Laghman  province.  It  does  not  appear  from  the
   skeleton argument  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  record  of
   proceedings that she was addressed on a risk to  the  Appellant  in  that
   province as a matter to take into account in assessing Article 3 nor  was
   she directed to any background evidence in relation to that province. The
   passage to which Ms Foster referred me at paragraph 7.2.1 of the  CIG  at
   page 221 of the Appellant's bundle does not deal with  the  situation  in
   that province nor is it stated to be either  under  the  control  of  the
   Taliban or to be one of the most volatile provinces. In  any  event,  the
   Upper Tribunal in AK  held  that  outside  Taliban  controlled  districts
   internal relocation would not in general be unreasonable. The  First-tier
   Tribunal made a specific finding that the Appellant knew where his family
   was and in all the circumstances I find that there was no error of law in
   the First-tier Tribunal's decision in this regard.


19. I find that on a reading of the decision as a whole, it cannot  be  said
   that the Judge failed to take  into  account  any  relevant  evidence  or
   misconstrued that evidence. She had adequate regard  to  the  Appellant's
   personal  circumstances  in  coming  to  her  conclusions,  analysed  the
   background material she was referred, addressed the relevant case law and
   gave sufficient reasons for her findings in respect of  future  risk  and
   under the Qualification Directive, Article 3 and internal flight.


20.  Ground  3  asserts  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   erred   in   its
   consideration of paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (vi)  in  determining  that  the
   paragraph could not apply to him. It is said that the heart of his  claim
   identified the very significant obstacles to integration if  he  returned
   home. It is also said that the First-tier Tribunal  materially  erred  in
   law in the assessment of his  Article  8  rights  in  the  light  of  his
   friendships in the UK.


21. The Appellant did not rely on  paragraph  276ADE  (1)  in  his  skeleton
   argument and the record of proceedings  discloses  no  argument  in  this
   regard made by Counsel at the hearing.  The First-tier Tribunal concluded
   at paragraph 67 that the Appellant did not meet any of  the  requirements
   of  paragraph  276  ADE  without  considering  whether  there  were  very
   significant obstacles to his integration into Afghanistan. However, given
   the fact that it was not argued before her and her findings  in  relation
   to risk and relocation it is not arguable that the Appellant  could  have
   met the test propounded  in  SSHD  v  Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813  and
   Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances test)
   [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC). Further, the  First-tier  Tribunal  conducted  a
   full proportionality exercise, taking account of the friendships that the
   Appellant had established in the UK and the factors weighing against  and
   in favour of removal. Her findings were open  to  her  on  the  evidence,
   adequately reasoned, took all  material  factors  into  account  and  her
   assessment of where to strike the balance was lawful.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date 01 December 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
