
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08444/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2018                         |On 28th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  Sabah [h]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Patel, Solicitor, Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on [  ]  1990.   The  Appellant
    left Iraq in October 2015 claiming to arrive in the UK on 1st  December
    2015 and claiming asylum on the same date.  The Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum is based on a fear that if returned to Iraq he would  be  killed
    by Kurds seeking to avenge his father's actions or as a result  of  the
    general  situation  there  by  ISIS  or  militias.    The   Appellant's
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 9th July 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before me Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Austin sitting at Manchester on 16th March  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  15th  May  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 25th May 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was refused by Judge Boyes on 11th September 2017.



 4. On 26th September 2017 renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged.  On  20th
    October 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted permission to  appeal
    concluding that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    failed to give proper reasons for concluding  that  the  applicant  was
    vague and inconsistent and that it was arguable that the  judge  failed
    to properly apply the guidance given by AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 544 as
    amended  by  AA  (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ   944,   reaching   arguably
    unsustainable findings of fact.

 5. I note there is no Rule 24 response.  It is on the above basis that the
    appeal comes before me to determine whether or not there is a  material
    error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The
    Appellant appears by his instructed solicitor Miss Patel.   Miss  Patel
    is extremely familiar with this matter having appeared before the First-
    tier Tribunal and is, I believe, the author of the Grounds  of  Appeal.
    The Respondent  appears  by  her  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Diwnycz.

The Relevant Case Law

 6. The relevant case law is to be found in two authorities.   Firstly,  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).  There is an extensive
    headnote to this country guidance authority.  The relevant  section  to
    the headnote is to be found at section E  where  paragraphs  17  to  21
    state:

         "17. The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if  P  originates
             from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the
             IKR authorities.  The authorities in the IKR do not require  P
             to have an expired or current passport, or laissez passer.

         18.  The IKR is virtually violence free.  There is no Article 15(c)
             risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

         19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate  from  the  IKR  can  obtain
             entry for 10 days as a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
             permission for a further 10 days.  If K  finds  employment,  K
             can remain for longer, although K will need to  register  with
             the authorities and provide details of the employer.  There is
             no evidence that the IKR authorities pro-actively remove Kurds
             from the IKR whose permits have come to an end.

         20.  Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected
             to avoid  any  potential  undue  harshness  in  that  city  by
             travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and  is  likely
             to involve an assessment of (a)  the  practicality  of  travel
             from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil  by  air);  (b)  the
             likelihood of K's securing employment in the IKR; and (c)  the
             availability of assistance from family and friends in the IKR.

         21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home
             area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR."

 7. Thereafter the position was revisited in AA (Iraq) v the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  That is a  decision
    of the Court of Appeal and whilst they made revisions  particularly  to
    section C to the headnote in AA where the heading now simply reads  the
    CSID and paragraphs  within  section  C  have  been  removed  from  the
    headnote, AA [2015] still stands as current  the  country  guidance  in
    relation to humanitarian protection claims from Iraqi Claimants.

Submission/Discussion

 8. Miss Patel takes me to her Grounds of Appeal.   Firstly,  she  contends
    that whilst at paragraph 39 of the determination the judge  has  stated
    that:

         "The Appellant has been vague and  inconsistent  throughout  and  I
         cannot accept the Appellant's  argument  that  he  has  been  open,
         consistent and non-evasive."

    In making this finding the Immigration Judge has failed,  she  submits,
    to give  adequate  reasons  for  making  such  findings.   He  has  not
    indicated what element of the evidence was vague and  inconsistent  and
    consequently falls  into  error.   She  submits  that  the  credibility
    assessment is important and the judge having not made reference to  the
    evidence, it is indicative that unfortunately he has not looked at  the
    evidence thoroughly nor drawn conclusions.

 9. Secondly, she points out that the judge has stated at paragraph 43 that
    the Appellant is capable of relocating to the IKR in Baghdad  and  that
    this would be reasonable because the Appellant can  speak  Kurdish,  he
    has some education and work experience and he speaks of being  wealthy.
    Whilst the judge states that he has had regard to AA [2015] he has, she
    submits, failed to have regard to material evidence which was  critical
    in the assessment of internal relocation and in particular,  failed  to
    give due consideration to paragraphs E17 and E19 of the headnote of  AA
    (Iraq) [2015] (recited above).  She submits that the Appellant produced
    evidence of the poor economy and saturated job market in  the  IKR  and
    that it was noted  that  the  Appellant  originated  from  a  contested
    region, which was conceded and that the judge found he could return  to
    the Kurdish region but failed to engage with the background material.

10. Mr Diwnycz concedes that the judge has failed to consider the authority
    of AA [2017] and has given no consideration in the decision relating to
    the evidence that would be appropriate on  the  Appellant's  return  to
    Baghdad.  In such circumstances he concedes that there  is  a  material
    error of law.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. I am considerably assisted in this matter by the approach of Mr Diwnycz
    on behalf of the Secretary  of  State.   He  concedes  that  there  are
    material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  So far as the failure of the judge to give due consideration to
    AA [2017] no criticism whatsoever can be made of the judge  because  of
    course  this  decision  was  not  published  prior  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision being handed down.  In any  event  AA  [2017]  only
    tweaks  the  country   guidance   authority   which   was   given   due
    consideration.

14. What the judge has however failed to do  is  to  give  due  and  proper
    consideration to the issue relating to the return of the Appellant  via
    Baghdad making no findings thereon. Further, the judge  has  not  given
    reasons for his findings on credibility.  Whilst he has concluded  that
    the Appellant has been  "vague  and  inconsistent"  he  has  not  given
    reasons for reaching such conclusions.  It is well-established  that  a
    proper approach to  credibility  will  require  an  assessment  of  the
    evidence and of the  general  claim  and  that  relevant  factors  will
    consist  of  the  internal  consistency  of  the  claim,  its  inherent
    plausibility  and  consistency  with  external  factors  of  the   sort
    typically found in country guidance.  In this case,  whilst  the  judge
    may ultimately be justified in coming to  the  conclusions  he  has  on
    credibility he has to give his reasons and findings and he  has  failed
    to do so.

15.  All  these  factors,   supported   by   the   Secretary   of   State's
    representative, show that there are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The correct approach is  to
    set aside the decision and to remit the matter back to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.



Decision and Directions

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and is set aside.  Directions are given below for the  rehearing
    of this matter.

      1) On concluding that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         contains a material error of law the  decision  is  set  aside  and
         remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Manchester  on
         the first available date 28 days hence with none of the findings of
         fact to stand.

      2) That the length of hearing of the remitted  appeal  will  be  three
         hours.

      3) The hearing is to be before any Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         other than Immigration Judge Austin.

      4) That there be leave to either party to file/serve at  the  Tribunal
         and on the opposing party an  up-to-date  bundle  of  such  further
         objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they seek  to  rely
         at least seven days prior to the restored hearing date.

      5) That an Arabic (Middle Eastern) interpreter do attend  the  hearing
         as per the notice of hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  the
         event that the Appellant requires a different language  interpreter
         then it is the  responsibility  of  his  instructed  solicitors  to
         notify  the  Tribunal  within  seven  days  of  receipt   of   this
         determination.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 26 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 26 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
