
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08391/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|via Skype for Business/BT Meetme              |                              |
|                                              |On 07 September 2020          |
|On 1 September 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     HM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Masih, instructed by Hallmark, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born in 1991 and is a male  citizen  of  Iraq.  By  a
    decision dated 24 April 2019, the respondent  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for international protection. The appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated  on  10  December  2019,
    dismissed his appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims to have been a member of the  Patriotic  Union  of
    Kurdistan (PUK) and worked as a police officer  for  Asayish,  the  PUK
    security service. He was involved in an incident on  25  December  2018
    with the Hamavand Tribe and further violent incidents in January  2019,
    including one at a police station in which a colleague was killed. This
    latter  incident  prompted  the  appellant  to  go  into   hiding   and
    subsequently to flee to the United Kingdom. The  judge  accepted  these
    parts of the appellant's account as true  and  accurate.  She  accepted
    that the appellant had a subjective  fear  of  the  Hamavand  Tribe  on
    account of the possibility of a blood feud arising from  the  incidents
    he had  described.  She  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  a
    subjective fear of the Kurdish authorities because he had deserted from
    his post as a police officer; she found that the appellant's  'superior
    officer was involved in his decision to leave Iraq and assisted him  in
    doing so' [18]. The judge did not accept that the appellant would  face
    serious harm as an undocumented ethnic Kurd and Sunni Muslim;  she  did
    not believe the appellant's claim to have lost  his  passport  and  his
    CSID and found [28] that his identity card would be  in  possession  of
    his family with whom she found the appellant had not lost contact.  The
    appellant, therefore, could return to Iraq and the IKR via Baghdad. The
    judge found that the Kurdish authorities would be willing and  able  to
    protect him  from  the  Hamavand  Tribe  [21].  Finally,  even  if  the
    appellant did find himself in danger it  is  home  area  (the  Hamavand
    Tribe operates in Chamchamal and the Bazayn region of the IKR) she  was
    not satisfied  that  the  tribe's  'reach  extends  beyond  this  area'
    consequently the appellant would be  able  to  relocate  without  undue
    hardship.

 3. The first ground complains that the judge failed to  make  findings  on
    material evidence. Appellant had produced a letter from the Ministry of
    Interior warning employees in general  against  travelling  abroad  and
    engaging in particular activities. The  appellant  complains  that  the
    judge has not made finding as to the weight to be  given  that  letter.
    Moreover, the appellant had given explanations, ignored by  the  judge,
    as to why his reliance upon the letter was not  inconsistent  with  his
    claim that his boss had an officially sanctioned the appellant's flight
    from Iraq.

 4. I am not satisfied that the ground exposes any  error  in  the  judge's
    reasoning. First, I find that the judge will have  taken  into  account
    all evidence that was before her in reaching her findings of  fact.  It
    is clear from the decision [10]  that  the  judge  had  regard  to  the
    appellant's 'explanations'. A finding that the letter from the Ministry
    of Interior was not consistent with the appellant's claim that his  own
    superior officer had encouraged him to leave Iraq was plainly available
    to the judge on the evidence.  Whilst  the  judge  does  not  expressly
    attach particular weight to the letter, it is clear that she has  taken
    all relevant evidence into account in identifying the inconsistency  in
    the appellant's account which led her  to  disbelieve  the  appellant's
    claim that he fears the Kurdish authorities. In essence, the judge  has
    accepted that the appellant  was  encouraged  to  leave  following  the
    incidents in which he had been involved in that the generic  nature  of
    the letter (significantly making no specific reference to the appellant
    himself) did not bear  sufficient  evidential  weight  to  prove  that,
    having been encouraged by an officer to leave Iraq, the appellant would
    be punished in some way upon his return.

 5. The second ground concerns the appellant's claim that he  had  received
    threats from an unknown source  which  had  appeared  on  his  Facebook
    account. The evidence regarding Facebook and  the  judge's  account  of
    that evidence are somewhat, in parts, a  little  difficult  to  follow.
    However what is clear is that the judge did not accept the  appellant's
    claim that he been unable at the time of the hearing to provide details
    of his Facebook account because  he  had  forgotten  his  password  and
    because his mobile phone had been  taken  during  the  journey  to  the
    United Kingdom. The judge makes the  point  (not  contradicted  by  the
    appellant) that it is possible to obtain access to a  Facebook  account
    by requesting a new password  via  the  email  address  linked  to  the
    account. As Mr McVeety,  who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of  State,
    submitted that finding enabled the judge legitimately to attach limited
    weight to the Facebook evidence. In any event, since the  'threats'  on
    the account emanated from an unknown source, it was open to  the  judge
    to conclude that the appellant had failed to prove that he was at  risk
    from the Kurdish authorities.

 6. The appellant also complains that the judge at [14] and [17] had  found
    that the appellant had been inconsistent in his evidence regarding  his
    claimed loss of contact with his family in Iraq. I acknowledge that the
    expressions used by the judge are sometimes problematic; is clear  that
    the judge sometimes  uses  the  word  'inconsistent'  when  she  really
    intends to say that the evidence is not credible. However, it was  open
    to the judge to find that is not credible that the appellant would have
    brought with him to the United Kingdom those documents  which  assisted
    his case (eg. is  police  identification  card)  whilst  'conveniently'
    losing every document which might show that he is safe to return  home.
    Having rejected the appellant's claim that he had  lost  his  CSID,  it
    follows that the judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the  card  was
    available to him. To do so was not an error in law.

 7. The appellant also complains that the mere existence  of  a  system  of
    protection in the IKR 'does not automatically preclude victims of  non-
    state persecution from recognition as a refugee'. That  ground  is  not
    made out. I  accept  the  respondent's  submission  that  there  is  no
    evidence at all that tribes such as that which the appellant claims  to
    fear either seek open conflict with the Kurdish authorities,  that  the
    reach of such tribes throughout the IKR is such that there  is  nowhere
    in the region where the appellant would be safe or that  links  between
    the state authorities and the tribes would in some way pose a threat to
    the appellant. Whilst it would have been helpful had  the  judge  dealt
    with the issue of sufficiency of protection in slightly greater detail,
    I find that grounds of appeal do not disturb her findings.

 8. In conclusion, therefore, the judge's assessment at the  appellant  may
    fear the Hamavand Tribe having been involved in violent incidents  with
    it; that he left Iraq  with  the  official  sanction  of  his  superior
    officer; that the Kurdish authorities are willing and able  to  protect
    him in the future in his home area; that, should he feel unsafe in  his
    home area, there  are  other  parts  of  the  IKR  to  which  he  might
    reasonably relocate; that he will be able to return to Iraq via Baghdad
    and travel from there to the IKR safely because he would have access to
    his CSID is not flawed by legal error for the reasons asserted  in  the
    grounds of appeal or at all. Consequently, the appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


        Signed                               Date 2 September 2020

       Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.













