
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08841/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16.4.2018                         |On 25.4.2019                         |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                    [s s]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Plowright (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr E. Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This was listed as an  error  of  law  hearing  but  in  light  of  the
    concession made in the respondent's Rule 24  Notice  I  confirmed  that
    there was an error of law in the First Tier Tribunal (Judge Moan) (FTT)
    promulgated on 5th September 2018. The grounds  were  made  out  and  I
    proceeded by way of a continuation hearing to consider the evidence  as
    to risk on return to Kurdistan as an apostate.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq  from  Kirkuk  and  a  Kurd.   She
    claimed  asylum  on  religious  grounds,  that  having   converted   to
    Christianity she would be at risk of persecution and or  ill  treatment
    on return to Iraq from the government and ISIS.  She will be  returning
    to Iraq as a single  parent  with  4  children,  one  of  whom  has  no
    registration card.  The appellant fears physical harm from  her  family
    in Iraq, in particular her brother who is a member of  the  forces  and
    who has threatened to kill her since her conversion.

FTT decision

3.   The FTT found the appellant's claim in  general  to  be  credible.   It
    found that she had converted to Christianity [44] and that  her  family
    in Iraq were opposed to this and she had  received  threats.   The  FTT
    took into account evidence of a translated message from the appellant's
    brother referring to her as an apostate and the only  solution  was  to
    kill her.  The FTT accepted this evidence and found that the  appellant
    had not embellished her account [38]. The FTT considered the background
    material and concluded that there was discrimination towards Christians
    in Kurdistan.  The background material suggested that CSID cards issued
    to a Muslim could not be changed as a result of conversion  to  another
    faith, the FTT found that the effect of this was unclear [52].  The FTT
    found  no  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  account  that  she  had
    separated from her husband  because  of  her  conversion  and  that  he
    maintained contact with the children [42]. The FTT concluded  that  the
    appellant could return to Iraq or Kurdistan where she would be able  to
    obtain protection and practise her religion freely [54 - 58].

Grounds of appeal

4.   In grounds of appeal the appellant argued that the FTT erred by  having
    found that  she  had  converted  to  Christianity  it  failed  to  make
    sufficient findings as to risk on return to Kurdistan as  an  apostate.
    There was a fundamental difference in treatment towards Christians  and
    those who converted from Islam.  Further the FTT failed to give  weight
    to the fact that the appellant was a member of  an  Evangelical  church
    and she considered proselytising as an inherent part of her faith.

Permission to appeal

5.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by  FTJ
    Scott Baker on 16.10.2018.

 Rule 24 notice

6.   In a Rule 24 notice dated 20.11.2018 the respondent did not oppose  the
    grounds for permission and invited the Tribunal to determine the appeal
    with fresh oral (continuance) hearing to consider risk on return.

Hearing & Submissions

7.   There was no interpreter booked for the hearing.  I indicated  that  an
    interpreter could be arranged for the afternoon and the  hearing  could
    be postponed until then.

8.   Mr  Plowright  responded  and  sought  to  rely  additional  pieces  of
    documentary evidence in the form of a Vibe message from the appellant's
    brother issuing threats to her, a  photograph  of  the  brother  and  a
    letter re the appellant's faith.  Mr Tufan confirmed  that  he  had  no
    objection to this evidence being adduced in the light of  the  findings
    made by the FTT that  the  appellant  had  been  sent  a  Vibe  message
    containing threats by her brother. Accordingly Mr Plowright decided  to
    proceed on the basis of submissions.  Mr Tufan had  no  wish  to  cross
    examine the appellant.

9.   Mr Plowright relied on the grounds of appeal  and  background  material
    which included the following: Iraq 2017 International Religious Freedom
    Report, COIR Iraq: religious minorities August 2016, and Iraq: Internal
    relocation,  civil  documentation  and  returns   February   2019.   He
    emphasised the difficulties that would be faced by the appellant in the
    event that she did not register her child  as  Muslim  and  that  would
    result in her being unable to  obtain  state  support,  education  etc.
    Although included in the appellant's bundle, the unreported UT case was
    not relied on.  The appellant  faced  difficulties  because  she  would
    return as a lone parent, there were no patrilineal relatives to  assist
    her and she had converted to Christianity. The risk shad to be assessed
    in that context.

10.  In response Mr Tufan acknowledged the  Rule  24  Notice  and  submitted
    that the background material established that there was  discrimination
    towards Christians and converts but  not  persecution.   The  appellant
    would be able to relocate to an area away from her family  and  it  was
    not plausible that her brother would seek to track her down.   She  may
    well have difficulties if indeed she was returning as a single  parent.
    The  recent  Home  office  letters  indicated  that   there   were   no
    difficulties in registering for a CSID card.

Discussion and conclusion

11.  I take as my starting point the findings made  by  the  FTT  summarised
    above in paragraph 3 that the appellant has converted  to  Christianity
    and been baptised.  She is a Kurd from Kirkuk and she has an Iraqi CSID
    card which would allow her to return to Iraq and  it  was  agreed  that
    there were flights to IKR where she could return. The  FTT  found  that
    the appellant was unlikely to have the support of her  family  in  Iraq
    given that they opposed her decision to convert to  Christianity  [48].
    The FTT concluded that she could  continue  to  practise  her  religion
    freely and relocate to Kurdistan.

12.  It is clear from the decision and reasons that  the  appellant  pursued
    her claim on the basis that she would be considered to be an  apostate,
    that she was a member of an Evangelical church and that  she  would  be
    active in proselytising her faith.  These are material aspects  of  her
    claim that the FTT did not fully  consider.   The  background  material
    adduced before the FTT was the report on  "Kurdistan  -  conditions  of
    Christian  Converts  -  July  2017"  which  in  effect  summarises  the
    background material that was presented to me.  The background  material
    relied  on  by  Mr   Plowright   establishes   that   Christians   face
    discrimination in Iraq and the IKR.  The emphasis in the material is on
    Christians rather than on converts but I fully accept that overall  the
    risk of persecution for Christians in Iraq/IRK is not shown.   The COIR
    dated January 2016 at section 5.3 refers to the UNHCR guidelines  which
    show  contradictions  in  Iraq  where  the  law  allows  for  religious
    conversion but the personal  laws  do  not  allow  for  the  change  in
    religious status.  It  states  that  "given  the  widespread  animosity
    towards converts from Islam,  and  the  general  climate  of  religious
    intolerance, the conversion of a Muslim to  Christianity  would  likely
    result in ostracism and /or violence at  the  hands  of  the  convert's
    community, tribe or family. Many, including (Sunni & Shi'ite) religious
    and political leaders, reportedly believe that apostasy from  Islam  is
    punishable by death or even killing of apostates as a  religious  duty.
    Additionally, Christian converts risk being suspected of  working  with
    the MNF-1/USF-1 or more generally the West..."

13.  I am satisfied that the appellant faces risk of  ill  treatment  /death
    from her family in Iraq. The evidence shows that her brother  has  sent
    threatening messages and it is reasonable  that  as  a  member  of  the
    forces he would be able to locate her and have the resources to do  so.
    Accordingly internal relocation to Kurdistan is the key  consideration.



14.  I am satisfied that the appellant would  be  able  to  enter  Kurdistan
    (IKR) as she is in possession of a  valid  CSID  as  do  three  of  her
    children.  The fourth child  has  no  card.   The  background  evidence
    provides that "Christian converts reported being forced  to  choose  to
    register  their  child  as  a  Muslim  or  to  have  the  child  remain
    undocumented, affecting their eligibility for government benefits." The
    personal  status  law  requires  administrative  designation  of  minor
    children as Muslim even if the parent is a convert. Without an identity
    card converts may not  register  their  marriages,  enrol  children  in
    school, acquire passports or obtain some government  services  such  as
    ration card allocation  for  basic  food.  (see  International  Freedom
    report  2017).   I  am  satisfied  that  the   appellant   could   face
    difficulties with regard to one of her children  who  would  be  either
    undocumented or she would be forced to register him as Muslim. There is
    a level of uncertainty as to how these processes apply in practice  but
    I give the benefit  of  the  doubt  to  the  appellant.  Following  the
    guidance/ headnote in AHH with reference to AA (Iraq) v SSHD para 9  it
    is necessary to consider on a case by case basis the  extent  to  which
    any assistance is likely to be provided.  For those without family,  as
    in  this  case,  there  are  limited  options  for  accommodation,  and
    employment especially for lone women who are very  unlikely  to  secure
    legitimate employment.  The appellant would be  returning  without  any
    male support and no family support.  She has 4 children to  support.  I
    find that she would be vulnerable as  a  lone  female  parent  who  has
    converted to Christianity who wishes to proselytise her faith and  that
    given  the  difficulties  faced  as  outlined   above   in   terms   of
    accommodation and employment and education it  would  be  unduly  harsh
    such that internal relocation is not an option.

Decision

15.  I go on to remake the decision and I allow  the  appeal  on  protection
    grounds.

                               Signed                     Date 17.4.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


NO ANONYMITY ORDER
NO FEE AWARD


                               Signed                     Date 17.4.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


