
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/08961/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th December 2017                        |On 9th January 2018           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                           MR REMEDAN HUSSEIN HARO
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born on 1st of September 1999. He
    appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi sitting  at
    Birmingham on 13th of March 2017 who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated 16th of August 2016. That decision  was
    to refuse  the  Appellant's  application  for  international  protection
    although  as  an  unaccompanied  minor   the   Appellant   was   granted
    discretionary leave to remain until he was 17 � years of age.


 2. The Appellant left Ethiopia in 2015 and travelled  for  about  6  months
    passing through Sudan, Libya, Italy and France before  arriving  in  the
    United Kingdom on 9th of November 2016 when he was apprehended by police
    in Lincolnshire and placed in the care of the local authority there.  He
    claimed asylum on the 10th of February 2016 when he was informed that he
    was an illegal entrant and could be removed from the United Kingdom.  It
    was the refusal of that application  which  gave  rise  to  the  present
    proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The Appellant's claim  was  summarised  by  the  Judge  at  [2]  of  her
    determination. The Appellant was of  Oromo  ethnicity  and  had  been  a
    supporter of the Oromo Liberation Front,  the  OLF,  for  2  years.  His
    father had also been a supporter who was detained on three occasions. On
    the 3rd and last occasion the  Appellant's  father  was  killed  by  the
    authorities. The Appellant's family moved to Dallo after that  when  the
    Appellant attended demonstrations to protest at the killing of  students
    and encouraged others to do so. During one of  those  demonstrations  he
    was beaten by the police. Following the beating  he  returned  home  but
    whilst he was out playing football the  police  visited  his  home.  His
    mother was  afraid  and  told  the  Appellant  what  had  happened.  The
    Appellant went to stay with a neighbour where he remained until  he  was
    able to leave Ethiopia. The Appellant relied on an expert report written
    by Dr Samuel Bekalo which said that the central point in  the  case  was
    that the Appellant was an active supporter of the OLF  and  at  risk  of
    persecution upon return to Ethiopia. Diaspora opposition movements  such
    as the one which the Appellant had joined were seen as a threat  to  the
    Ethiopian regime's political and economic monopoly.

The Explanation for Refusal

 4. The Respondent accepted the Appellant's  claimed  age,  that  he  was  a
    citizen of Ethiopia and was of Oromo ethnicity. The  Respondent  neither
    accepted nor rejected two points in  the  refusal  letter  but  rejected
    outright a third point. The Appellant's claim that his  father  had  had
    problems with the authorities due to the father's political opinion  was
    neither accepted nor rejected. The Appellant had put this  part  of  the
    case forward in both his witness statement and  his  substantive  asylum
    interview. The Appellant had told the Respondent that  his  father  died
    when he, the Appellant, was 12 years old and the information  about  his
    father's political activities came  second  hand  from  the  Appellant's
    mother. The Appellant had been unable to provide a detailed  account  of
    his father's arrests and detentions.  At  paragraph  24  the  Respondent
    summarised her position saying that due to the lack of  detail  and  the
    second-hand nature of the information there was not enough to accept  or
    reject that part of the claim. The Respondent was not prepared  to  give
    the  Appellant  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  because  the   Appellant's
    statements were not found to be coherent and plausible. They ran counter
    to  available  specific  and  general  information   relevant   to   the
    Appellant's case.


 5. The 2nd concern of the Respondent related to the Appellant's claim to be
    a supporter of the OLF which could be neither accepted nor rejected  but
    for which the Appellant was refused the benefit of  the  doubt  for  the
    reasons previously given. The Appellant had been able to  provide  basic
    details of this group in his asylum interview but  the  photographs  the
    Appellant had produced which were said to be of an official OLF  meeting
    were only printed copies and unsupported by  a  letter  of  confirmation
    from an OLF official. No weight was  placed  on  them  and  no  external
    sources could be found by the Respondent of  the  existence  of  an  OLF
    organisation in London.


 6. The 3rd concern was the Appellant's claim to  have  taken  part  in  two
    demonstrations and suffering problems with the authorities as a  result.
    This was rejected outright.  No  external  sources  could  be  found  to
    confirm the demonstrations in Ethiopia to which the  Appellant  referred
    or the death of one of the student leaders of the demonstrations.


 7. At paragraph 33 of the refusal letter the Respondent set  out  what  she
    said were further concerns this time about specific  inconsistencies  in
    the Appellant's account. Firstly, if the Appellant had been beaten up by
    the police at a demonstration it was inconsistent  that  he  would  have
    gone out to play football a few hours later. Secondly,  the  Appellant's
    explanation that he returned home (after the beating) because he thought
    he was safe at home from arrest by the police was inconsistent with  his
    account that his father had been arrested at home. Thirdly, he  appeared
    to have suggested in his asylum interview that his sister took him to  a
    neighbour's house  (instead  of  going  home)  whereas  in  his  witness
    statement he said his mother had taken  him,  the  Appellant,  from  the
    family home to the neighbour's.  The  Respondent  also  noted  that  the
    Appellant had passed through a number of safe countries before  arriving
    in  the  United  Kingdom  and  claiming  asylum  which  undermined   his
    credibility  pursuant  to  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.

The Hearing at First Instance

 8. At [21] and [22] the Judge summarised the closing submissions.  For  the
    Respondent, it was argued that there was no evidence  that  the  meeting
    which the Appellant claimed to have attended in the United  Kingdom  had
    taken place and there was no evidence of the date of the photographs  of
    the meeting. Since the refusal  letter  the  Appellant  had  provided  a
    letter of support from the OLF but that had been provided after a single
    meeting and a telephone call. The letter was an attempt to  bolster  the
    Appellant's asylum claim. It was  based  on  information  given  by  the
    Appellant and  was  not  independent  verification  of  the  Appellant's
    activities. There was no evidence the authorities would  be  aware  that
    the Appellant was taking part in demonstrations in the United Kingdom.


 9. Counsel for the Appellant, who also appeared before me, argued there was
    no need for the Appellant to provide corroboration of his  asylum  claim
    he only had to show a reasonable likelihood of  harm  in  the  event  of
    return. There was background material to indicate  oppressive  behaviour
    by the regime in Ethiopia. The Appellant had  had  a  harrowing  journey
    from Libya across the Mediterranean. The alleged inconsistency regarding
    who took the Appellant to the uncle's house was not an inconsistency  at
    all. A careful examination of the Appellant's answer in interview showed
    that he was actually referring to his sister not his mother.



The Decision at First Instance

10. The Judge noted at  [25]  that  the  OLF  would  only  have  issued  the
    Appellant with a letter of support in this country if the Appellant  was
    genuinely involved with  them.  According  to  the  background  evidence
    contained in the Respondent's country of origin and  information  report
    there was societal discrimination against the Oromo people  but  it  did
    not amount to persecution. The  Judge  accepted  at  [27]  that  it  was
    reasonably likely that the Appellant had been involved in at  least  one
    anti-government protest but that on its own did not place the  Appellant
    at risk of persecution and return. There  was  little  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's father having been an activist  or  of  mobilising  protests
    against the Ethiopian government.


11.  The Judge found a lack of evidence of  the  Appellant's  activities  in
    this country. The authorities were unlikely to have an interest  in  the
    Appellant unless  he  was  involved  in  a  prominent  role  with  those
    protests. The letter from the  OLF  chairman  accepted  the  Appellant's
    account given by the Appellant over the telephone but the  chairman  was
    not able to verify what the  Appellant  told  him  about  activities  in
    Ethiopia. The Appellant was no more than a participant in the  protests,
    he was not responsible for mobilising attendance at them.  Without  more
    evidence about the position  of  the  Appellant's  father  and  why  the
    government would have reason to fear the Appellant the Judge  could  not
    be satisfied that the Appellant was  of  any  greater  interest  to  the
    authorities than the large  number  of  individuals  who  attended  such
    protests.


12. The Appellant on his case,  became  involved  with  the  OLF  after  his
    father's death. This suggested (according to the Judge at [28]) that the
    Appellant had an interest in his  father's  activities  and  would  have
    sought out information about them. The Appellant's lack of knowledge  of
    the father's activities suggested that the Appellant's  father  had  not
    been of interest to the authorities as claimed. There  was  no  evidence
    about the father's death. The Judge dealt briefly with human rights  and
    section  55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act   2009
    dismissing the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

13. The Appellant appealed arguing that there was an error in requiring  the
    Appellant to provide supporting evidence of the father's  position.  The
    Judge had not decided whether  the  Appellant  had  taken  part  in  two
    protests in Ethiopia. The Appellant should have been given  the  benefit
    of the doubt. The finding that OLF supporters did not  risk  persecution
    upon return was not based  on  the  background  information  or  country
    guidance. The Judge had failed to determine whether the Appellant was an
    OLF supporter. If the Appellant's account was correct and he had come to
    the adverse attention of the Ethiopian authorities  before  fleeing  the
    country he did belong to a targeted group. There was also an issue as to
    whether the Appellant would be at risk as an unaccompanied child.


14. The application for permission to  appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson on 9th of August 2017. In  refusing
    permission to  appeal  he  stated  that  Judge  Obhi  had  not  required
    corroborative evidence nor had it been indicated why  it  was  important
    for the Judge to conclude that the Appellant might have been  a  student
    protester. Whilst the Judge did not specifically refer to  the  relevant
    country guidance decision in MB [2007] UKAIT 30, it was evident she  was
    relying on it when assessing the question of risk to the Appellant.  The
    Judge had set out her findings on the level of support  demonstrated  by
    the Appellant for the OLF.


15.  This caused the Appellant to renew his application  for  permission  to
    appeal which took issue with the first instance decision. Judge Obhi had
    acted perversely in holding that the Appellant's case was incredible  or
    not proved because  the  Appellant  could  not  supply  details  of  his
    father's OLF activities conducted before the Appellant had attained  the
    age of 10 years. The renewed application came on the papers before Upper
    Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 12 October 2017.  In  granting  permission  to
    appeal she wrote that it was arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    required the Appellant to provide more detailed in  supporting  evidence
    when given his circumstances this would have been very difficult. It was
    also arguable that in finding that the Appellant would not be at risk by
    reason of his accepted participation in  demonstrations  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not taken into account the report of the country expert  or
    the country background evidence.


16. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission on  31st  of  October
    2017 stating that she was not able to produce a full  response  to  the
    Appellant's grounds but the Judge had considered all the evidence  that
    was available  and  came  to  sustainable  conclusions.  In  turn,  the
    Appellant replied to  this  response  stating  that  should  the  Upper
    Tribunal  find  that  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  previous
    determination a request might be made for the substantive hearing to be
    adjourned for the Appellant to obtain: a further country expert report;
    an  updated  statement  from  the  Appellant  and  further   background
    material.

The Hearing Before Me

17. In consequence of the grant of permission  to  appeal  the  matter  came
    before me to determine in the first place whether there was  a  material
    error of law such that the determination should be  set  aside  and  the
    decision re-made. If there was not then the decision at  first  instance
    would stand. At the outset of the hearing the  Presenting  Officer  said
    that having read the Appellant's renewed  grounds  he  agreed  that  the
    Judge had materially erred in law and the decision should be set  aside.
    The Judge had made no findings on the section 8 point. There was however
    a disagreement between the Appellant and the Respondent as to  what  the
    further outcome of the appeal should be in the event of an error of  law
    being found. The Respondent's view was that the case should be  remitted
    back to the First-tier  to  be  reheard  by  different  Judge.  For  the
    Appellant, it was argued that this was not necessary, the Upper Tribunal
    should be able to make a decision  today  on  the  material  already  in
    existence.


18. I indicated that I was concerned about the position the  Respondent  was
    taking. The Respondent had had a favourable decision which she  was  now
    seeking to distance herself from. The result of a remittal would  be  to
    require the Appellant to have to give his evidence all  over  again  and
    another Judge would have to write a fresh determination which  could  be
    subject to lengthy onward appeals. After reading the decision  at  first
    instance under appeal, it was difficult to see what  significant  points
    in the refusal letter had been overlooked by the Judge  when  dismissing
    the Appellant's appeal. If there were none the fact that the  Respondent
    was now not prepared to support a decision in her favour would mean that
    the Respondent was resiling from the contents  of  the  refusal  letter.
    Once the refusal letter was abandoned, the only remedy was to allow  the
    Appellant's appeal as the Respondent's case fell away.


19. For the Appellant, it was argued that there was nothing in  the  refusal
    letter that the Judge at first instance had failed to include. The Judge
    had accepted the Appellant had attended a demonstration in Ethiopia. She
    had not accepted that the Appellant's  father  had  been  in  the  Oromo
    Liberation Front and wanted direct evidence of that. The Appellant could
    not give that direct evidence he could only repeat what he had been told
    by his mother. That would remain the position if the matter was remitted
    back to  the  First-tier  and  therefore  to  send  the  case  back  was
    pointless. The Respondent had rejected  the  Appellant's  claim  of  the
    father's involvement because the Appellant was not to  be  believed  but
    the  Judge  had  believed  that  the  Appellant  had  taken  part  in  a
    demonstration.


20. For the Respondent, it was argued that one  could  not  compartmentalise
    credibility findings. If the findings on credibility by the  Judge  were
    flawed in some respects then none of the credibility findings  could  be
    preserved. The Respondent was  not  conceding  that  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to a grant of refugee status, a different Judge would  have  to
    look at the case. The Judge had erred in her approach  to  corroboration
    and whether it was or was not available for a child. Another Judge might
    say that they did not require corroboration but the issue had  not  been
    looked at properly.


21. For the Appellant in reply counsel argued that if the matter were to  be
    remitted the Judge's positive finding that the Appellant had taken  part
    in a demonstration would have to be preserved. If it was unsafe for  the
    Judge to expect direct evidence of the Appellant's account and that  was
    an error by the Judge as the Respondent appeared to be  suggesting,  one
    had a case that the Appellant could not lose.


Findings

22. This is a rather unusual case in that not only did the  Judge  at  first
    instance dismiss the Appellant's appeal but another Judge sitting in the
    First-tier Tribunal found there was no arguable error  of  law  in  that
    decision. In a reply to the grant of permission the Respondent supported
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Judge.  Nevertheless,  before  me  the
    Respondent took a completely different view and said that the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was unsafe and should be set aside. It is  difficult
    to see how the Respondent can argue that the Judge's decision  at  first
    instance is unsafe and should be set aside  without  at  the  same  time
    fundamentally undermining her own refusal letter.


23. It was an important part of the Appellant's case  that  his  father  had
    been killed by the authorities because of the  father's  activities  for
    the OLF. The Respondent did not consider that the Appellant had provided
    sufficient evidence of that claim for  it  to  be  accepted.  The  Judge
    agreed with the Respondent and at  [27]  wrote  that  there  was  little
    evidence of the  Appellant's  father  having  been  an  activist  or  of
    mobilising protest against the current regime. The Judge  did  not  stop
    there and merely echo the refusal letter but in fact went on to  give  a
    reason why the Appellant's lack of knowledge of his father's  activities
    was of concern. At [28] the Judge wrote that  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge suggested that the Appellant's father was not of  interest  to
    the authorities because if the  Appellant  was  active  in  the  OLF  as
    claimed he would reasonably be expected to have sought  out  information
    about his father's activities.


24. At first sight that appears to be a sound conclusion open to  the  Judge
    on the evidence and a point to be taken against  the  Appellant  in  the
    overall assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the  claim.  However,  the
    Respondent does not support that and says that the Judge gave inadequate
    reasons for her findings. It is not clear to me how another Judge  could
    deal with this issue more clearly or more cogently than Judge Obhi  did.
    Any other attempt to explain this problem would come up against the same
    objection from the Respondent that it was inadequate. I cannot  see  how
    the refusal letter can be maintained in the circumstances.


25. The second concern the Respondent had was whether the  Appellant  really
    was a supporter of the OLF. At the  stage  of  the  refusal  letter  the
    Appellant was criticised for not having a letter  of  support  from  the
    OLF. By the time the matter came before Judge  Obhi  the  Appellant  had
    produced a letter from the OLF. The Judge rejected that letter  at  [27]
    noting that the letter was based on what the Appellant had  said  rather
    than any independent investigation by the OLF themselves. That  too  was
    an apparently cogent objection to the Appellant's claim to  be  involved
    in OLF activities in this country. The Respondent's position was that no
    evidence to support the Appellant's OLF activities in the United Kingdom
    had been produced, the Judge agreed with that by saying  that  what  had
    been produced did not go that far.


26. If  the  Judge's  findings  are  rejected  as  being  inadequate  it  is
    difficult to see how another Judge could address the  issue  any  better
    than Judge Obhi did. In submissions to me the Presenting Officer  relied
    on the three issues taken in paragraph 33 of  the  refusal  letter,  the
    inconsistency of playing  football  after  being  beaten,  thinking  the
    police would not arrest him at home when his father had been so arrested
    and who out of his mother and his sister had taken the Appellant to  the
    neighbour's house. The Respondent criticises the Judge for  not  dealing
    with those three issues and the submission is that whilst the Judge came
    to the right conclusion in dismissing the appeal  she  did  so  for  the
    wrong reasons. Another Judge, it was  submitted,  should  analyse  those
    three discrepancies and assessed their importance.


27. The Judge's finding was that the  Appellant  had  been  involved  in  at
    least one anti-government protest in Ethiopia but that of itself did not
    place the Appellant at risk of persecution. The  Respondent's  case  was
    that the Appellant had not been involved in any  such  demonstration  at
    all. The Respondent is in effect merely disagreeing  with  the  positive
    finding made by the Judge on the Appellant's activities in Ethiopia. The
    Respondent's case is that the Judge should have placed  more  weight  on
    the three alleged inconsistencies.


28. In fact, there are only two inconsistencies for  the  reasons  given  by
    the Appellant's counsel at the  hearing  at  first  instance.  A  closer
    examination of the interview record reveals that it is not clear on  the
    face of it who the Appellant was referring to at  question  93  when  he
    said: "she took me to a neighbouring house". Did  the  mother  send  the
    Appellant's sister to inform the Appellant of the police visit and  then
    the mother took the Appellant to  the  neighbouring  house  or  did  the
    sister having passed on the information about the police visit then take
    the Appellant to the neighbouring house? Contrary to what is said in the
    refusal letter  there  is  not  an  inconsistency  between  the  witness
    statement and the interview record since the witness statement does  not
    make clear who took the Appellant to the  neighbour's.  The  sister  had
    found the Appellant 10 minutes away from home playing  football  and  he
    had returned home but the statement  did  not  say  who  then  took  the
    Appellant to the neighbour's house. Perhaps the  Appellant  should  have
    made the position clearer but that was a matter to be explored in  cross
    examination and thus for the Judge to adjudicate upon. That she did  not
    say there was a discrepancy means that the issue was not proved  against
    the Appellant.


29. The criticism of the Appellant that he was playing football after  being
    beaten up also has little bearing on the close upon  closer  examination
    of the witness statement. At paragraph 14 of his statement the Appellant
    said that he was hit by a policeman's baton but "I did not  sustain  any
    serious injuries and I managed to escape. I did have bruises on  my  arm
    which disappeared with time." Whether the Appellant did or did not go on
    to play football is to a certain extent irrelevant, the important  point
    is whether the Appellant's  case  was  inconsistent  as  the  Respondent
    claimed in the refusal paragraph. In my view,  a  fair  reading  of  the
    witness statement does not reveal the inconsistency relied upon  by  the
    Respondent. Bruising on  the  arm  would  not  necessarily  prevent  the
    Appellant from for example playing football. The significance of this is
    that it cannot be a criticism of the Judge that she failed to deal  with
    an inconsistency which turns out not to be an inconsistency.  There  was
    no  need  for  the  Judge  to  deal  with  irrelevant  matters  in   her
    determination and she did not do so.


30. The 3rd point made  at  paragraph  33  of  the  refusal  letter  is  the
    inconsistency between the Appellant saying he did not think  the  police
    would come to his house and the fact that he knew that they did come  to
    his house because that was where they had arrested the father. Was  this
    a point of such significance that its omission by the  Judge  meant  she
    had not considered properly  the  credibility  or  lack  of  it  in  the
    Appellant's claim?


31. Part of the difficulty here is the wording of the interview record.  The
    answer to question 93 was "I thought the police didn't come home so they
    came home". The Judge had to deal with the case  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence which was before her. The poor wording of that answer does  not
    make it clear what the Appellant's case was on why  he  thought  he  was
    safe at home. The Appellant was interviewed in Oromo and it is not clear
    from the interview record whether the  Appellant  was  saying  that  the
    police never came to the house (which would an inconsistency) or whether
    he was saying that he did not think they had come to the house  on  that
    occasion.


32. Had the Judge found against the Appellant on this point a  course  urged
    on me by the Presenting Officer, that conclusion would have been  itself
    open to challenge on the basis that the precise wording of the interview
    record did not support the criticism made by the Respondent at paragraph
    33. Overall, I do not consider that the Judge can properly be criticised
    for failing to consider the issues raised in paragraph 33 of the refusal
    letter since a careful examination of the evidence does  not  show  that
    they have any force.


33. For the sake of  completeness  and  to  ensure  that  the  losing  party
    understood why they lost it might have been preferable for the Judge  to
    have dealt in terms with the three issues in paragraph  33.  However,  a
    careful examination of the evidence which was  before  the  Judge  shows
    that the criticisms made in that paragraph could not be made out and  so
    did not take the case any further. What one is left with is  a  positive
    finding  by  the  Judge  that  the  Appellant  was   involved   in   one
    demonstration but that would not  of  itself  put  him  at  risk  and  a
    rejection of the Appellant's UK  based  evidence  and  claimed  father's
    activities. The Respondent does  not  stand  by  those  criticisms  even
    though those criticisms were made in the  refusal  letter.  The  refusal
    letter thus falls away since  the  Respondent  does  not  stand  by  the
    otherwise cogently seeming objections taken  by  the  Judge  (objections
    which were supported by Judge Hodgkinson when he refused  permission  to
    appeal). The Respondent relies on objections not specifically dealt with
    by the Judge but which a closer examination reveals do not take the case
    materially  further.  The  Respondent  did  not  take  issue  with   the
    Appellant's failure to claim asylum in a safe country prior to  arriving
    in the United Kingdom because of the Appellant's  age  at  the  relevant
    time, see paragraph 36 of the refusal letter.


34. Finally I deal with the issue of the Appellant's claim under Article 8.
    The Judge stated at paragraph 29 of her determination that  the  appeal
    before her was primarily concerned with asylum because until such  time
    as the Appellant could be safely returned to  Ethiopia  the  Respondent
    was not proposing to return him. The Appellant is now over the  age  of
    18 but since I propose to allow the appeal on asylum grounds the  issue
    of Article 8 is not important. The  Judge  considered  her  duty  under
    section 55 of the 2009 Act because the Appellant was under the  age  of
    18 years at the time of the appeal before her. It is not necessary  for
    me to consider this aspect of the matter since  the  Appellant  is  now
    over 18. Since the refusal letter falls away there is no  objection  to
    the Appellant's claim for international protection. It is urged upon me
    by the Presenting Officer to set the decision of the  First-tier  aside
    on the grounds that the objections taken to the Appellant's  claim  are
    not sustainable. As I have indicated that leaves me with no option  but
    to allow the appeal outright  when  remaking  the  appeal  decision.  I
    therefore allow the Appellant's appeal.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I remake the  decision  in  this  case  by
    allowing the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant international protection.

Appellant's appeal allowed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 2nd of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 2nd of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
