
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08617/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th September 2017                         |On 5th October 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill instructed by AH Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 10th August
    2016 to refuse her application for asylum in the  UK.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 20th February  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot
    dismissed the appeal. The Appellant now appeals with permission granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern on 24th July 2017.

    Background

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant claims that she was
    educated to degree level in Pakistan and graduated  with  a  degree  in
    maths and began studying for an MSc in Pakistan.  Her parents  arranged
    a marriage between her and an uneducated man from the village  but  she
    was unhappy with this arrangement.  With the support of her mother  and
    maternal grandparents she applied to study in the UK and arrived in the
    UK on 23rd August 2011.  However, a short time after she commenced  the
    course the college closed.  Before her  leave  to  remain  expired  she
    applied to extend her stay on human rights grounds but that application
    was refused and an appeal against that dismissed.

 3. The Appellant claims that on 15th January 2013 she met a man called Ali
    and they moved in together in March 2013.  However, a short time  after
    that Ali began to mistreat the Appellant; he sexually abused and  raped
    her. The mistreatment continued over three years.  She  says  that  she
    sustained an injury to her head when he hit her on 1st March  2016  and
    that he left after she told him  to  go  and  threatened  to  call  the
    police. She claims that on 20th March 2016 she got a  phone  call  from
    her father saying that Ali was with him and that he had told  him  that
    she had been living with Ali  and  other  men  and  that  he  had  seen
    photographs of her. Although  the  Appellant  denied  this  her  father
    threatened to kill her and accused her of insulting him and Islam.  Her
    brother also phoned her and threatened to kill her upon her  return  to
    Pakistan.

 4. The Appellant claims that it was after this incident that she went to a
    solicitor and told him what happened but he did not take her seriously.
     She was arrested and detained but she claims that  the  barrister  who
    represented her did not mention this issue in court. Removal directions
    were deferred after she made further representations and an application
    for judicial review. On 11th June 2016 she claimed asylum.

 5. In the Reasons for Refusal letter the Secretary of State did not accept
    the Appellant's claim to have been threatened by her family in Pakistan
    due to her relationship with Ali nor that her parents  had  arranged  a
    marriage for her.  In any event the Secretary of State considered  that
    there would be  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  Appellant  in
    Pakistan and concluded that she did not have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution.

 6. The Appellant did not give oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge. She submitted a report from a consultant clinical  psychologist,
    Dr Rachel Thomas, which concluded that the  Appellant  suffers  from  a
    major depressive disorder with a number of  post-traumatic  traits  and
    that it would be psychiatrically dangerous for her to  be  required  to
    give evidence at the Tribunal.  The judge considered the  evidence  and
    concluded that the Appellant had not established that she is at risk of
    persecution in Pakistan. The judge considered that  the  Appellant  had
    not established a claim under Article 3 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights based on a risk of suicide.  The judge considered  Article
    8 and concluded  that  the  removal  of  the  Appellant  would  not  be
    disproportionate  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  legitimate  aim   in
    maintaining immigration control.

    Grounds of appeal

 7. The Appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that application was refused on 9th  June  2017.   In  the
    renewed Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Appellant relied on
    three grounds.

 8. The first ground contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed  to
    properly take account of the  Appellant's  mental  health  difficulties
    when assessing the credibility of her account.  It is  contended  that,
    in finding the Appellant not credible, the judge provided three reasons
    for his conclusions, the first being the delay in the Appellant seeking
    asylum, the second being inconsistencies in  the  Appellant's  evidence
    and thirdly the failure  of  the  Appellant  to  produce  corroborative
    evidence of her relationship with Ali in the UK. Whilst it is  accepted
    that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  turned  his  mind  to  Dr  Thomas'
    evidence he did this only in the  context  of  determining  whether  Dr
    Thomas'  evidence  confirmed  that  the  mental  health  disorder   the
    Appellant was suffering from was caused by the  traumatic  life  events
    she claimed occurred.  However, it is submitted that the  judge  failed
    to consider  Dr  Thomas'  evidence  about  the  likely  impact  of  the
    Appellant's mental health difficulties on the matters  that  the  judge
    ultimately found supported his conclusion that  the  Appellant's  claim
    was not credible. It is contended that the judge failed to take account
    of the medical evidence when assessing the alleged  inconsistencies  in
    the Appellant's narrative of the  mistreatment  she  had  suffered  and
    failed to consider whether the accepted fact that the Appellant  had  a
    disorder that impaired her memory,  concentration  and  orientation  to
    time and place would have an impact on her ability to  give  consistent
    evidence. It is further submitted that the judge failed to have  regard
    to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No  2  of  2010  on  Children,
    Vulnerable Adults and Sensitive Appellants in assessing the Appellant's
    evidence.  It is contended that the judge should have had regard to the
    potential impact of the Appellant's vulnerability  on  her  ability  to
    give a consistent account in support of her claim and on  matters  such
    as the timing of her claim and her inability to corroborate her claim.

 9. In the second ground it is  contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    assessment of Article 3. It  is  submitted  that,  although  the  judge
    accepted that mental health services in Pakistan leave a great deal  to
    be desired and described the lack of  provision  of  such  services  as
    woeful and noted that mentally ill people are very  much  dependent  on
    informal sources of support from family and the  local  community,  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons for concluding that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant met the threshold for Article 3 protection
    on health grounds.  In the alternative it is contended that  the  judge
    reached an inconsistent conclusion based on the findings.

10. The third ground contends  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for concluding that there are not very significant obstacles to
    the Appellant's integration in Pakistan.  Having found that there  were
    obvious difficulties  for  the  Appellant  in  readapting  to  life  in
    Pakistan which would be exacerbated by her mental health  problems  the
    judge failed to explain why he concluded that he was not satisfied that
    there were very significant obstacles such as to meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE.

11. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal  Judge  Southern  noted
    that it may well be that,  on  closer  examination,  the  first  ground
    amounts to no more than an expression of disagreement  with  adequately
    reasoned findings of fact made by the judge. However, as recognised  by
    the judge, the psychology report was a centrepiece of  the  Appellant's
    case and in his view it is at least arguable that, in reaching  adverse
    credibility findings based on a significant extent  upon  inconsistency
    and a lack of plausibility in the Appellant's account, the judge failed
    to have regard to the view expressed by Dr Thomas that the  Appellant's
    psychiatric disorder renders her with  impaired  memory,  concentration
    and orientation to time and place which would cause  severe  impairment
    to the ability to provide a coherent narrative of past  traumatic  life
    events.  Permission was granted on this ground although Judge  Southern
    did not refuse permission on Grounds 2 and  3  but  doubted  that  they
    would survive scrutiny.

    The submissions

12. In her submissions Ms Revill focused on Ground 1.  She  submitted  that
    the judge accepted the findings  of  the  medical  report  although  he
    disagreed with the reasons for it, she pointed  out  that  he  accepted
    that the Appellant suffers from a major depressive disorder.  In  these
    circumstances, in her submission, it was incumbent upon  the  judge  to
    adopt and apply the approach set out in the  Joint  Presidential  Note.
    She relied on the case of JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013]
    UKUT 00145 (IAC), in particular paragraph  6,  which  referred  to  the
    situation where an Appellant was vulnerable and said  that  it  was  of
    particular importance to see what findings,  if  any,  the  judge  made
    about the possible relevance of the Appellant being a vulnerable person
    to the credibility findings.  At paragraph 27 of  the  decision  in  JL
    judges are reminded that applying this guidance entails asking  whether
    any  of  the  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  account  could  be
    explained by her being a vulnerable person.

13. Ms Revill referred to the guidance at  10.3  at  page  6,  which  gives
    guidance on assessing evidence, and paragraph 14, which says that where
    there were clear discrepancies  in  the  oral  evidence,  consideration
    should be given to the  extent  to  which  the  age,  vulnerability  or
    sensitivity of the witness was an element of that discrepancy  or  lack
    of clarity. Paragraph 15 states that the decision should record whether
    the Tribunal has concluded that the Appellant is a child, vulnerable or
    sensitive,  the  effect  the   Tribunal   considered   the   identified
    vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it and  whether  the
    Tribunal was satisfied whether the Appellant had established his or her
    case to the relevant standard of proof.  It is  noted  that  in  asylum
    appeals weight should be given to objective indications of risk  rather
    than necessarily to a state of mind.

14. Ms Revill submitted that the judge in this case had not  followed  this
    guidance.  In her submission the judge only took account of the medical
    report in assessing whether the condition identified was caused in  the
    way the Appellant says it was [27].  She submitted that the  judge  did
    not at any point consider whether the medical condition is relevant  to
    her findings in relation to delay and inconsistencies.   She  submitted
    that this is material in this case because paragraph 92 of the  medical
    report states:

         "92. As can readily be seen from the above  diagnostic  assessment,
             [the Appellant's] current  psychiatric  disorder  renders  her
             with impaired memory, concentration and  orientation  to  time
             and  place.   She  also  experiences  emotional  hyper-arousal
             states (such  as  flashbacks  and  nightmares)  and  recurrent
             heightened anxiety and distress.  It can readily be seen  that
             such a complex diagnostic picture will cause severe impairment
             to the ability  to  provide  a  coherent  narrative  of  past,
             traumatic, life events."

15. In terms of Ground 2 Ms Revill submitted that the judge did accept what
    the Dr Thomas said in relation to the diagnosis of a  major  depressive
    disorder.  She referred to paragraph  31  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision, in which the judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  is
    suffering from a serious  mental  disorder  in  the  form  of  a  major
    depressive disorder with post-traumatic traits  and  that  she  suffers
    from  regular  suicidal  ideation  and  has  indulged  in  self-harming
    activities including some self-reported  suicide  attempts.  The  judge
    also accepted that the Appellant is desperate to avoid  being  returned
    to Pakistan and that it is reasonable to conclude that the  Appellant's
    removal would exacerbate the current symptoms, at least  in  the  short
    term [31].

16. At paragraph 33 the judge went on to accept that the Appellant may well
    have little or no access to specialist support for  her  mental  health
    problems in Pakistan.  The judge went on to conclude that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the high threshold required for Article 3 protection  is
    met in the Appellant's case [34].   However,  in  her  submission,  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons for that conclusion in  light  of
    those findings.

17. In relation to Ground 3 Ms Revill submitted that  at  paragraph  5  the
    judge found that the Appellant would  have  "obvious  difficulties"  in
    readapting  to  life  in  Pakistan.   These   difficulties   would   be
    "exacerbated  by  her  mental  health  problems  and  by  a   difficult
    relationship within her family".  However, the judge has failed to give
    adequate reasons why these do not amount to very significant  obstacles
    under paragraph 276ADE.

18. In response Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted in relation to Ground 1  that
    the judge has taken all factors  into  account  including  the  medical
    evidence.  The judge referred  to  the  medical  evidence  before  even
    considering the Appellant's evidence.  In her submission the judge  was
    under no obligation to quote all of the report but it is clear from the
    decision that he had in mind the report before reaching the findings on
    credibility.

19. Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  turn  on
    paragraph 92 of the psychology report.  In her submission paragraph  92
    makes clear that the impairment  is  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    ability to  provide  "a  coherent  narrative  of  past  traumatic  life
    events".  It does not say that the Appellant will be unable to  give  a
    coherent account  in  relation  to  all  aspects  of  her  claim.   She
    submitted that it was clear, looking at the judge's decision, that  the
    judge took into account a range of factors.  The judge referred to  the
    delay in claiming asylum at paragraphs 21 and 22.   In  her  submission
    the  conclusions  in  relation  to  delay  were  not  relevant  to  the
    Appellant's narrative of past traumatic life events. She submitted that
    paragraph 23 looks at the Appellant's account of who she lived with and
    points to an inconsistency between her asylum interview, when she  said
    that she had lived with her grandparents from the age of 2 or 3 and had
    not lived with her parents, yet later in the asylum interview she  said
    that she had lived with  her  parents  for  four  years  following  her
    graduation whereas she told Dr Thomas that she lived with  her  parents
    from the age of 17 or 18 after her grandfather died.   The  judge  also
    notes that the first time the Appellant mentioned the  allegation  that
    she saw her father attacking her mother regularly and that she too  was
    the victim of her father was at her  asylum  interview.   Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe submitted that these inconsistencies refer  to  timeframes  and
    whether the Appellant lived with her parents but did  not  specifically
    refer to a narrative of past traumatic life events.

20. Ms Willocks-Briscoe also submitted that at paragraph 24 of the decision
    the judge looked at the lack of supporting evidence in relation to  the
    Appellant's claimed relationship with Ali.  She notes  that  the  judge
    properly directed himself that asylum seekers cannot always be expected
    to produce corroborative evidence [26] but the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's credibility  was  undermined  by  her  failure  to  produce
    evidence which could have been available to her in the UK  in  relation
    to her claimed relationship with Ali.  Given that the psychologist  had
    made a qualified assessment  of  the  Appellant's  ability  to  give  a
    coherent account at paragraph 92 the evidence taken into account by the
    judge was not damaged by that assessment.  She submitted  that  looking
    at the findings holistically the judge's findings  were  in  accordance
    with the Presidential guidance. She submitted that the medical evidence
    is referred to throughout the decision.

21. In relation to Ground 2 Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted  that  the  judge
    had properly directed himself at paragraphs 29  and  30  in  accordance
    with the guidance in KH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1354.  She submitted that the  judge  looked
    at the lack of access to specialist support but noted that there  would
    be access to emotional and practical support for the Appellant upon her
    return  [33].   She  submitted  that  the  Article  3  conclusions  are
    sustainable.

22. In relation to the third  ground  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that
    Article 8 cannot be looked at  in  a  vacuum.   The  findings  made  in
    relation to Article 3 were relevant to the  assessment  as  to  whether
    there  were  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  returning   to
    Pakistan.  She relied on the case  of  Nasim  and  others  (Article  8)
    [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) and submitted  that  limited  weight  could  be
    attached to the  Appellant's  private  life.   In  her  submission  the
    judge's findings here can be sustained.

23. In response Ms Revill submitted in  relation  to  Ground  1  that  just
    because the Appellant did not give evidence  does  not  mean  that  the
    guidance is not applicable.  She referred in this context to  the  case
    of JL.  The judge was under a duty to have regard to the  vulnerability
    of the  Appellant  and  to  consider  to  what  extent,  if  any,  that
    vulnerability affected the evidence. In her  submission  there  was  no
    consideration given to paragraph  92  of  the  medical  report  in  the
    credibility findings. The only assessment of the medical evidence is at
    paragraph 27.  She  disputed  that  paragraph  92  was  qualified,  she
    submitted that it did not mean that the Appellant could not be coherent
    in relation to chronology.   She  submitted  that  it  meant  that  the
    Appellant may not get things in the right order nor might she  be  able
    to be consistent.  In any event  she  submitted  that  the  finding  at
    paragraph 23 in relation to where and when the Appellant lived with her
    grandparents or parents was in fact related to traumatic events.

24. In relation to Ground 2 she responded by saying that the judge made  no
    clear finding at paragraph 33 as to whether the Appellant has family in
    Pakistan.  She submitted that the case of  KH  (Afghanistan)  is  about
    PTSD not suicide risk.  She submitted that  the  judge  had  not  given
    sufficient reasons for the finding in relation to Article 3 given  that
    the judge had accepted the account of the Appellant's suicide attempts.

25. In terms of Ground 3 Ms Revill submitted that part of  the  aspects  of
    private life is a person's physical and emotional  integrity  and  that
    the judge had failed to give sufficient reasons for finding that  there
    would be no insurmountable obstacles  to  the  Appellant  returning  to
    Pakistan.

    Discussion and conclusions

26.  The  judge  considered  the  report  from  the   consultant   clinical
    psychologist at an early stage in the decision.  After having  set  out
    the Appellant's claim and the Home Office reasons  for  refusal  letter
    the judge set out the contents of that report in  detail  at  paragraph
    15.  It is clear, in my view, that the judge had  this  report  at  the
    front of his mind when considering  the  entirety  of  the  Appellant's
    claim.

27. I accept Ms  Willocks-Briscoe's  submission  that  the  conclusions  at
    paragraphs 21 and 22, which relate to the  timing  of  the  Appellant's
    claim and to her failure to disclose the basis of her claim to the Home
    Office or to her own lawyers, do not necessarily link to the conclusion
    in the psychological report that the  Appellant's  ability  to  give  a
    coherent narrative of past traumatic life events would be  impaired  by
    her condition.

28. In my view the judge was entitled to reject the  explanation  given  by
    the Appellant for failing to raise the matter with the Home  Office  or
    her  lawyers  at  an  earlier  stage,  even  taking  into  account  the
    psychological evidence,  and  I  find  therefore  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude at paragraphs 21 and 22 that the delay damaged the
    Appellant's credibility.

29. The judge dealt with some of the issues in relation to the  Appellant's
    claimed account of events in Pakistan at paragraph 23.  In my  view  it
    is clear that the inconsistencies referred to by the judge at paragraph
    23 relate mainly to the Appellant's living circumstances  in  Pakistan,
    that is, whom she lived with and when, rather than to  the  details  of
    the events she claims to have witnessed and  experienced  in  Pakistan.
    In light of the medical report and the conclusions at paragraph  92  of
    that report it is difficult to  see  how  her  ability  to  give  these
    details could have been impaired to the extent claimed on the basis  of
    her psychological condition. It is  difficult  to  see  too  how  these
    details could have been  inconsistent  in  the  account  given  to  the
    psychologist in her single interview. It appears from the past  history
    at paragraphs 4 to 27 of the psychologist's report that  the  Appellant
    was able to give a coherent account to the psychologist. This  somewhat
    undermines the assessment at paragraph 92 that the Appellant's  ability
    to provide a coherent narrative would be severely impaired.   In  these
    circumstances, in my view, it was open to the judge to conclude  as  he
    did at paragraph 23 that there were inconsistencies in the  Appellant's
    account of her living circumstances which undermined the credibility of
    her account.

30. At paragraph 24 the judge found that the  Appellant's  credibility  was
    damaged by the lack of evidence as to her relationship  with  Ali.  The
    judge referred to the lack of evidence from  her  landlords  (including
    the landlord whom she described in her interview as having treated  her
    like a daughter) or from her circle of friends (who she referred to  in
    interview as including the friends who had been paying  for  her  legal
    advice and her friend's husband who had stood as  surety  in  her  bail
    application).  No explanation has  been  put  forward  as  to  why  the
    Appellant failed to obtain this kind of evidence and no  conclusion  is
    reached in the psychological report that the Appellant would be  unable
    to seek support of her friends and  the  community  in  presenting  her
    case. Accordingly in my view the conclusions at paragraph 24 were  open
    to the judge.

31. Additionally the Appellant failed to  provide  any  medical  report  to
    evidence the claimed scarring from cigarette burns and  no  explanation
    has been put forward as to why the  Appellant  failed  to  obtain  such
    medical evidence and there is no evidence in the psychology  report  as
    to her ability to seek medical help.  Therefore the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge was entitled to reach the conclusion he did at paragraph 25.

32. At paragraph 27 the judge took into account the evidence in the  report
    of Dr Thomas in making the overall assessment of credibility. The judge
    accepted the psychological report. The judge accepted the diagnosis but
    did not accept the Appellant's account of her  circumstances,  or  that
    she had given a credible or reliable account of her family history  and
    circumstances  in  Pakistan  or  of  her  experiences  in  the  UK,  in
    particular in relation to her claimed relationship with Ali.

33. I do not accept the criticism that  the  judge  took  into  account  Dr
    Thomas' report only in the context of  credibility.   In  fact,  it  is
    clear from reading the decision as a whole that  the  judge  took  into
    account other factors in assessing credibility.

34. I accept, as set out in paragraph 26  of  the  case  of  JL,  that  the
    guidance applies to all of the evidence, not just  oral  evidence.  The
    criticism in JL was that the judge there  had  not  considered  whether
    discrepancies in the Appellant's account  could  be  explained  by  the
    Appellant being a vulnerable person.

35. I do not accept that the judge failed to follow the Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 in dealing with this Appellant.  The judge  did  not
    hear oral evidence from the Appellant  because  of  her  mental  health
    issue.  The judge  did  not  take  into  account  the  failure  of  the
    Appellant to give oral evidence as damaging her credibility.  In  fact,
    the judge took into account other factors in assessing credibility  and
    he attached particular weight to delay, to the Appellant's  description
    of her living circumstances in Pakistan and to the lack  of  supporting
    evidence as significant.  These issues do  not  go  specifically  to  a
    demand  for  a  coherent  narrative  but  go  instead  to   the   wider
    circumstances surrounding the Appellant's case. It  is  clear  that  in
    assessing these matters the judge gave sufficient consideration to  the
    Appellant's circumstances and mental health.  In my view  there  is  no
    error and Ground 1 has not been established.

36. In terms of Ground 2 the judge made clear at paragraph 27 that  he  did
    not accept that the Appellant has given a credible or reliable  account
    of  her  family  history  and  circumstances  in  Pakistan  or  of  her
    experiences in the UK.  The judge did not accept that she has  given  a
    truthful account as to why she fears returning to Pakistan.  The  judge
    accepted that the  Appellant  is  suffering  from  a  major  depressive
    disorder and that the Appellant suffers from regular suicidal  ideation
    and has  indulged  in  self-harming  activities  including  some  self-
    reported suicide events although the judge noted  that  none  of  these
    appear to have resulted in admission to A&E. The  judge  accepted  that
    the Appellant is desperate to avoid being returned to  Pakistan  as  is
    borne out by her repeated attempts to resist the Home  Office  attempts
    to remove her.  The judge therefore thought it reasonable  to  conclude
    that the Appellant's removal would exacerbate her current  symptoms  at
    least in the short term.

37. However, the judge  did  not  accept  that  the  implications  for  the
    Appellant's health would be "as catastrophic as  was  indicated  by  Dr
    Thomas, as her conclusions are very much predicated on the truth of the
    Appellant's  account  of  her  experiences  in  the  UK,   her   family
    circumstances and the resulting consequences on her return to Pakistan"
    [31]. The judge did not accept that the results for the Appellant would
    be so catastrophic given that the Appellant has been  in  an  extremely
    precarious  immigration  position   for   a   considerable   time   and
    particularly since April 2016 when she  was  in  immigration  detention
    until July 2016.  The judge considered her  medical  records  for  this
    period and noted that, whilst  there  is  reference  to  her  suffering
    symptoms of anxiety and  depression,  there  is  no  reference  to  any
    suicide attempts despite the  obvious  stresses  of  such  an  extended
    period of detention. The judge also noted that the Appellant has  never
    been admitted to a psychiatric hospital ward and was only  referred  to
    community health services in December 2016.

38. I consider that the findings at paragraph 31 are key to the conclusions
    the judge went on to  reach  in  relation  to  Article  3.   The  judge
    accepted that there is limited support in the  form  of  mental  health
    services in Pakistan, noting that people with mental illnesses are very
    much dependent on informal sources of support  from  family  and  local
    community.  He noted that the Appellant may have little or no access to
    specialist support in Pakistan.  However, this is in the context of the
    judge's earlier findings that the Appellant appears to have had  little
    or no access or has little or no recourse to specialist support in  the
    UK even under circumstances of extreme stress.  Although the judge said
    at paragraph 33 that it was difficult to say whether or not there  were
    family members or close friends in Pakistan, I consider that this is  a
    sufficiently clear finding in the context of the judge's doubts  as  to
    the Appellant's credibility, that the judge believe that there were  in
    fact family members and sources of support in Pakistan  given  that  he
    did not accept the Appellant's  description  of  her  circumstances  in
    Pakistan.

39. In terms of Ground  3,  again,  in  my  view,  it  is  clear  that  the
    conclusions at paragraph 35 are based on all of the previous  findings.
    The judge did accept that there would be difficulties for the Appellant
    in re-adapting to life in Pakistan which would be  exacerbated  by  her
    mental health problems and difficult  relationships  with  her  family.
    However, when the judge referred at the end  of  paragraph  35  to  the
    evidence before him, it is clear that this refers to the  evidence  and
    conclusions  made  previously  in  the  decision,  in  particular,  the
    conclusions  at  paragraphs  31  to  33.  The   conclusion   that   the
    circumstances did not amount to very significant obstacles were open to
    the judge on the basis of the  evidence  and  the  findings  previously
    made.

40. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the judge made findings open
    to him on the basis of the evidence before him.  The judge took  proper
    account of the psychological evidence and conclusions in that report in
    assessing and considering the evidence.

Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The anonymity direction is continued.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 4th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 4th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

