
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08648/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th September 2018                        |On 31st October 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T Hussain, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
& Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr. Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity order was not made by the FtT.  However, as the case
      involves protection issues, it is appropriate to make an anonymity
      order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269). Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs
      otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of publication
      thereof shall directly or indirectly identify SM ("the appellant").
      This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
      comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
      proceedings.


   2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  He claims to have arrived in  the
      United Kingdom in May 2007. He made a claim for asylum on 9th May 2007
      and that claim was refused for the reasons set out in a decision dated
      7th  November  2007.  The  appellant  appealed,  and  his  appeal  was
      dismissed for the  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision  promulgated  by
      Immigration Judge Edwards,  dated  4th  January  2008.  The  appellant
      subsequently made further submissions  to  the  respondent,  the  most
      recent of which were made on 6th December 2016. On 22nd  August  2017,
      the respondent again refused the claim  for  international  protection
      and the appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT").   His
      appeal was heard on 9th January 2018 and dismissed for the reasons set
      out in the decision of FtT Judge Williams promulgated  on  24  January
      2018. It is that decision that is the subject of the appeal before me.


   3. Permission to appeal was granted on  all  grounds  by  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Saffer on 7th February 2018. At the outset of the hearing before
      me, Mr Tan confirmed that there had previously been a hearing  of  the
      appeal listed before Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 21st May 2018. That
      hearing had been adjourned pending the  promulgation  of  new  country
      guidance, and the matter was  to  have  been  re-listed  before  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Bruce.  The decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AAH
      (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal  relocation)  (CG)  [2018]  UKUT  212   was
      promulgated on 26th June 2018.


   4. A transfer order was made by Principal Resident Judge O'Connor on 20th
      July 2018. It was agreed by the parties that there has been  no  error
      of law  decision  previously,  and  the  matter  comes  before  me  to
      determine whether the decision of the FtT Judge should  be  set  aside
      for legal error.  I record from the outset  that  in  considering  the
      appeal, I have had regard to the Country Guidance set out in  case  of
      AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 as amended by the Court  of
      Appeal and which has now been refined by the more recent case  of  AAH
      (Iraq) [2018] UKUT 212 ("AAH"), that was obviously  not  available  at
      the time of the decision of the FtT Judge.


The decision of FtT Judge Williams


   5. At paragraph [13] of the decision, the FtT Judge refers to the
      previous decision of Immigration Judge Edwards and the findings made.
      At paragraphs [14] to [17], the FtT Judge summarises the appellant's
      claim that as a Kurdish national of Iraq from Kirkuk, he would remain
      at risk upon return because if returned to Baghdad, he will be
      targeted as a Kurdish Sunni Mulsim, and if returned to Kirkuk, he will
      be killed on account of the time and that he is spent in the UK and
      his Kurdish ethnicity.  The judge records, at paragraph [17], the
      appellant's claim that he "... Does not have [a] birth certificate, a
      civil status identity card or passport ..." and that the appellant
      "... has two brothers and one sister in Kirkuk, with whom he has
      intermittent contact.".


   6. The FtT Judge found that the appellant is a national of Iraq from
      Kirkuk, a contested region.  The FtT Judge found that it is not
      reasonably likely that the appellant would be at any future risk upon
      return.  The appellant is of no specific on-going adverse interest to
      the authorities, but left Iraq due to the general security situation
      prevailing at the time. The FtT Judge also found that it is reasonably
      likely that the appellant remains in contact with his family.  At
      paragraphs [38] to [43], the Judge addressed return to the appellant's
      home area of Kirkuk, and the possibility of internal relocation,
      applying the country guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]
      UKUT 544, as amended ("AA").  The FtT Judge concluded that the
      appellant's concerns regarding return to his home area of Kirkuk are
      well founded. However, it would be reasonable for the appellant to
      internally relocate to the Iraqi Kurdish Region ("IKR").  The FtT
      Judge accepted that it would not be reasonable for the appellant, a
      Sunni Muslim, to remain in Baghdad, but it would be reasonable for the
      appellant to travel via Baghdad International Airport in transit and
      internally relocate to Erbil International Airport.  The Judge noted,
      at [42], that Erbil International Airport is open and receives direct
      flights from Baghdad International airport. Alternatively, the
      appellant could fly directly from the UK to Erbil via European
      countries such as Germany or Austria.  As to whether internal
      relocation to the IKR would be unduly harsh, the FtT Judge states, at
      [43];


         "...it is reasonable for him to return to IKR and he would be able
         to extend his stay to over 10 days (AA at 19). He is reasonably
         likely to find employment (AA 20(c)) taking into account: his young
         age; his ability to speak Kurdish Sorani; a character which has
         shown fortitude and resourcefulness as demonstrated by a
         willingness to relocate to the UK and support himself for 9 years;
         reasonable health - I note the appellant has a history of some
         mental health issues (AB page 10) but would be able to access
         treatment in IKR; as discussed above [29-30] I am satisfied that he
         still has family in Iraq (including 3 siblings in Kirkuk) who could
         provide assistance; there being no requirement for sponsorship:
         Home Office CPI Note page 44 of 57, September 2017 and Report of
         the Danish Refugee Council of April 2016, 'The Kurdistan Region of
         Iraq KRL Access, Possibility of Protection, Security and
         Humanitarian   Protection.   In   particular:   2.1.6   Exemption
         from Sponsorship requirements "IOM stated that Kurds, including
         appellant's from Kirkuk axe exempted from the sponsorship
         requirement".


The appeal before me


   7. Although the appellant relies upon two grounds of appeal, both grounds
      are closely linked. It is accepted by the appellant that the outcome
      of the appeal rested upon the Judge's decision as to the
      reasonableness of internal relocation.


   8. It is said that the FtT Judge erred by speculating how the appellant
      would actually get to the IKR.  The appellant relies upon the decision
      in HH (Somalia) -v- SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 426, to support the
      proposition that the Judge was required to consider the appellant's
      safety at the point of return, and on any journey that he would have
      to make to reach safety.  The Tribunal was required to determine any
      challenge to the safety of the route, or method of return.  It is said
      that the Judge erred by speculating how the appellant would actually
      get to the IKR and that in so far as return to the IKR via Baghdad is
      concerned, absent guarantees that the appellant can even enter
      Baghdad, let alone leave for safe onward travel to the IKR, there is a
      real risk that the appellant will be refused entry or stranded in
      Baghdad, exposing him to treatment contrary to Article 3, and
      rendering internal relocation unreasonable or unduly harsh. The
      appellant contends that he has not been pre-cleared by the IKR
      authorities and as a consequence, he will not be able to enter the
      IKR.  Even if it were possible for the appellant to reach the IKR, the
      FtT Judge speculates that the appellant would find employment and
      speculated that the appellant could rely upon his family in Kirkuk for
      support.


   9. Mr Hussain submits that it is common ground that the appellant is from
      Kirkuk, in the contested region. He submits that in his assessment of
      the risk upon return, the Judge treated the appellant as if he were
      returning to the IKR as his home area, rather than addressing whether
      internal relocation to the IKR would be even possible, and if it were
      possible, whether it would be unduly harsh.  He refers to paragraphs
      [169], [170, [205] and [207] of AA.  He submits that the Judge failed
      to adequately address how the appellant would get to the IKR because
      he has not been pre-cleared by the IKR authorities and as a
      consequence he will not be allowed to enter the IKR. He submits that
      even if the appellant were able to safely get to Erbil International
      Airport, the background material establishes that the appellant could
      only remain in the IKR temporarily, and so internal relocation is not
      a proper alternative that is open to the appellant in any event.


Discussion


  10. The appellant claims to be an Iraqi of Kurdish ethnicity from Kirkuk.
      This was accepted by the FtT Judge.  The appellant's claims to have
      suffered threats in Iraq were not accepted by either the respondent of
      the FtT Judge.  It is not necessary to consider the asylum claim
      further because the dismissal of this aspect of the FtT Judge's
      decision is not being challenged.


  11. The FtT Judge set out relevant extracts from the extant country
      guidance case of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) as
      amended by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944,
      promulgated on 11 July 2017, ("AA") at paragraph [8] of the decision.


  12. I reject the submission made by Mr Hussain that the Judge treated the
      appellant as if he were returning to the IKR as his home area, rather
      than addressing internal relocation to the IKR.  The Judge accepted
      that the appellant is a national of Iraq from Kirkuk.  At paragraph
      [22] of the decision, the FtT Judge records that "... It is reasonably
      likely that the appellant's home area of Kirkuk is a contested region
      having regard to AA ...".  At paragraph [33], the Judge again records,
      in his findings that the appellant is an Iraqi national, from Kirkuk,
      a contested region and at paragraph [38] concluded that the ".. The
      Appellants concerns regarding the security situation in his home area
      of Kirkuk are well-founded.".


  13. The issue under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive was
      whether there is a real risk of the appellant suffering serious harm
      if he returns to Kirkuk. Serious harm in this context consists of a
      serious and individual threat to the appellant's life by reason of
      indiscriminate violence due to armed conflict.   I am quite satisfied
      that the Judge proceeds upon the premise that the appellant is to be
      considered as originating from Kirkuk, an area outside the IKR, and
      determined the appeal by reference to the country guidance set out in
      AA. At paragraph [38] of the decision, the FtT Judge found that the
      appellant's concerns regarding the security situation in his home area
      of Kirkuk are well founded.  In my judgement, it is plain that the
      Judge proceeds upon the premise that the appellant's home area is
      Kirkuk, a contested region, and that the issue before him was,
      internal relocation.


  14. The FtT Judge found that it would not be reasonable for the appellant,
      a Sunni Muslim to remain in Baghdad because the appellant does not
      have an Iraqi ID card or a civil status ID Card ("CSID").  The FtT
      Judge found that it would be reasonable for the appellant to travel
      via Baghdad International Airport in transit and internally relocate
      to the IKR.  The reasons provided by the Judge are set out in one
      short paragraph, at [43] of the decision.  The Judge reached his
      decision by reference to the country guidance set out in AA.


  15. The FtT Judge concluded that the appellant could, as a Sunni Kurd,
      upon return by air from the UK to Baghdad, travel onward to the KRG
      and live there in safety.   In AAH, the Upper Tribunal replaced
      section E of the Country Guidance annexed to the Court of Appeal's
      decision in AA,  and although the current country guidance is that
      even a Kurd who does not originate from the IKR may enter the IKR
      lawfully for up to 10 days, and then extend his stay to settle there,
      having found employment, there is a need to consider wider issues such
      as travel between Baghdad and the IKR, the documents that will be
      available to an individual, whether the individual will be at
      particular risk of ill treatment during the security screening
      process, and the options available for accommodation and employment.


  16. The decision of the Upper Tribunal in AAH post-dates the decision
      under appeal before me, but from a careful reading of the Judge's
      findings and conclusions, in my judgement the Judge did not adequately
      address the issues relevant to the appellant's journey from Baghdad to
      the IKR and whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate
      to the IKR.  That is not to say anything about the merits of the
      appeal.  Because of the paucity of the reasons, I simply cannot be
      satisfied that a Judge properly considering the relevant matters now
      referred to in AAH, would reach the same decision.


  17. It follows that the decision of the FtT must be set aside.  As to the
      disposal of the appeal, I have decided that it is appropriate to remit
      this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having taken into account
      paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th
      September 2012.  In my view, in determining the reasonableness of
      internal relocation, the nature and extent of any judicial fact-
      finding necessary will be extensive. The parties will be advised of
      the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.


  18. The following findings of fact are preserved:


        a. The appellant is a national of Iraq from Kirkuk, in the
           contested region.


        b. The appellant is of no adverse interest due to his father's
           involvement with the Ba'ath party and or his employment as a
           police officer.  The findings set out at paragraph [24] of the
           decision of Immigration Judge J D L Edwards in the decision
           dated 4th January 2008 shall stand for the reasons set out at
           paragraphs [27] and [28] of the decision of the FtT Judge.


        c. The appellant has family that remain Iraq and he remains in
           contact with his family.


Notice of Decision


  19. The appeal is allowed and the appeal is remitted the FtT for a fresh
      hearing of the appeal.


  20. I have made an anonymity direction.


Signed                                       Date              19th October
2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia








TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


      Signed                                 Date         19th October 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

