
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08363/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 18 February 2021                  |
|Working Remotely by Skype for        |                                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 28 January 2021                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     MI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Evans instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 21 June  1990.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2014 with a  student  visa
    valid until 2 October 2017.

 3. The appellant claimed asylum on 2 January  2019.   He  did  so  on  two
    bases.  First, he claimed that he was at risk from individuals whom  he
    claimed had raped him on 17 July  2013  in  Bangladesh.   Secondly,  he
    claimed to be at risk on return to Bangladesh as a gay man.

 4. On 14 August 2019, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.
     In reaching that decision, the  respondent  rejected  the  appellant's
    claim to be gay.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 26 February 2020, Judge Loughridge  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  First, as  regards  the  claimed  risk  to  the
    appellant as a result of the incident on 17 July 2013,  without  making
    any findings as to whether he accepted that incident had occurred,  the
    judge found that the appellant could safely and  reasonably  internally
    relocate within Bangladesh.  Secondly, as regards the appellant's claim
    to be at risk on return as a gay man, the judge did not accept that the
    appellant was gay and so rejected his claim to be at risk on return  to
    Bangladesh on that basis.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    principally on three grounds.  First, the judge had given undue  weight
    in  reaching  his  adverse  finding  as  to  the   appellant's   sexual
    orientation to the absence of supporting documentary and other evidence
    relating to the appellant's life in the UK, as he  claimed,  as  a  gay
    man.  Secondly, the judge had erred in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse
    finding by failing to engage with the  appellant's  evidence  and  give
    reasons why he did not accept the veracity of the appellant's  evidence
    other than by reference to the absence of  supporting  documentary  and
    other  evidence.   Thirdly,   the   judge   had   improperly   required
    corroborative evidence in order for  the  appellant  to  establish  his
    claim.

 7. On 3 April 2020, the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Froom)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  At para 4 of his decision, Judge Froom
    said this:

         "However, whilst it is not remotely arguable that the FtTJ was  not
         entitled to draw such an inference, it is arguable that he erred by
         failing to have regard to the appellant's own personal  account  of
         his sexuality and to give  reasons,  based  on  that  account,  for
         rejecting it.  The FtTJ has not engaged with  the  appellant's  own
         account at all".

 8. On 23 July 2020, the  Secretary  of  State  filed  a  response  to  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal seeking to uphold the judge's decision on
    the basis that the judge had not, improperly, required the appellant to
    provide corroborative evidence but had  been  entitled,  in  accordance
    with the well-known decision in TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40,
    to take  into  account  the  absence  of  supporting  documentation  in
    reaching his adverse finding in relation  to  the  appellant's  claimed
    sexual orientation.

 9. In response to directions made in the light of the COVID-19 crisis, the
    Upper Tribunal was invited  to  hold  a  remote  hearing  in  order  to
    determine the appeal.  That appeal was  listed  at  the  Cardiff  Civil
    Justice Centre working remotely on 28 January 2021.  At  that  hearing,
    the appellant was represented by Mr D Evans and the respondent by Mr  C
    Howells and the hearing was conducted via Skype for Business.

Discussion

10. Mr Evans in his oral submissions relied upon his grounds of appeal.  He
    submitted, reflecting the grant of permission by Judge Froom, that  the
    judge had erred in law by failing to engage with  the  appellant's  own
    evidence,  in  particular  in  relation  to  his  sexual   orientation.
    Instead, Mr Evans submitted, the judge  had  simply  made  his  adverse
    decision on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide
    supporting documentary or other evidence.

11. Having heard Mr Evans' submissions, while Mr  Howells  did  not  accept
    that the judge had  improperly  required  corroboration  and  had  been
    entitled to take into account the absence of  supporting  evidence,  he
    accepted that the judge had failed to look at the  consistency  of  the
    appellant's account, its plausibility and its inherent reliability.  As
    a result, Mr Howells conceded that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  by
    failing to engage with the appellant's evidence  and  to  consider  the
    credibility of the appellant's own evidence. Mr Howells  conceded  that
    Judge Loughridge's decision could not stand and should be set aside  to
    the extent that the appeal had to be redetermined  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's claim to be at risk on return to Bangladesh as a gay man.

12. I agree with Mr Howells' concession.  The judge set out the appellant's
    evidence relating to his claim to be a gay man at paras  19-24  of  his
    determination.   At  para  25,  the   judge   reminded   himself   that
    corroborative evidence was not necessary  in  order  to  establish  his
    claim.  However, at paras 27-29 the only reason given by the judge  for
    his adverse finding, that the appellant had not established he is a gay
    man, was that the appellant  had  not  provided  documentary  or  other
    evidence as to his life in the UK to support his claim that he is  gay.
    The judge did not engage with the appellant's own evidence at all.   As
    Mr Howells conceded, the judge failed to assess the credibility of  the
    appellant's evidence including whether  that  evidence  was  internally
    consistent, was plausible and was evidence  that  was  reliable.   That
    holistic assessment, recognised by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SB  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 160 at [46], was  required  in  order  to
    reach a sustainable finding that the appellant's account was not to  be
    believed even  in  the  absence  of  supporting  documentary  or  other
    evidence..

13. For these reasons, therefore, the judge  materially  erred  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds.   That  decision,
    accordingly, cannot stand and is set aside.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.   That  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

15. The representatives invited me to remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in order to re-make  the  decision  solely  on  the  issue  of
    whether the appellant has established his asylum claim on the basis  of
    his claimed sexual orientation.

16. I agree that it the proper disposal of the appeal having regard to  the
    nature and extent of fact-finding required and para 7.2 of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement.

17. The appeal is, therefore, remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in  order
    to re-make the decision to the extent indicated above.  The  appeal  is
    to be heard by a judge other than Judge Loughridge.

18.  The  judge's  decision  (and  findings)  dismissing  the   appellant's
    international protection claim based upon the incident on 17 July  2013
    was not challenged and stands on the basis that the  judge  found  that
    the appellant could safely and reasonably internally relocate in  order
    to avoid any risk arising from that incident.

19. Likewise, the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal  under
    Art 8 was not challenged and that decision also stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             29 January 2021

