
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08789/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 20 February 2020                 |On: 5 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     MZJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, counsel instructed by Leonard
Cannings
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre, promulgated on 21 October  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey on 19 December 2019.




Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is  reiterated  below  because
    this is a protection matter and the appellant has been  diagnosed  with
    PTSD.

Background

 3. The appellant, who is a national of Afghanistan, arrived in the  United
    Kingdom during 2016, aged 15. He applied for asylum on 2  October  2016
    and was referred to the National Referral Mechanism on 3 October  2016.
    The basis of his claim being that he  is  a  Hazara  Shia  Muslim,  his
    father belonged to a political party called  Islamic  Unity  which  was
    anti-Taliban and that  the  Taliban  raided  his  village  causing  the
    occupants, including the appellant's family,  to  flee.  The  appellant
    left Afghanistan at the end of 2015. He fears that he would  be  killed
    by the Taliban or forced to fight if returned to Afghanistan.

 4. By way of a letter dated 23 August 2019, the Secretary of State refused
    the asylum claim.  The  respondent  accepted  the  appellant's  claimed
    nationality, ethnicity, religion  and  that  he  came  from  Wardak  in
    Afghanistan. It was further accepted that the appellant may have had to
    leave his village due to the fear of  the  Taliban  because  background
    information suggested that there was a strong Taliban presence there in
    2015. It was not accepted  that  the  appellant  was  of  any  personal
    interest to the Taliban or that he was targeted.  His  credibility  was
    said to be undermined by his failure to apply for asylum in  the  other
    European countries to he travelled  through  en  route  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  The respondent did not accept that  the  appellant  would  be
    targeted if returned to Afghanistan on  account  of  his  ethnicity  or
    religion.  It  was  said  that  he  could  reasonably  relocate  within
    Afghanistan, particularly to Kabul.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant, who gave oral evidence, was identified as  a  vulnerable
    witness. The judge also heard  oral  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's
    current  circumstances  from   Mr   Foster,   a   representative   from
    International Care Network (ICN), who were  supporting  the  appellant.
    The judge acknowledged that the appellant was diagnosed with  PTSD  and
    depression but found him not to be a reliable witness regarding matters
    peripheral to his protection claim. She concluded that he had a  family
    network in Afghanistan, that his mental health issues were  not  severe
    and that he had made a  positive  decision  to  refuse  medication  and
    counselling. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The  grounds  of  appeal  were  fourfold.  Firstly,  that  it  was  not
    reasonably open to the  judge  to  find  that  the  appellant  was  not
    suffering from mental ill-health. Secondly,  that  the  judge  made  an
    error of fact in recording the appellant's evidence. Thirdly, that that
    the judge erred in basing her findings on her understanding of what the
    Red Cross would normally do and concluding that the absence of evidence
    indicated that the appellant was in contact with  his  family.  Lastly,
    the judge failed to reach her credibility findings in the round.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought. While ground  one
    was described as unarguable, permission was not refused on any ground.

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response was  received  on  14  January  2020.
    Essentially, the appeal was opposed, and  it  was  submitted  that  the
    judge directed herself appropriately.

The hearing

 9. At the outset I informed the representatives  that  there  had  been  a
    recent judicial training event at which information had been given by a
    Red Cross representative to the effect that the  organisation  did  not
    provide letters for asylum appeals. This being relevant  to  the  third
    ground.

10. Ms Heybroek made the following points. The  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant was sufficiently well and that he  chose  not  to  co-operate
    with medical treatment was unsustainable. In relation  to  the  judge's
    finding  that  the  appellant  was  in  contact   with   relatives   in
    Afghanistan, this had emanated from the appellant's visit to  a  police
    station in 2017 in which he had stated that his  mother  was  ill.  The
    appellant had responded to the Secretary of State's enquiries regarding
    this matter, in writing and explained that he pretended that his mother
    was ill in order to try  to  obtain  help.  Ms  Heybroek  asked  me  to
    consider  the  context  of  the  appellant's  circumstances   when   he
    approached the police as a cry for help. He was 17 years  old  and  had
    heard nothing regarding his asylum claim made a year  earlier,  he  was
    suffering from depression and PTSD and in the care of social  services.
    Ms Heybroek acknowledged that there was  very  little  in  the  way  of
    medical evidence because the appellant was not cooperating,  yet  there
    was correspondence from September 2017 in which the appellant had  said
    that he would be "better off dead." Those  representing  the  appellant
    had been unable to provide up to date medical evidence because  of  the
    difficulty of persuading the appellant to co-operate. A support  worker
    who attended on the appellant's behalf was found by the judge to  be  a
    compelling witness. His evidence was that the appellant's mental health
    was deteriorating. The judge  erred  in  interpreting  the  appellant's
    inability to concentrate as unreliability rather than symptoms of  PTSD
    and depression. It was not  considered  that  mental  health  sufferers
    often do not accept treatment. The judge  did  not  consider  that  the
    appellant's confused answers to questions about the number of  paternal
    uncles was indicative of his poor  mental  health.  The  judge  further
    erred in concluding that the appellant would  have  been  admitted  for
    treatment if his mental health was that bad and that he  was  not,  was
    treated as affecting his credibility. The  judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's account of having been found on public transport without  a
    ticket,  a  peripheral  issue,  was  unfairly  used  to  undermine  the
    appellant's credibility.

11. Mr Tufan argued that as the appellant is now  aged  20,  the  issue  of
    family members was a red herring and  did  not  materially  affect  the
    outcome of the appeal. The issue with the Red Cross  was  whether  they
    would assist the appellant by responding to his enquiry and  that  they
    did not was something the judge could take into account. This point was
    also irrelevant as the appellant was an adult. The judge's treatment of
    the mental health issue was adequate, evidenced by her reliance on  the
    case of KH (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 1354.  Lastly, Mr Tufan stated
    that were I to find an error he would ask  that  any  remaking  of  the
    appeal is held up behind the new Country Guidance decision in AS  which
    was recently heard.

Decision on error of law

12. The judge's treatment of  the  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
    mental state was inadequate. Having already accepted that the appellant
    was a vulnerable witness [6], that he was diagnosed with PTSD  in  2017
    [30], and having heard from Mr Foster of ICN that the appellant stopped
    attending counselling because "of the trauma of  revisiting  events  in
    Afghanistan" and that he found his medication  "too  debilitating"[14],
    her finding that his cessation of the prescribed medical treatment  was
    evidence that the appellant was "sufficiently well both physically  and
    mentally" was unsustainable.

13. The judge's conclusion that if  ICN  had  serious  concerns  about  the
    appellant's mental ill-health they would have taken  him  to  a  doctor
    takes no account of the fact that the appellant is an adult  and  there
    is no indication that  lacks  capacity  to  take  decisions  about  his
    treatment or that he posed a risk to himself or  others  owing  to  his
    mental health. The evidence of Mr Foster was  that  the  appellant  was
    unable to continue his studies, was unable to sleep,  focus  or  manage
    his accommodation. The absence of recent psychiatric evidence does  not
    automatically indicate that  the  appellant's  symptoms  of  PTSD  have
    resolved without  treatment.  The  evidence  indicated  that  as  of  1
    November 2017, the appellant scored 24 out of 27 for  depression,  that
    he had thoughts that he was better off dead, he told ICN  that  he  was
    having nightmares and flashbacks of the circumstances in which he  lost
    his parents and the citalopram medication made  him  feel  intoxicated.
    The  judge  did  not   consider   whether   the   appellant's   current
    presentation, including at the hearing, was the result of his diagnoses
    rather than laziness, as the presenting officer submitted or an absence
    of credibility, as the judge found.

14. The judge made an error of fact in adopting  the  presenting  officer's
    submission that the appellant stated that  there  was  no  internet  or
    electricity in  Afghanistan  and  finding  that  this  response  lacked
    credibility [15]. As  is  apparent  from  [12]  of  the  decision,  the
    appellant did not use the words "in Afghanistan" and he was  not  asked
    to clarify what he meant by his evidence in this regard.  As the  judge
    relied upon this matter in  rejecting  the  appellant's  account,  this
    amounts to a further material error on the part of the judge.

15. The appellant was assisted in contacting Red  Cross  by  ICN.  Yet  the
    judge disbelieves the appellant's evidence  that  he  had  received  no
    correspondence from the Red Cross and accepted the unsupported  opinion
    of the presenting officer that "there would have been as a  minimum  an
    acknowledgement from the Red Cross." The judge goes  further  and  gave
    weight to the fact that no letters had been provided and  in  doing  so
    she relied upon an absence of evidence in circumstances where there was
    no evidence as to the Red Cross procedures. The appellant's account, at
    paragraph 15 of his witness statement,  was  that  the  Red  Cross  had
    "told" him that they would not be able to undertake family  tracing  on
    his behalf owing to the poor country conditions in Afghanistan. This is
    a far from an unreasonable or incredible response. The judge relied  on
    this issue at [25] to reach an adverse finding as to the credibility of
    the appellant's evidence that he was not in contact with family members
    and she materially erred in doing so.

16. The errors mentioned above suffice to render unsafe the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal and I set that decision aside in its entirety.

17. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  him  of   such
    consideration. In addition, Ms Heybroek agreed that there  was  a  need
    for updated medical information as to the appellant's mental state  or,
    in the absence of that, evidence from  those  currently  assisting  him
    (i.e. legal representatives and ICN). There is also the matter  of  the
    outstanding country guidance decision in AS which is  likely  to  delay
    the remaking of this case in the Upper Tribunal.


Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 20 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

