
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08616/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2018                          |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                 Huseyin [O]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs K Degirmenci of Counsel, Montague Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Griscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Roopnarine-Davies  which  was  promulgated  on  24  August  2018.   The
    appellant is a national of Turkey who arrived in the United Kingdom  on
    24 December 2017 and claimed asylum immediately thereafter.

2.   The First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds,  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.  Detailed grounds of appeal led to the grant of permission  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 27 September 2018.

3.   Oral submissions before me focused on periods of detention  alleged  by
    the appellant to have taken place in 2013 and  2016  and  claimed  ill-
    treatment.  The judge's findings in that regard  are  not  particularly
    clear: in certain places they seem to reject the claim that there was a
    detention although at paragraph 22 the judge remarks:

         "... even accepting that [the appellant] may have been arrested  in
         2013 and 2016 he was not singled out for arrest but part of a group
         of protestors."

    It seems to me, reading  the  decision  holistically,  that  the  judge
    formed the view on a balance of probabilities that there  had  been  an
    arrest and detention.

4.   That then leads to a  fundamental  difficulty  with  the  decision.  In
    paragraph 29 the judge addresses  risk  factors  on  return  by  making
    reference to IK (Returnees, Records, IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT  00312
    although the case law is not set out with any level  of  particularity.
    While the judge gives a degree of balance  to  the  assessment,  it  is
    limited to the following at paragraph 29:

         "Other than the fact that this appellant  is  an  Alevi  Kurd  this
         appellant does not meet the risk factors in IK above.  He  has  not
         shown that he comes from a politically active family. His uncle was
         granted asylum some 18  years  previously.   He  claimed  that  his
         father was an activist with little detail offered and  by  his  own
         evidence his father is living a normal life in  Turkey  today.   It
         cannot be assumed that he is a draft  evader  because  he  has  two
         years to fulfil this obligation but it is common  sense  to  assume
         that this may have affected the credibility  of  his  claim  and  a
         factor in leaving the country."

5.   It is a well-recognised risk factor within IK that  an  individual  has
    been arrested and brought to the police attention  in  the  past.   The
    fact that the judge did not factor that issue into  the  IK  assessment
    causes me concern. But it is not an isolated incident: a number of  the
    other complaints made  by  the  appellant  in  the  grounds  also  have
    substance.

6.   On repeated occasions the judge implies that  there  is  a  requirement
    for there to be corroboration of an appellant's claim and seems to draw
    an adverse inference from the apparent lack of corroborating  evidence.
    This is a flawed approach and one which, because it is repeated,  seems
    to be have embedded itself in the judge's  mind  causing  her  to  make
    adverse credibility findings, such that at paragraph 30 she  states  in
    clear terms: "He has fabricated a claim to asylum."

7.    Further,  on  at  least  two  occasions  the  judge  has  indulged  in
    speculation. First she  states  at  paragraph  28  that  it  cannot  be
    discounted that the appellant has a Turkish passport; and secondly  she
    states, without any evidential basis, that the appellant was  motivated
    solely to avoid conscription by way of military service.  Not  only  is
    that latter conclusion speculative, it does not sit well  with  another
    finding of the judge, namely that there was a two  year  period  during
    which the obligation to carry out  military  service  could  have  been
    fulfilled.

8.   I  am  additionally  caused  concern  that  the  judge  seems  to  have
    approached the  country  guidance  and  other  country  material  in  a
    somewhat limited, and highly selective manner, summarising at paragraph
    25 material put before the Tribunal by the respondent.  There seems  is
    no reference to, still less express discounting of, the material  which
    had been lodged by the appellant, and was relied on.

9.   Looking at the totality of this decision in the round,  whilst  it  may
    be that one or more of the errors I have identified that might  not  of
    themselves have been sufficient to justify setting aside the  decision,
    when taken collectively the safety and reliability of the  disposal  in
    the First-tier Tribunal appears questionable. I cannot be confident, as
    a reviewing body, that all  aspects  of  the  appeal  received  anxious
    scrutiny.

10.  The only appropriate course is to set aside the decision and  remit  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be  decided  afresh.  I  make  it  clear,
    however, that it is perfectly possible that a different judge may  come
    to exactly the  same  overall  conclusion.   However,  because  of  the
    failures of  reasoning  and  the  manner  in  which  the  decision  was
    articulated, it cannot be allowed to stand and must be reheard.

Notice of Decision

   1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  the  appeal  is
      remitted to be decided afresh by a judge other than Judge  Roopnarine-
      Davies.
   2) No factual findings are preserved.
   3) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     7 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

