
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/08189/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                Decision & Reasons      |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 4 April 2018                    |                On 11 April 2018        |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel, instructed by Tami Welfare
                    Association
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Chana (the judge), promulgated  on  13  October  2017,  in
        which she dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
        decision dated 10 August 2017 refusing his asylum claim.

     2. I need only set out the background to this appeal in  brief  terms.
        The appellant is a Tamil national of Sri Lanka, born  in  1986.  He
        maintains that he was coerced into joining the LTTE  in  2006  and,
        after being  injured,  undertook  an  administrative  role  in  the
        organisation until he left in February 2009 when he surrendered  to
        the authorities. He was detained in an army camp until  2011  where
        he was  subjected  to  interrogation  and  torture.  The  appellant
        maintains that he joined the  Tamil  National  Alliance  party  and
        later the Democratic Fighters party. In 2013 he opened a  shop  and
        earned money by  fishing.  He  claims  that  he  was  detained  for
        approximately a month at the beginning of December 2013  and  asked
        to provide information  about  the  LTTE.  He  was  released  after
        members of the Fishermen's Union vouched for  him.  He  married  in
        2014 and had a son in 2015. He was again detained in March 2015 and
        later released after the Fishermen's Union once again  vouched  for
        him. He celebrated Heroes' Day in November 2016 with a friend  who,
        it is claimed, was then killed by  the  authorities  on  1  January
        2017. The authorities  later  came  to  the  appellant's  house  on
        several occasions searching for  him.  Fearing  for  his  life  the
        appellant left Sri Lanka on 11 February 2017 with the assistance of
        an agent and, after transiting in an unknown  country,  arrived  in
        the UK on 12 February 2017 and claimed  asylum  the  same  day.  He
        claims to attend the Sri Lankan transitional government  office  in
        London every Sunday and attends associated functions and rallies.


     3. The respondent did not find the appellant to be a credible  witness
        and rejected his account based on various  alleged  inconsistencies
        and implausible assertions. The respondent rejected the appellant's
        claim to have been a member of the LTTE, his  claim  to  have  been
        arrested and to have been a member of the Tamil  National  Alliance
        and Democratic Fighters Party, and his claim to be  wanted  by  the
        Sri Lankan authorities.


     4. The appeal lodged an appeal with the First-tier Tribunal  following
        the refusal of his protection claim. A hearing date was listed  for
        22 September 2017, 6 weeks after  the  refusal  of  his  protection
        claim. The appellant's representatives sought an adjournment at the
        case management stage in order to secure medical evidence from  the
        Medical Foundation. This application was supported by a letter from
        the Medical Foundation dated 6 September 2017  confirming  that  it
        had accepted the appellant's referral and that 3  appointments  had
        been arranged between 3 October 2017  and  17  October  2017.  This
        application was refused on 8  September  2017  on  the  basis  that
        medical evidence from a GP would be sufficient.


     5. On the day of the hearing  Counsel  was  instructed  to  renew  the
        adjournment  application  in  order  to  obtain  from  the  Medical
        Foundation  a  scarring   report   that   also   addressed   mental
        health/psychological   issues.   The   renewed   application    was
        additionally advanced on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's  legal
        representatives had serious concerns as to his litigation  capacity
        and were unclear as to whether he was fit to  instruct.  The  judge
        refused the application  citing  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
        Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  &  Asylum
        Chamber) Rules 2014 and the case of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)
        [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). The judge noted  that  the  appellant  had
        recently given evidence in his screening and asylum interviews  and
        that there was no sign that he was mentally compromised. The  judge
        referred to a letter from the appellant's GP,  dated  21  September
        2017, which indicated that the appellant suffered  from  dyspepsia,
        post-traumatic  stress  disorder,  that  he  was  currently  having
        counselling and was on antidepressants, and that he had pain in his
        right shoulder. The letter did not state  that  the  appellant  was
        unable to attend  the  hearing  or  give  evidence  and  the  judge
        observed that, as the appellant was receiving antidepressants, this
        should help his nerves. The judge did not consider that  she  would
        be particularly helped by a scarring report as she was  willing  to
        accept the appellant had scars but that  she  would  determine  the
        manner  in  which  they  were  caused  having  considered  all  the
        evidence. Even if a Medical Foundation report found that the  scars
        were consistent with the appellant's description,  the  judge  held
        that consistency was not the same as proof.


     6. Having refused the adjournment application the judge  was  informed
        that Counsel had only  been  instructed  to  make  the  adjournment
        request. The judge subsequently  treated  the  appellant  as  being
        unrepresented  and  the  hearing  proceeded.  The  judge  took  the
        appellant through the Reasons For Refusal Letter and explained  the
        issues  to  him,  and  sought  confirmation  that   the   appellant
        understood the issues and gave him more time  to  prepare  for  the
        hearing. An addendum to the judge's decision indicates that, at the
        resumed hearing, the appellant said he was not  feeling  well.  The
        judge however continued with  the  hearing  given  the  appellant's
        earlier engagement with the proceedings. Towards  the  end  of  the
        appellant's cross examination Counsel came into  the  hearing  room
        and said that she was advising her clients not  to  give  evidence.
        The judge subsequently found out that Counsel had  been  trying  to
        contact Judge  Woodcraft,  the  duty  judge,  in  relation  to  the
        adjournment request. The duty judge,  through  an  usher,  informed
        Counsel that he would not intervene and that any  complaints  about
        the judge's conduct had to be made in writing  and  through  formal
        complaint channels. The judge heard submissions from the presenting
        officer and gave the appellant a short adjournment to  prepare  his
        submissions. The appellant did not however return  to  the  hearing
        room after the adjournment.


     7. In her determination the judge did not find the appellant to  be  a
        credible witness. She rejected his account,  found  he  was  a  man
        lacking in credibility and that he was  an  economic  migrant.  The
        judge consequently dismissed the  appeal.  For  reasons  that  will
        become apparent it is not necessary  for  me  to  engage  with  the
        judge's substantive consideration of the appellant's claim.


     8. The grounds of appeal essentially contend that the judge  erred  in
        law in refusing the adjournment for medical evidence,  in  refusing
        the  adjournment  following  the   assertions   relating   to   the
        appellant's capacity, and in light of  the  appellant's  assertions
        that he was feeling unwell at the hearing. The grounds additionally
        content that the judge failed to contextualise the limited  answers
        given by the appellant at the hearing in light of his claim to feel
        unwell and that he was answering  questions  in  cross  examination
        over a short period of time. It was additionally submitted that the
        judge was not  entitled  to  rely  on  purported  discrepancies  in
        evidence given by the appellant at his screening interview  as  the
        purpose of the screening interview was to glean generalities as  to
        claim.


     9. Permission was granted by the first-tier Tribunal on the basis that
        it was arguable that the judge's exercise of discretion in refusing
        the adjournment was unlawful in  circumstances  where  the  Medical
        Foundation   had   accepted   his   referral,   where   the   legal
        representatives had concerns  relating  to  his  capacity  to  give
        evidence, and where the appellant notified his counsel that he  was
        unwell.


    10. At the outset of the 'error of law' hearing I was informed by  both
        representatives that the  respondent  accepted  that  the  decision
        contained material legal errors  and  that  it  would  have  to  be
        remade. The respondent accepted that the  judge  erred  in  law  in
        refusing to grant the adjournment  and  that  this  resulted  in  a
        procedurally unfair hearing. I have independently reached the  same
        conclusion. I therefore need only give brief reasons for my finding
        that the judge materially erred in law.


    11. I find that the judge failed to  take  into  account  a  number  of
        relevant considerations when she refused to  adjourn  the  hearing.
        There was no appreciation by the judge of the Home Office  Guidance
        'Medical Evidence (Non Medical Foundation  cases),  November  2008,
        which indicated  that  the  respondent  recognised  the  particular
        expertise of the Medical Foundation  in  identifying  and  treating
        survivors of torture. The judge, and the First-tier Tribunal in its
        earlier refusal to grant an adjournment, failed to appreciate  that
        a GP would not necessarily have  the  experience  and  training  to
        provide a reliable assessment of the scarring  on  the  appellant's
        body. At [33] the judge indicated that she was  willing  to  accept
        the appellant had scars on his body but that  she  would  determine
        whether they were caused in the manner claimed by the appellant  on
        consideration of all  the  evidence.  The  judge  however  did  not
        profess to have any medical expertise and would be unable to assess
        the scarring applying the Istanbul  Protocol.  Although  the  judge
        would not be obliged to accept a professional medical assessment of
        the causes of the scarring such a  report  would  undoubtedly  have
        been of some assistance to the Tribunal in  assessing  the  overall
        protection claim. Nor does the judge  appear  to  have  taken  into
        account the potential relevance of a Medical Foundation  assessment
        of the appellant's mental state. If  the  appellant  was  suffering
        from a mental illness a medicolegal report would have assisted  the
        Tribunal in determining the cause and nature of any mental  illness
        and whether the same could explain inconsistencies other  perceived
        defects in the appellant's evidence. Following AM  (Afghanistan)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 the
        findings of a medical expert have to be  treated  as  part  of  the
        holistic assessment and  medical  evidence  could  be  critical  in
        explaining why an account might be incoherent or inconsistent.  Nor
        is it clear that the judge actually took into account the fact that
        appointments had been fixed and were to be conducted within 4 weeks
        of the proposed hearing, and that a final report was anticipated by
        February 2018, so that the adjournment request was not open ended.


    12. The judge observed that the Medical Foundation provided a  standard
        letter that inaccurately referred to the  appellant  as  'she'  and
        that the letter provided to the Tribunal was a copy and that it had
        been sent by email. It appears from [34] that the judge holds these
        factors against the appellant as she concludes that  he  was  using
        delay tactics. The judge has not given any reasons as  to  why  the
        filing of a copy  rather  than  the  original  of  the  letter  was
        relevant, or explained why the  manner  in  which  the  letter  was
        transmitted was of any relevance. Although there was a  mistake  in
        the letter it was apparent that it was written specifically for the
        appellant given that his name and  date  of  birth  were  included.
        Given that the referral to the Medical Foundation was made within a
        month of the respondent's decision it is difficult to see  how  the
        judge was entitled to conclude that  the  appellant  was  deploying
        'delay tactics'.


    13. I additionally observe that, at [29], the judge considered that the
        Tribunal  must  not  adjourn  the  hearing  of  an  appeal  on  the
        application of a party in the  satisfied  that  the  appeal  cannot
        otherwise be justly determined. The judge  appears  to  be  quoting
        from the provisions of the 2014 Procedure Rules  contained  in  the
        schedule containing the  Fast  Track  Rules.  No  such  presumption
        against the granting of an adjournment appears in  the  2014  Rules
        relating to  non-Fast  Track  cases.  The  judge  appears  to  have
        therefore misdirected herself in her general approach to the  issue
        of the adjournment.


    14. Following detailed submissions as to the best way to  proceed  with
        the appeal I am satisfied that it is appropriate to remit the  case
        back to the First-tier Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by material errors of law.  The
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  (de  novo)  hearing
to be heard by a judge other than Judges of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Chana
or Woodcraft.

Directions

   1. There is to be a Case Management Hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      before the matter is listed for substantive hearing.
   2. The  First-tier  Tribunal  will  endeavour  to  list  the  matter  for
      Counsel's convenience (Mr Chelvan).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]                               5 April 2018

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
