
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/08160/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 April 2018                          | On 25 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                    D H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gribble, promulgated on 5 October 2017,  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the respondent  made  on  16  August
    2017 to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

 2. It is the appellant's case that he is an  Iranian  Kurd  who  has  been
    politically involved with PJAK (Kurdistan Free Life Party), having been
    forced to transport leaflets for them.  Some two or  three  days  later
    his uncle, who had a connection with the Etellaat (the  Iranian  Secret
    Police) told him there was a warrant and for his arrest  and  took  him
    into hiding whilst he arranged for an agent to  take  him  out  of  the
    country.  He was then smuggled over land to the United Kingdom  but  he
    entered clandestinely, having been fingerprinted in Germany.

 3. The respondent accepted that the appellant is Iranian  and  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity but considered that his claim to  be  working  for  PJAK  was
    inconsistent with his account that he was a smuggler of goods,  it  not
    being credible that a terrorist organisation would force  an  unwilling
    person  to  assist  them  given  that  he  could  report  them  to  the
    authorities nor was it credible that they would  have  given  them  two
    opportunities to refuse before threatening him.

 4. The judge found that:-

      i) the appellant's account had been inconsistent in three main areas:

          a. as to whether he had been approached two or three times before
             threatened;

          b. whether it is one or two  or  one  to  three  days  after  his
             delivery of the PJAK leaflets that his uncle  told  him  about
             the warrant; and,

          c. he had said in his witness statement he was new  to  the  area
             yet in his oral evidence said that he had lived there all  his
             life  concluding  that  from  these  points  his  account  was
             unreliable [32] to [34];

     ii) there were other issues in the account which  made  it  implausible
         [35] to [37] finding  the  account  of  the  circumstances  of  him
         leaving to be implausible;

    iii) the  appellant  was  not  involved  with  leaflet  distribution  or
         delivery for the PJAK, had no political affiliation profile and  he
         could  make  no  finding  on  his  actual  occupation  due  to  the
         inconsistencies identified;

     iv) even if the appellant were  involved  in  the  smuggling  of  goods
         illegally he would not fall within the Refugee Convention  and  any
         penalty he may face would be prosecution, not persecution;

      v) the appellant would not face persecution on account of  having left
         Iran illegally.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in failing to consider the implications of return in all  the
    circumstances including the fact that he is  a  Kurdish  national,  had
    left illegally and, were he to be accepted as a smuggler, how he  might
    be reviewed on return  and  whether  any  political  element  might  be
    perceived.  It is further argued that he might be perceived as somebody
    who had outed against the regime due to the cumulative  factors  facing
    him on return.

 6.  On  23  November  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen   granted
    permission to appeal.

 7. I do not consider that there is any proper challenge to the findings of
    the judge with respect to credibility, nor did Ms  Brakaj  submit  that
    there were.  Having considered them carefully, I conclude that they are
    sustainable, properly reasoned and made in the light of the  background
    material.   It  was  manifestly   open   to   the   judge   given   the
    implausibilities and inconsistencies he identified to conclude that the
    appellant was not telling the truth and was not credible.

 8. It was open to the judge to say that he could not make a finding on the
    appellant's actual occupation.  He was not obliged to do so and, in any
    event it was for the appellant to prove that he is a smuggler and it is
    clear by the judge's use of the phrase "even if" at [40] and the use of
    the phrase "if he was simply a smuggler of goods" at [41].   I  do  not
    consider, despite the submissions to the  contrary  that  he  could  be
    considered that the appellant had been found to be a smuggler and  thus
    it did not fall to be taken into  account  in  assessing  the  risk  on
    return.  While Ms Brakaj sought to argue that  the  judge  should  have
    made a finding on occupation, that  is not  what  was  pleaded  in  the
    grounds, nor was there any proper indication that  a  finding  on  that
    issue had been sought.

 9. The judge directed himself in line  with  SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:
    failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT  308  which  also  considered
    Kurds.  In particular, the Tribunal noted at paragraph 34:

         "34. It was not suggested to us that an individual  faces  risk  on
         return on the sole basis of being Kurdish. It  was  however  agreed
         that being Kurdish was relevant to how a returnee would be  treated
         by the authorities. For  example,  the  Operational  Guidance  Note
         refers at 3.12.14 to  the  government  disproportionally  targeting
         minority groups, including Kurds, for arbitrary  arrest,  prolonged
         detention  and  physical  abuse.  No  examples  however  have  been
         provided of ill-treatment of returnees  with  no  relevant  adverse
         interest  factors  other  than  their  Kurdish  ethnicity,  and  we
         conclude that the evidence does not show risk of  ill-treatment  to
         such returnees, though we accept that it might be  an  exacerbating
         factor  for  a  returnee  otherwise  of  interest.  Accordingly  we
         conclude that it has not been shown that a person in  the  position
         of these appellants faces a real risk on return to Iran  either  on
         the basis of what would happen  to  them  when  questioned  at  the
         airport or subsequently if they were convicted  of  an  offence  of
         illegal exit. With regard to HR specifically, it does not appear to
         be disputed that he is Kurdish and that he is  undocumented:  hence
         we see no reason for remittal. Prosecution for illegal exit  is  an
         outcome not generally experienced by such returnees, and  where  it
         does occur, the most likely sentence in  relation  to  the  illegal
         exit charge would be a fine. It has not been shown that there would
         be a real risk of prosecution  under  Article  500  for  propaganda
         against the state on the basis of having made an asylum claim which
         was found to be false. Accordingly these appeals are dismissed."

10. The head note in SSH and HR is clear as is the ambit of the guidance it
    gives and it is clear from the decision at [13(e)] and  [17]  that  the
    judge was fully aware  of  the  contents  of  the  case.   It  was  not
    incumbent on him to repeat that when assessing the risk on  return  and
    his reasoning based on SSH and HR that the appellant is not  a  refugee
    and is not at risk on return as a failed asylum seeker is adequate  and
    sustainable.  The grounds fail  to  identity  what  additional  factors
    could be taken into account and whilst it is averred that  there  might
    be a political element, there is no basis for this put forward  in  the
    essence the submission is that the  judge  should  have  departed  from
    county guidance in the absence of cogent evidence.  There is  no  merit
    in it and I find that the decision of the judge  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.

11. For these reasons I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it,

 2. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date 24 April 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
