
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08578/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2019                         |On 7th May 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 brigel [d]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Mitchell (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N Haria, promulgated on 20th June 2018, following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 26th April  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Albania, and  was  born  on  13th
    October 1995.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    23rd  August  2017  refusing  his  application  for  asylum   and   for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of the HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that his family has been involved in  a  blood
    feud with the "[V]" family in Albania.  The  Appellant's  parents  were
    born and grew up in Kukes, in northern Albania, where  the  blood  feud
    tradition remains as the "Kanun".  According  to  the  Kanun,  the  [V]
    family have a right to kill the Appellant or an adult male aged  17  or
    above from his family.  The feud arose in 1996 when  "Arben  [V]",  was
    killed by one of the Appellant's paternal uncles.  In 2003, there was a
    retaliation when another of the Appellant's paternal uncles, shot Arben
    [V]'s father.  The victim survived.  In consequence, however, in  2009,
    another paternal uncle of the Appellant shot and killed Arben [V].   He
    was shot by Bajaram [D], who was prosecuted  and  imprisoned  (see  the
    Appellant's bundle at A36).  Following  this  murder,  the  Appellant's
    father, his remaining paternal uncles, and his cousins, fled Albania to
    avoid being targeted by the [V] family.  When the Appellant reached the
    age  at  which  he  too  would  become  a  target,  his  parents   made
    arrangements for him to leave Albania.  The Appellant left  Albania  in
    September 2012.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge was not satisfied that the Appellant would be at  risk  of  a
    targeted killing on account of a blood feud.  It was noted by the judge
    that  the  Respondent  had  accepted  the  Appellant's   identity   and
    nationality.  It was observed that, "The Respondent  accepts  that  the
    [D] family is in a blood feud with the [V] family which began  in  1996
    when Arben [V] killed Fitim [D]" (paragraph 38).  However, it was noted
    that the Respondent now considered that the Appellant would not  be  at
    risk of a targeted  killing  because  "There  have  been  no  incidents
    against the  Appellant's  family  with  the  [V]  family  since  2009".
    Moreover, it was  the  case  that  "The  Appellant's  father  has  been
    travelling freely in  and  out  of  Albania  without  facing  problems"
    (paragraph 39).  It was held that the blood feud was "no longer active"
    (paragraph 39).  In any event, there was an  active  police  system  in
    Albania  (paragraph  42)  to  which  the  Appellant  could   turn   for
    assistance.

 5. The judge also went on to hold that there were a number of difficulties
    in the Appellant's own evidence.  As he observed, "The first difficulty
    for the Appellant is inconsistency in his evidence  as  to  his  family
    members.  The Appellant has changed his claim as to who are his  family
    members several times" (paragraph 58).  The judge also thought that the
    family had not taken all the necessary  precautions  that  they  should
    have done if the Appellant really had  been  at  risk  (paragraph  69).
    Consideration was given by the judge to the country guidance case of EH
    (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348  (at  paragraph  87  of  the
    determination).  This made it clear that blood feuds  in  Albania  were
    now few and declining.

 6. The judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  had  wrongly  made
    adverse findings by rejecting the expert report of Miss  Senerdem.   It
    was also argued that the determination lacked the necessary clarity.

 8. On 13th December 2018 permission to appeal was granted  on  both  these
    grounds.

Submissions

 9. At the  hearing  before  me  on  12th  February  2019,  Miss  Mitchell,
    appearing on behalf of the  Appellant,  relied  upon  her  well-crafted
    skeleton argument, and on the decision in HK v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1037, which signified the proper approach to be taken  to  fact-finding
    in cases where a different and unfamiliar cultural  background  was  in
    existence.  She submitted that the crux of this  appeal  was  that  the
    Home Office had already accepted that there was a documented blood feud
    between the [D]  family  and  the  [V]  family.   Indeed,  she  brought
    attention to this in her skeleton argument at footnote 2 where there is
    documentation obtained by his family from the Committee  of  Nationwide
    Reconciliation and the Municipality of Kamez (at footnote 2).  What was
    not accepted by the Respondent, submitted Miss  Mitchell,  was  whether
    this blood feud was any longer continuing.

10. The Respondent's view was that given that the last killing had been  in
    2009, and given that the  Appellant's  father  had  twice  visited  his
    country already, the evidence suggested that the blood feud had come to
    an end.  However,  she  submitted  that  in  this  regard  the  country
    guidance case of EH [2012] UKUT 00348 (which the  judge  refers  to  at
    paragraph 87) bore proper  consideration.   This  made  it  clear  (see
    paragraph 84(vi)) that, in determining whether "an active  blood  feud"
    exists, a number of factors should be taken into account.

11. These included the history of the alleged feud, including the notoriety
    of the original  killings,  the  numbers  killed,  and  the  degree  of
    commitment by the aggressor clan toward the prosecution  of  the  feud.
    They also included the length of time since the  last  death  occurred.
    Also of relevance was the ability of the members of the aggressor  clan
    to locate the  Appellant  if  returned  to  another  part  of  Albania.
    Finally, consideration had to  be  given  to  past  and  likely  future
    attitude of the police and other authorities  towards  the  feud.   The
    judge,  submitted  Miss  Mitchell,  had  failed   to   evaluate   these
    considerations properly.

12. Second, the judge was wrong to have disparaged  the  expert  report  of
    Erisa Senerdem.  Whereas the judge makes it clear that "She is a highly
    educated person holding a  PhD  in  economics  ...  and  a  Masters  in
    Belgium" (paragraph  77),  and  whereas  it  was  accepted  that  "Miss
    Senerdem had an in-depth knowledge of Albanian society and culture both
    as a result of her personal background  and  through  advising  on  the
    parliamentary committees" (paragraph 80) the judge was  wrong  to  have
    then stated that, "I am not satisfied that Miss Senerdem currently  has
    a depth of knowledge required of a country expert" (paragraph 80).  The
    criticism that Miss Senerdem "Did not attend the  hearing  and  so  she
    could not be examined on her report" (paragraph  80)  was  unwarranted,
    particularly given that the majority of experts do not actually  attend
    hearings before the Tribunal and reliance often has to be  placed  upon
    their report only.

13. The more serious criticism, submitted Miss Mitchell,  was  the  judge's
    statement that "Miss Senerdem makes no additional comments  as  to  any
    additional factors that may be appropriate", because it is unclear what
    else she was meant to be saying (at paragraph 85).  There is  criticism
    that "She accepts without question that the Appellant is  a  member  of
    the [D] family involved in a blood feud  and  has  not  considered  the
    possibility that the Appellant may simply share the same surname as the
    family involved in  the  blood  feud"  (paragraph  85).   However,  the
    Respondent had accepted that there was a blood feud in relation to  the
    Appellant.

14. For her part, Miss Isherwood submitted that there was no material error
    of law at all.  First, it could not be assumed that the Appellant was a
    member of the correct "[D]" family in this case.  The  judge  addressed
    this very issue as being of concern to the Home  Office,  when  stating
    that "Miss Ellis on behalf of the Home Office submitted that  the  Home
    Office was of the view that anyone with the surname [D] was  pretending
    to be from the same family involved in a blood feud with the [V] family
    ..." (paragraph 65).

15. Second, the judge was alive to the position of the Respondent Secretary
    of State who had "Rejected the Appellant's claim that he is a target of
    a blood feud on the basis that there had been no incidents against  the
    Appellant's family with the [V] family since 2009" (paragraph 39).

16. Third, the judge had concerns about the Appellant's recollection of the
    entirety of his family members against the background of how  the  Home
    Office viewed  the  fact  that  anyone  with  the  name  of  "[D]"  was
    attempting to relate themselves to the family which had the  feud  with
    the [V] family.  This is clear (at paragraph 62) when the Appellant had
    stated that his father had a total of  nine  brothers,  four  from  one
    mother, and five from another mother, but the Appellant had "Failed  to
    mention Bujer one of his father's  brothers  at  the  asylum  interview
    because four weeks prior to his  asylum  interview  he  had  spoken  to
    Bujer, who had asked him not to mention his name ..."  (paragraph  62).
    The judge took the view that "I do not accept the reason given  by  the
    Appellant for failing to mention Bujer as the Appellant must have known
    that he was under a duty to provide correct and  complete  information"
    (paragraph 62).

17.  In  reply,  Miss  Mitchell  submitted  that,  even   if   there   were
    discrepancies in the Appellant's account, the essential  question  here
    was to do with the "materiality" of these aspects of the evidence.   It
    was simply not material  to  the  Appellant's  claim,  that  there  was
    confusion about his family members, in the same way, it was simply  not
    material as to why the Appellant, who had been taken out of  school  on
    account of fears for his safety, was then found to be working at a  car
    wash (at paragraph 69) given that the Appellant's evidence was that his
    parents used to drive him to the car wash and drive him back again, for
    reasons of safety.  Furthermore,  the  suggestion  that  the  Appellant
    could seek internal  relocation  was  not  properly  reasoned  and  the
    conclusions reached by the judge are contrary to the  country  guidance
    case.

Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First,  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the expert report could not be relied  upon  is  not  sustainable.
    This is especially given that the Appellant's expert was said  to  have
    "an in-depth knowledge of Albanian society and culture".  It could  not
    be  said  that  this  knowledge  was  not  sufficiently  current   (see
    determination at paragraphs 80 and 85).  If there was to  be  criticism
    of the expert report, it was necessary to identify  an  aspect  of  the
    expert report considered to be deficient.   This  was  not  done.   The
    criticism of the expert  on  the  basis  of  providing  an  "inaccurate
    assessment of facts" is also not borne out if regard is had to question
    85 of the asylum interview, when the Appellant was asked what  the  [V]
    family said to the Appellant when they came to him, and he had  replied
    "We shot at them twice you owe us blood". The Appellant  had  not  said
    that his family had been threatened by the [V] family.  The expert  had
    concluded that there  was  absence  of  sufficiency  of  protection  in
    Albania given the impunity attending upon the specific incidents  in  a
    blood feud, and the judge was critical of this (at paragraph 84) but  a
    complete reading of the  relevant  sections  of  the  report,  suggests
    otherwise (see pages 108 to 147).  In the same way the  criticism  that
    the expert had made  "no  additional  comments  as  to  any  additional
    factors that may be appropriate" (at paragraph 85)  is  unwarranted  if
    the Appellant had already provided all the necessary information on the
    basis of detailed questions asked of her in the instructions that  were
    put to her.

19. Second, the judge's approach to credibility findings was also  open  to
    criticism.  The Appellant was a child at  the  time  of  his  screening
    interview, as well as his asylum interview, and also his first  witness
    statement.  There had been a passage of some four years after which the
    decision was made in relation to his claim, and by the time he  arrived
    at the hearing he was an adult.  The background evidence suggested that
    males of 16 or over would be at risk under Kanun law.  As a child,  the
    Appellant's knowledge and understanding of the underlying tradition was
    bound to be limited and this conclusion is  supported  by  the  country
    expert, Miss Erisa Senerdem (see her  report  at  paragraph  78).   The
    Respondent had stated that the Appellant's evidence that the [V] family
    had begun to look  for  him  at  school  while  he  was  still  16  was
    "conflicting" and was "damaging to his credibility" (see paragraph 39).
     However, the evidence was consistent with the Appellant being mistaken
    as to the precise age when the risk arose.   The  Respondent  had  also
    asserted that the Appellant had "failed to remain consistent as to  how
    many paternal uncles he  had"  but  the  Appellant  had  clarified  the
    position, and made it clear that his father had four brothers and  four
    half-brothers (from a different mother) and this had been  referred  to
    by the judge in terms.

20. Third, however, the most important aspect relating to  the  credibility
    of the claim as put by the Appellant is the fact that, if regard is had
    to the country guidance case of EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT
    00348, which makes it clear  that  what  needs  consideration  is  "the
    history of the alleged feud" including the notoriety  of  the  original
    killings, the numbers killed, and  the  degree  of  commitment  by  the
    aggressor clan toward the prosecution of the feud", then it remains the
    case that on the lower standard applicable,  the  blood  feud  remained
    active.  This was because the  most  recent  killing  had  been  widely
    publicised.  There had been two  deaths.   There  had  been  a  serious
    attack to  date.   The  families'  commitment  to  the  feud  had  been
    demonstrated by the gaps of six and seven years  between  the  killings
    (as set out in the Appellant's skeleton argument at paragraph 22).

21. What remains clear is that although in the determination (at  paragraph
    87) the judge had set out the headnote of the country guidance case  of
    EH (blood feuds), none of the factors is actually considered, expressly
    or critically in substance, in the  section  that  is  devoted  to  the
    reasons under the heading "consideration and findings".  The failure to
    have regard to these factors, as  specified  in  the  country  guidance
    case, was relevant to the case before the Tribunal,  and  its  lack  of
    application put the Tribunal into an error of law.

22. Finally, the evidence in relation to the father being  able  to  return
    back to Albania has not  been  properly  and  accurately  stated.   The
    Appellant's father, Ilya [D], had stated that he had fled  Albania  due
    to the risk arising from the blood feud.  He had since been  living  in
    Belgium.  He returned only twice in recent years to  Albania  (see  the
    Appellant's skeleton argument at paragraph 19).   The  trips  had  been
    extremely  brief.   He  had  been  accompanied  by   stringent   safety
    precautions.  He had travelled in the back of a heavy goods vehicle  to
    avoid  detection  (this  was  clear  from  his  witness  statement   at
    paragraphs 12 to 14).

23. If the Tribunal is to state that the Appellant's father's movements are
    highly significant, as to whether the blood feud remained active,  then
    it is important that these facts are properly accounted for.   This  is
    especially given that the Tribunal had accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    father "may be in Belgium" and that he "may have travelled in  and  out
    of Albania without his exit  and  departure  being  formally  recorded"
    (paragraph 76).  If this is the case, then it  is  not  clear  why  the
    judge proceeded to give this aspect of the  evidence  "little  weight".
    On the basis that the fact that the Appellant's father "had  been  able
    to travel in and out of Albania  without  problems  was  the  strongest
    possible evidence that the Appellant was not at risk in  Albania"  (see
    paragraph 76).

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that  it  falls
    to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of the  original  judge.   I
    remake the decision as follows.   This appeal is remitted back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge Haria
    pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b).

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 3rd May 2019

