
 [pic]
St

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/08781/2016






                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th July 2017                            |On 1st August 2017            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MR.AW.W.

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr.FB.Ali of Aman Solicitors Advocates (London) Ltd.
For the Respondent: Mr.P.Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. Although it is the respondent who is appealing in these proceedings,
      for convenience, I will continue to refer to the parties as in the
      First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The matter came before me by way of an error of law hearing on 28
      February 2017 with the same representatives. I refer the parties to
      the decision and reasons given on that occasion. In summary, I found a
      material error in the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Roots who
      allowed the appeal on a freestanding article 8 basis. The judge
      appears to have been under the misapprehension that there was no right
      of appeal under paragraph 276 ADE.

   3. The original refusal letter considered his private life under
      paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii) and recorded that he had not lived
      continuously in the United Kingdom for the prescribed 20 years. The
      refusal did not consider paragraph 276 ADE (v). This applied to the
      appellant's situation, bearing in mind he was 22 at the time of
      application and had been in the United Kingdom since he was 8, thus
      having spent half his life here. At the hearing before First tier
      Tribunal Judge Roots paragraph 276 ADE (v) was considered in the
      context of freestanding article 8 assessment. The judge concluded the
      appellant met 276 ADE of the rules and the respondent's decision was
      therefore disproportionate.

   4. At the hearing the presenting officer pointed out that paragraph 276
      ADE (v) was subject to the suitability grounds in S-LTR.1.2 to 2.3 and
      3.1. The judge concluded that the appeal could be allowed because no
      issue suitability had been taken in the decision letter. It was my
      conclusion that the point having been raised at hearing it was
      incumbent upon the judge to deal with it.

   5. My Directions were that the decision should be remade in the Upper
      Tribunal. Meantime, the respondent was to carry out checks as to
      whether any of the suitability grounds applied.

   6.  I have received a skeleton argument dated 11 July 2017 from the
      appellant's representative stating that no further information has
      been received from the respondent. At hearing today Mr Nath indicated
      that he had been unsuccessful in obtaining the information on this
      issue. I had assumed that when the issue was raised at first instance
      there was some cause for concern on suitability. Mr Nath asked for a
      further 14 days which was opposed by Mr.Ali. Although the respondent
      has been given a significant amount of time to date I was prepared to
      allow the further 14 days sought.

   7. I indicate to the parties that in the absence of any substantial
      material relating to suitability issue I was minded to allow the
      appeal under paragraph 276 ADE (v). 14 days now having passed and no
      further information being provided I allow the appeal on this basis.
      There has been no challenge to the negative findings in relation to
      the protection claim.

Decision

The appeal is allowed paragraph 276 ADE (v).



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.


28th July 2017


































