
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08499/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 February 2019                  |On 12 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OMO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Dingley, instructed by Ison Harrison, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent was born in 1984 and is a female citizen of  Gabon.  Her
    child (S) was born in 2010 both the appellant and S entered the  United
    Kingdom's  visitors  in  July  2016.  She  applied  for   international
    protection in January 2018 and, by  a  decision  dated  21  June  2018,
    Secretary of State refused her application. She appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  29  August  2018,
    allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).
    Secretary of State appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The respondent has given an account of attending rallies  and  meetings
    in Gabon in support of the opposition leader, Jean Ping. Although not a
    political activist, she  claims  to  have  come  to  the  attention  of
    government authorities. The judge found  that  the  appellant  gave  an
    'extremely detailed, vivid and compelling account' [37]. She  had  also
    produced documentary evidence showing that both she and the  opposition
    leader originate from Kongo, Gabon. She provided a newspaper report  in
    support of her claim. Judge refers in her decision at [41]  to  country
    material detailing unrest  in  Gabon  during  and  following  the  2016
    election. She found that the respondent's account was  consistent  with
    that material. The judge accepted written  evidence  from  the  Conseil
    Gabonaise de la Resistance (CGR), described  in  the  decision  as  the
    'opposition organisation in exile'. A letter  from  CGR  describes  the
    respondent as one of several individuals who had been threatened by the
    'tyrannical regime in Gabon.' The judge concluded  that  the  appellant
    had left Gabon because of her imputed political opinion  which  exposed
    her an objectively well-founded fear of persecution.

 3.  The grounds of appeal, in essence, challenge the  judge's  credibility
    findings. There is, in my opinion, little merit in the disagreement  in
    the grounds with the  judge's  characterisation  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's main challenge to the respondent's credibility having been  her
    failure  to  mention  her  political  problems  during  her   screening
    interview. The Secretary  of  State  contends  that  that  was  only  a
    secondary factor, his main argument being that the respondent's account
    was inconsistent with background country information. Whether the judge
    was right to characterise the Secretary of State's  challenges  to  the
    appellant's evidence in this way, the fact remains that the  judge  has
    dealt with both the appellant's delay in claiming asylum  and  is  also
    examined the respondent's  evidence  in  the  context  of  the  country
    material.  The  result  of  her  analysis  was  that  she   found   the
    respondent's account truthful and accurate.

 4. A number of rhetorical questions are posed in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    seeking clarification and querying parts of the respondent's  evidence.
    I agree with Mr Dingley, who appeared for  the  respondent  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, that the presenting officer at the First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing had the opportunity to raise these matters in cross examination
    but failed or chose not to do  so.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    identified an error in the decision now by  raising  matters  of  which
    neither the respondent nor the judge had notice  at  the  time  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.

 5. I agree with the Secretary of State that it is sometimes  unclear  what
    form supporting evidence for the respondent's claim was received by the
    judge. However, read as a whole, I find that the judge has conducted an
    adequate analysis of the credibility of the appellant's evidence. As  I
    have noted above, the grounds raise  matters  which  should  have  been
    raised at the hearing before the judge or constitute disagreements with
    the judge's findings, which were unarguably available  to  her  on  the
    respondent's evidence and country material.

 6. The Secretary of State also challenges the judge's findings as  regards
    Article 8 ECHR. At [47], the judge allows the appeal on Article 8  ECHR
    grounds primarily, if not solely, on account of S's best interests (see
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009).  The
    analysis here is inadequate  and  the  reasoning  not  entirely  clear.
    Indeed, it is uncertain whether the judge has  allowed  the  appeal  on
    Article 3 or 8 grounds. However, given that I can identify no  material
    error in the judge's analysis of the appeal on asylum grounds  I  shall
    leave the Article 8 ECHR analysis undisturbed.

Notice of Decision

 7. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 7 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane







