
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08895/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 January 2019                             |On 31 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                mr A M J A B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Nizami, counsel, instructed by D H Law
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a national of Iraq, date of birth 10 January 1995  sought
    protection on or about 13  February  2018  which  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 3 July 2018.  His appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M R Oliver (the Judge) who  on  25  October  2018  dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum and Humanitarian Protection grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin  on
    20 November 2018.

3.   The grounds extensively challenge a variety of aspects of the  decision
    of the Judge and highlight a number of issues  which  Miss  Nizami  who
    appeared  before  the  Judge  had  raised  in  her  extensive  skeleton
    argument.  That skeleton argument was a helpful guide of  points  which
    the Judge should have found useful in dealing with several  aspects  of
    the claim.  That is not to say the arguments should have succeeded,  so
    much as they were pointers or touchstones to address in order to secure
    an adequate and sufficiently reasoned decision.  Of particular note was
    the absence of consideration in any direct sense by the  Judge  of  the
    Humanitarian  Protection  basis  of  claim  set  out  with   particular
    reference to the case of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq  CG  [2017]  UKUT
    00018.  It is clear that in that country guidance case for good or  ill
    the point was raised about the potential risk from  persons  who  on  a
    return to Baghdad may face dangers because they  are  perceived  to  be
    rich, wealthy, westernised or exposed to a different life  to  that  in
    Iraq.

4.   Mr Whitwell courageously argued that other findings, if they  had  been
    made, by the Judge when pulled together are sufficient to show that the
    risk of serious harm, kidnapping,  exploitation,  whatever  it  may  be
    particularly relied upon, would not occur.  He particularly relied upon
    the fact that the Appellant is Iraqi, speaks Arabic, is young enough to
    find work, there are family connections of some sort and thus there was
    no real risk.

5.   Mr Whitwell may be right.  I would not seek to second guess  that.   It
    simply does not follow because the Appellant  is  single,  healthy,  23
    years of age that he can relocate back to Iraq and safely make  a  life
    for himself there or in parts of Baghdad without the need  to  consider
    the Humanitarian Protection issues or it followed  internal  relocation
    and sufficiency of protection.  The matter was  simply  not  fully  and
    properly addressed by the Judge.  Given the rejection of other parts of
    the case, the claim needed to be looked at  with  great  care.  It  was
    plain that the Judge  became  focused  on  the  issue  of  the  Refugee
    Convention claim and  issues  arising  from  it  lately  arising  which
    diverted him from the wider issues  which  the  skeleton  argument  had
    drawn to his attention.

6.   The view  the  Judge  took  of  the  lateness  of  the  claim  and  the
    application of Section 8 of the AIT (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) 2004
    was an issue which was addressed: Whether it was correctly addressed is
    certainly open to some argument.

7.   The fact was that the skeleton argument  identified,  by  reference  to
    the case law, the issues of risk on return, the factors in relation  to
    the sufficiency of  protection  and  the  scope  of  it.  I  find  that
    similarly the Judges' general approach to  the  claim  really  did  not
    adequately address those matters.

8.   Similarly the issue of the reasonableness of internal relocation as  an
    option was again highlighted in some depth in  the  skeleton  argument.
    Quite simply,  even  if  the  Judge  was  right  to  have  reached  the
    conclusion that he did, the adequacy of the reasons fell short of  that
    to be expected.

9.   Other grounds of challenge might be characterised  as  the  counsel  of
    perfection but it seemed to me that particularly the way in  which  the
    Judge addressed the evidence, provided in translation, with a statement
    explaining its paper trail  relating  to  a  report  from  a  Brigadier
    General in the Iraqi police, was not  adequately  dismissed  simply  by
    describing it as 'self-serving'.  No other reasoning was given  by  the
    Judge. Whilst one may understand what he says and why he  says  it,  as
    the case law plainly directs it is not sufficient to dismiss a document
    as self-serving.  There does at least need to be some,  however  brief,
    explanation of the reasons why it is self-serving.  The need  for  some
    reason, however brief, has been repeated in the Upper Tribunal  in  the
    case of SS [2017] UKUT 00164.

10.  For these reasons I am satisfied that the Original Tribunal  failed  to
    give sufficient and adequate reasons to address the issues  raised  and
    cannot stand.  The appeal will have to be  reheard  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, no findings of fact to stand.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  List Hatton Cross, not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver.


(2)  List for hearing one witness, two hours.


(3)  Any further evidence  relied  upon  in  support  of  the  claim  to  be
    submitted not less than ten working days  before  the  further  hearing
    unless otherwise directed at a CMRH or PTR at Hatton Cross.


(4)  No interpreter required.


(5)  Anonymity order continued.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 18 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
