
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: PA/08185/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 January 2020                             |On 17 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     t a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr. K Shoye, Counsel, instructed by CW Law Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr. D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Eden
    ('the Judge') issued on 14 October 2019 by which the appellant's appeal
    against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  to  grant  him
    international protection was dismissed.

 2.  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Macdonald   granted
    permission to appeal on 28 November 2019.

Anonymity

 3. The Judge issued an anonymity direction and the parties did not request
    that it be set aside. I confirm the direction pursuant to  Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  in  the  following
    terms:-

         Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of
         these proceedings or any formal publication thereof shall  directly
         or indirectly identify the appellant. This  direction  applies  to,
         amongst others, the appellant and the respondent.  Any  failure  to
         comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of  court
         proceedings. I do so in order to avoid the  likelihood  of  serious
         harm arising to the appellant from the contents of  the  protection
         claim becoming known to the public.


 4. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He  asserts  that  he  entered
    this country in 2006 as a visitor and subsequently overstayed. In  2009
    he was convicted of being in possession of a  false  Nigerian  passport
    and sentenced to six months' imprisonment. In April 2009 he applied for
    an EEA residence card. The respondent refused the application by  means
    of a decision dated 16 July 2010.  In September  2010  he  applied  for
    leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  (article  8)  grounds  and   this
    application was refused by way of a decision dated 6 December  2015.  A
    subsequent appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (the  'FtT')
    by a decision sent to the parties on 31  January  2017.  The  applicant
    claimed asylum on 22 November 2017 asserting that he was at  real  risk
    of persecution consequent to a land dispute concerning his family home.
    The respondent refused the application for international protection  by
    means of a decision dated 30 July 2019.

Hearing before the FtT

 5. The appellant states that he was admitted to Newham University Hospital
    on Friday, 20 September 2019 and his solicitors wrote  to  the  FtT  on
    Monday, 23 September 2019  requesting  an  adjournment  of  his  appeal
    hearing. They detailed that the applicant was suffering from  a  severe
    infection consequent to a leg injury. No corroborative documentation as
    to  his  admission  and  ailment  was  provided  with  the  adjournment
    application and it was refused by the FtT on 24 September 2019. The FtT
    observed that the application could be renewed upon receipt of  medical
    evidence establishing that  the  appellant  was  unfit  to  attend  the
    hearing.

 6. The appellant's solicitors renewed the application by way of an  e-mail
    dated 24 September 2019  and  provided  a  handwritten  letter  from  a
    medical practitioner and  two  photographs  of  the  appellant  in  his
    hospital bed.  The letter is addressed "To Whom it May Concern" and  is
    signed by a medical consultant.  The name of the consultant is unclear.
    The letter provides a  date  of  birth  that  is  consistent  with  the
    respondent's records but is said by the appellant at paragraph 1 of his
    witness statement dated 12 September 2019 to be incorrect.

 7. The FtT refused the application on 25 September  2019  observing  grave
    concerns as to failure of the letter to explain the reason to  why  the
    appellant had been admitted to hospital and further that there had been
    a  failure  to  provide  a  hospital  reference  number.  The  decision
    observes, 'if the appellant fails  to  attend  the  hearing  [it]  will
    proceed in his absence'.

 8. The appeal came before the Judge at Taylor House on 26 September  2019.
    Neither the appellant, his sister who is a witness in  this  appeal  or
    his legal representatives attended.  The Judge  considered  whether  to
    adjourn or to proceed in the appellant's absence and determined  as  to
    this preliminary issue, at [5]:-

         'Neither  the  appellant  nor  his  representatives  attended   the
         hearing. Applying rule 28 of the Procedure Rules and the overriding
         objective, I decided to proceed in the appellant's absence.  I  was
         satisfied that the appellant had been notified of  the  hearing.  I
         considered it in  the  interests  of  justice  to  proceed  in  the
         appellant's absence, having particular regard to the need to  avoid
         delay and the duty of parties to co-operate with the Tribunal.  The
         appellant had provided inadequate evidence that he was in  hospital
         and had been clearly told that the hearing  would  proceed  in  his
         absence. His representatives should  have  provided  clear  medical
         evidence with a hospital reference number and a description of  his
         illness from the outset. Even if his representatives  had  not  yet
         received the refusal of their second application as at the date  of
         the hearing, they should not  have  assumed  that  the  application
         would be granted and should have  attended  the  Tribunal  hearing.
         Having read the file, I was satisfied that the evidence  before  me
         was sufficient for me to decide the appeal.'


 9. The Judge proceeded to find the appellant incredible as to  his  stated
    history of being a victim of a land dispute observing at [22] that 'the
    answers the appellant gave in the asylum interview were vague, somewhat
    incoherent  and  lacking  in  detail'.  The  asylum  and   humanitarian
    protection appeals were dismissed. As for  the  appellant's  article  8
    appeal the Judge concluded in dismissing it that the  limited  evidence
    presented did not affect the conclusion reached by the FtT in 2017.

Grounds of Appeal

10. The grounds of appeal concentrate  solely  on  one  issue,  namely  the
    failure to grant  an  adjournment.  Reliance  is  placed  upon  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418   (IAC).    In   granting
    permission to appeal DJFtT Macdonald observed:-


         'The  Judge  explained  why  he  was  not  adjourning  the  hearing
         (paragraph 5) but it is at least arguable that there was sufficient
         information before the Judge to allow  him  to  conclude  that  the
         appellant was in hospital and would not be able to attend.'

The Hearing

11. Both representatives at  the  hearing  informed  me  that  the  parties
    considered the Judge's decision to be flawed by legal error, such  that
    it should be set aside. Mr Clarke informed me  said  that  he  had  had
    sight of further medical evidence confirming  that  the  appellant  was
    receiving medical treatment in hospital on 26 September  2019  and  was
    discharged from hospital on 1 October 2019. He was therefore  satisfied
    on behalf of the respondent that on the  relevant  date  the  appellant
    remained an in-patient at a hospital and therefore was unable to attend
    the hearing.

Decision on Error of Law

12. The Judge was not aided by the actions of  the  appellant's  solicitors
    who  failed  to  attend  the  hearing  but  remained  on  record.   The
    explanation for such failure to attend is detailed within  the  grounds
    of appeal as the appellant having instructed them  not  to  attend  the
    hearing due to cost. No steps were taken by the solicitors  to  contact
    the hearing centre at Taylor House  on  the  morning  of  the  hearing,
    either by telephone or email,  to  confirm  the  present  situation  in
    relation to the appellant's stay in hospital. A solicitor with  conduct
    of an appeal should be mindful of the fact  that  whilst  remaining  on
    record they are required to comply with their duties to the FtT and not
    to hinder the administration of justice. The decision of the  solicitor
    with conduct of the appeal to abide by the appellant's instruction  not
    attend the hearing, and then to subsequently fail to  provide  the  FtT
    with an update as to the present position, causes concern as to whether
    clarity of thought was given to the duty placed upon them. At the  very
    least the Judge would have been aided by communication on  the  morning
    of the hearing as to whether or not the appellant remained in  hospital
    or had been discharged. It may well be that if the Judge was made aware
    that the appellant remained in hospital,  a  different  decision  would
    have been made as to the adjournment request.

13.  Rule  4(3)(h)  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum  Chambers)  Rules  2014  empowers  the  FtT  to
    adjourn a hearing.  Consideration has to be given to Rule 2 which  sets
    out the overriding objectives under the Rules that the FtT  'must  seek
    to give effect' to when exercising  any  power  under  the  Rules.  The
    overriding  objective  is  to  deal  with  cases  fairly  and   justly.
    Ultimately the issue arising in this appeal  is  one  of  fairness.  In
    Nwaigwe it was confirmed at [7] that if the FtT refused to accede to an
    adjournment request, such decision could in principle be  erroneous  in
    law in several respects: these include a failure to take  into  account
    all material considerations; permitting  immaterial  considerations  to
    intrude; denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply
    the correct test; and acting irrationally. In most cases  the  question
    will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his right to
    a  fair  hearing.  In  circumstances  such  as  this  appeal  where  an
    adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, this Tribunal is
    required to recognise that the question is not whether  the  FtT  acted
    reasonably, rather the test to be applied  is  that  of  fairness:  was
    there any deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair  hearing?
    The Court of Appeal confirmed in SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1284,  at  [13]  that  when
    considering a refusal to adjourn 'the test and sole test was whether it
    was unfair'.

14. I have sympathy with the  Judge  who  was  provided  with  insufficient
    information as to the appellant's medical condition and was unaware  as
    to whether the appellant remained a patient at the hospital on the  day
    of the hearing. The medical letter is sparse in detail.  I observe that
    the letter is presented on NHS  notepaper  with  a  stamp  from  Newham
    University Hospital. It is not said to be a forgery and therefore as at
    Tuesday, 24 September 2019 the  appellant  was  an  in-patient  at  the
    hospital. Both the decision of the FtT in refusing to adjourn by  means
    of its decision of 25 September 2019 and the Judge were critical as  to
    the lack of detail contained within the letter, including the lack of a
    patient reference number. However, King LJ has reminded  the  judiciary
    when considering adjournment requests that they are to have in mind the
    pressure medical practitioners work under and the difficulties that may
    be faced in obtaining a report  containing  more  detailed  information
    than the bald details found in a sick note:  Emojevbe  v  Secretary  of
    State for Transport [2017] EWCA Civ 934, at [31].

15. Coulson LJ held in General Medical Council  v  Hayat  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
    2796, at [37], that there must be evidence that an individual is  unfit
    to participate in the hearing,  that  such  evidence  must  identify  a
    proper particularity of the individual's condition and explain why that
    condition prevents that participation in the hearing.   Moreover,  that
    evidence should be unchallenged. There is to be  rigorous  scrutiny  of
    evidence adduced in support of an application for an adjournment on the
    grounds that a party is unfit on medical grounds to attend  a  hearing.
    Such scrutiny forms part of the overriding objective assessment.

16. Ultimately the evidence presented by the appellant was that  he  was  a
    hospital  in-patient  and  had  been  for  several  days,  though  this
    information was some two days old when considered by the Judge,  and  I
    again observe that it is unfortunate that no-one from  the  appellant's
    solicitors took the step to inform the Tribunal at the morning  of  the
    hearing  that  the  appellant  remained  in  hospital.  However,  I  am
    satisfied upon considering the evidence filed with this  Tribunal  that
    the appellant was in hospital on the day  of  the  hearing  before  the
    Judge and remained there until 1 October 2019. In  such  circumstances,
    where an appellant wishes to pursue his appeal in relation  to  seeking
    international protection and is at the relevant  time  a  hospital  in-
    patient, it cannot be said that a  fair  hearing  could  occur  in  his
    absence.   In  those  circumstances  I  am  in   agreement   with   the
    representatives before me that this decision should be  set  aside.   I
    observe that it is the evidence postdating the hearing that has  proven
    to be conclusive and  the  Judge  cannot  be  overtly  criticised  when
    limited information was placed before the FtT.

Remittal

17. As to remaking the decision, given the fundamental nature of the  error
    of law that has been identified, I note the submissions made by both Mr
    Clarke and Mr Shoye that sustainable findings of fact have  yet  to  be
    made in this matter and to date the appellant has not  enjoyed  a  fair
    hearing.  Both representatives submitted  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    I   have   given   careful
    consideration  to  the  Joint  Practice  Statement  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in  this
    Tribunal.  It reads as follows at paragraph 7.2:-

         The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion  to  proceed  to
         remake the decision, instead of remitting the case  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other
                opportunity  for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to  be
                remade is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to
                the First-tier Tribunal.'


18. I have reached the conclusion that it  is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all  matters.
    The appellant has not yet enjoyed  an  accurate  consideration  of  his
    asylum claim to date and has not had a fair hearing.


Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
    14 October 2019 pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007.

20. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Eden.   No
    findings of fact are preserved.

21. An anonymity direction is confirmed.

Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 14 January 2020


