
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08968/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 August 2020                    |On 28 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between
                                      N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant acting in person
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as the  appeal  concerns  a
    protection claim. Unless  and  until  a  court  directs  otherwise  the
    Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly refer to her.  This direction  applies  both  to
    the Appellant and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who,  in  a
    determination promulgated  on  the  15  November  2019,  dismissed  her
    protection and human rights claim.

The factual background:

 3. The background to the appellant's protection claim is set  out  in  the
    determination of the FtTJ at  paragraphs  11-25  and  in  the  decision
    letter of the Secretary of State issued on 30 August 2019.

 4. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. The appellant is the  youngest
    of 4 girls and has an  elder  brother.   Her  father  is  a  successful
    businessman.  The appellant's elder brother persuaded their  father  to
    let her  come  to  the  UK  to  study.  The  appellant's  father  is  a
    conservative  Muslim  and  uneducated.    He  has  a  very  traditional
    attitude to women and was reluctant, but he eventually  agreed  because
    the appellant's brother and her elder sisters were in the UK with their
    husbands.

 5. On 5 November 2011, the appellant entered the UK with  entry  clearance
    as a tier 4 student general student valid until 4 January 2014.

 6. The appellant went to college and completed a level  3  access  course.
    She stayed with A her  eldest  sister.  In  July  2014,  the  appellant
    started studying a Bsc which she completed in 2017.  The appellant  was
    supported by her elder brother, N.

 7. On 14 October 2013, the appellant applied for further leave  to  remain
    in the UK as a tier 4 student.  The Home Office refused the application
    and the appellant appealed.  The appeal was allowed on 8  January  2015
    and on 2h February 2015 the Home Office granted  her  leave  to  remain
    valid until 30 September 2017.

 8. The Home Office subsequently granted the  appellant  further  leave  to
    remain in the UK on tier 5 visa valid until 8 October 2018.

 9. Whilst studying in the UK, a  paternal  cousin  suggested  a  potential
    suitor for the appellant's marriage.  The  appellant's  elder  sisters'
    marriages had been arranged and although the appellant was reluctant to
    marry, she felt she had no choice.  Her family agreed  that  she  could
    continue with her education.

10. On 13 October 2015 the appellant married B, a British citizen. However,
    within weeks  the  relationship  was  breaking  down.  The  appellant's
    husband was abusive and hit her.  He also tried to stop her from seeing
    her family in the UK.

11. On 8  December  2015,  the  appellant  went  to  hospital  after  being
    assaulted by her husband.  The two  families  pressurised  her  not  to
    press charges against him as this was a family matter.

12. The appellant's husband filed for divorce and accused the appellant  of
    committing adultery.  The appellant last had contact  with  her  former
    husband in April 2016 and the decree absolute was made on 12  September
    2017.  The couple divorced under Islamic law on 3  October  2017.   The
    appellant thinks that her parents believe the adultery  allegation  and
    only had minimal contact with them.

13. In 2017 the appellant began working and she applied for  further  leave
    to remain and continued to work.

14. In late 2017 the appellant met Z in London. They met on  a  handful  of
    occasions and in mid-2018  Z  proposed.   The  Appellant  said  no  and
    explained that she needed more  time  as  she  was  still  feeling  the
    effects of her earlier traumatic marriage.  The appellant has continued
    the relationship in secret. She only told her sister the day before the
    hearing.

15. On 4 October 2018, the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of family and private life in the UK.

16. On 5 March 2019, the Home Office refused the application with an out of
    country right of appeal.

17. On 6 March 2019, the  appellant's  brother  contacted  his  father  and
    advised him that the appellant is likely to return to Pakistan,  as  he
    understood that the Home Office had refused the application.

18. On 8 March 2019, the appellant  received  notification  that  the  Home
    Office had refused the application.  The appellant's manager terminated
    the appellant's employment but reassured her  that  the  company  would
    support an application for re-entry as a Tier 2 worker.  The  appellant
    decided to return to Pakistan for a few months and to apply for a visa.
     She began searching on- line for flights to Pakistan.

19. The appellant's brother contacted their father and told  him  that  the
    appellant intended to return home to Pakistan. The  appellant's  father
    advised the appellant's brother that he had arranged for the  appellant
    to marry  one  of  his  cousins.   The  appellant's  brother  told  the
    appellant.  She decided that she could not go back to Pakistan  and  on
    Monday morning she contacted the Home Office and claimed  asylum.   She
    returned and began living with her sister A again.  She  was  supported
    by her siblings.

20. In June 2019, the appellant's father advised the  appellant's  siblings
    that the appellant needed to return to Pakistan and if  they  continued
    to support her, he will disinherit them.  The appellant's eldest sister
    A opposed her father  and  has  continued  to  support  the  appellant.
    However, the appellant's other siblings have disowned her and have  had
    no further contact with her.

21. The appellant fears that if she is to be returned to Pakistan there  is
    a real risk of her father forcing her to marry against her  or  killing
    her if she does not as he wishes.

22. On 14 March 2019, the appellant contacted the asylum  intake  unit  and
    made a protection claim (asylum).

23. In a decision taken on the On 30 August 2019 the respondent refused the
    appellant's asylum and protection claim under paragraphs 336 & 339F  of
    the Immigration Rules and also reached the decision that the  appellant
    did not qualify for leave on the basis of her family or private life in
    the UK ( hereinafter referred to as " the decision letter".

24. The FtTJ summarised the decision letter at paragraphs 26-32 as follows.

25. The Respondent accepted the appellant's identity  and  that  she  is  a
    Pakistani national.  However, the respondent did not  accept  that  the
    appellant was a victim of domestic  violence  and  that  she  had  been
    accused of adultery.   In addition, the respondent did not accept  that
    the appellant's father threatened to her force her to re-marry  if  she
    returned to Pakistan.  The respondent relied in part on  section  8  of
    the Asylum & Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act  2004  (the  2004
    Act).

26. In the alternative, the respondent concluded that the  appellant  could
    safely relocate to another part of  Pakistan  and  that  the  Pakistani
    authorities could provide sufficient protection if required.

27. The respondent considered that the appellant had failed to  demonstrate
    a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  she  would  be  persecuted  on
    return to Pakistan and concluded that the appellant  would  not  be  in
    need of international protection.

28. As to the appellant's human rights claim, the respondent noted that the
    appellant had not lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  twenty
    years and did not accept that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    her integration into Pakistan. As such  the  Respondent  was  satisfied
    that the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of
    the Immigration Rules.

29. Finally, the respondent concluded that the appellant had not raised any
    exceptional circumstances, which might justify  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain in the UK outside the requirements of the immigration rules.

The hearing before the FtT:

30. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal against that decision.

31. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 17 October  2019.
    In a decision promulgated on 15 November 2019, the FtTJ  dismissed  her
    appeal.  After considering the evidence, both documentary and oral, and
    analysing that he set out a summary of his conclusions at paragraphs 73
    -86 as follows:

         "Conclusions

         73. In relation to the documents submitted, I have applied Tanveer
             Ahmed v SSHD (Pakistan) [2002] UKIAT 00439.   It  is  for  the
             Appellant to show that a document on which they seek  to  rely
             can be relied on (para 38-1) and "a  document  should  not  be
             used in isolation. The  decision  maker  should  look  at  the
             evidence as a whole or in the round (which is the same thing)"
             (para 35).

         74. Overall, the Appellant's account is plausible  and  consistent
             with the background material.  In  addition,  the  information
             given to the GP is broadly  consistent  with  the  Appellant's
             account and the doctor has diagnosed  that  the  Appellant  is
             suffering from depression.

         75. On the totality of the  evidence,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant's father arranged  her  former  marriage.   In  this
             context I have attached  significant  weight  to  the  country
             material that demonstrates that arranged  marriages  are  very
             common in Pakistan.

         76. I am also satisfied that the Appellant suffered an incident of
             domestic  violence  during  her  marriage.   Once  again,  the
             background material  shows  that  Pakistani  women  are  often
             victims of domestic violence and I attached significant weight
             to the report from the emergency department at the hospital.

         77. However, notwithstanding the above  positive  aspects  of  the
             Appellant's case,  I  have  reluctantly  concluded,  that  the
             Appellant failed to discharge the lower standard of proof,  in
             relation to the core aspects of her claim.

         78.  As  I  noted  above  the  principal  issue  is  whether   the
             Appellant's father will force her to remarry if  she  returned
             to Pakistan and, a key part of this  is  that  her  father  is
             strict, controlling and disapproved of her coming to the UK to
             study.

         79. However, the difficulty for the Appellant is that  in  support
             of her appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
             extend her leave to remain in the UK as a student, she  stated
             that her parents were  very  upset  that  she  was  unable  to
             complete her education in the UK.  The  clear  implication  is
             that they supported her studies in the UK, which  is  at  odds
             with the Appellant's asylum claim.  In my view, the  Appellant
             is now providing a very different account  of  her  upbringing
             and this has all the hallmarks of being an attempt to  support
             a fabricated asylum claim.  At the very least, the Appellant's
             failure to address this issue in her  appeal  statement,  even
             though it was raised in the  refusal  letter,  undermines  her
             credibility generally.

         80. I am also troubled by the absence of any supporting witnesses.
              I appreciate that an asylum seeker is not required to provide
             corroborative evidence.  However, where, as in this case,  the
             Appellant has provided  inconsistent  accounts  and  there  is
             evidence, that should be readily available (witness A), then I
             am satisfied that I am entitled to draw an  adverse  inference
             from witness A's failure to attend the hearing.  Especially as
             the Appellant's brother is also absent and the  Appellant  did
             not request an adjournment.

         81. As to the other evidence, the divorce petition does show  that
             the Appellant's former husband alleged that she had  committed
             adultery.   However, there is a lack  of  cogent  or  credible
             evidence demonstrating that anyone in Pakistan knows about the
             allegation.

         82. In addition, even if I assume that the letter from the  MP  is
             genuine, the MP has  not  explained  how  he  knew  about  the
             Appellant's claimed difficulties with her father, and,  in  my
             view, this undermines the weight I can attach to the  contents
             of the letter.

         83. Further, as was noted by the Respondent, the letter  from  the
             travel agency does  not  state  that  the  Appellant  did  not
             purchase a ticket because of family  problems.   I  appreciate
             that the letter is consistent with the Appellant's claim  that
             she initially intended to return to Pakistan, but there  could
             be many reasons why she  decided  to  change  her  mind.   For
             example, I note that the Appellant is now  claiming  that  she
             has been in a relationship with a man in the UK since 2018 and
             she confirmed at the hearing that she sees a future  with  him
             (paragraph 3 of her further appeal statement).

         84. On the totality  of  the  evidence,  I  have  been  driven  to
             conclude that the Appellant has not given me a wholly truthful
             account of her relationship with her family, in particular her
             father.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  father
             intends to force the Appellant  to  marry  a  cousin,  if  she
             returned to Pakistan or that he (or anyone else  in  Pakistan)
             believes that she has committed adultery.

         85. The Appellant has not satisfied me that she will be  returning
             to Pakistan as a lone woman or that she has a genuine fear  of
             returning to Pakistan.

         86. Applying the lower standard of proof, the  Appellant  has  not
             established that she will be at risk of  being  persecuted  on
             return to Pakistan.  Accordingly, I dismiss her asylum appeal.



32. The FtTJ also refused her Article 8 claim finding  that  there  was  no
    family life with her extended family ( at  [90])  and  whilst  she  had
    established a private life, there were no very significant obstacles to
    her reintegration to Pakistan and that she had  not  demonstrated  that
    there were any compelling circumstances which would justify  her  being
    granted leave outside of the Rules.

33. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and was granted on the 30
    February 2020 by the FtT.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

34. The hearing was listed on a date in May 2020. In the light of the COVID-
    19 pandemic Upper Tribunal (UTJ Jackson) issued directions, inter alia,
    indicating that it was provisionally of the view that the error of  law
    issue could be determined without a  face  to  face  hearing.  However,
    following those directions it  was  considered  that  a  face  to  face
    hearing should  take  place  as  the  appellant  was  not  represented.
    Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to enable  oral  submissions
    to be given by each of the parties.

35. In compliance with the  directions  sent  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
    appellant sent  a reply to update the court as   to  a  change  in  her
    circumstances exhibiting photographs of her wedding  in  November  2019
    and copy of the Nikah, and subsequent marriage certificate and  1  page
    of copy passport of her spouse. On the 5 May 2020, the  respondent  set
    out her written submissions in a Rule 24  response.  Following  this  a
    further reply was  sent  by  the  appellant  making  reference  to  her
    pregnancy.

36. The appeal was therefore listed as a face to face hearing with both the
    appellant and the Presenting Officer, Ms Pettersen present at court.

37. The appellant appeared in person and Ms  Pettersen,  senior  presenting
    officer, appeared on behalf of the respondent.  I am grateful for their
    assistance and their clear oral representations.

38. At the outset of the hearing I made enquiries with the appellant as  to
    whether she required the court interpreter who  had  been  directed  to
    attend by the Tribunal. She informed me that  an  interpreter  was  not
    necessary, and she made her representations in  English.  I  note  that
    during the hearing there were no difficulties  with  Ms  N  giving  her
    representations, and no concerns were raised at  any  time  during  the
    hearing.

39. I reminded myself of paragraph 6 of the Surendran guidelines in that it
    is a judge's duty to give every assistance to an appellant who  is  not
    represented.  To ensure that that duty was  complied  with,  I  ensured
    that at each stage of the proceedings I explained the procedure to  her
    and ensured that she understood what was happening at each stage of the
    proceedings.  Further I attempted to put the appellant at ease and told
    her that at any time of the proceedings if she wanted to ask a question
    or if she did not understand, then she must say so.

40.  I also ensured that she had all the relevant documentation and she had
    brought with her a bundle of the previous documents before the FtT.  It
    was identified that she did not have a copy with her of the grounds  of
    appeal which she confirmed had been drafted by her previous Counsel and
    that she had seen them. A copy was therefore provided for her and  time
    was given to her read the document and to refresh her memory as to  its
    contents.

41. I shall summarise her oral representations to the Tribunal. In relation
    to grounds generally she confirmed that Counsel who appeared before the
    FtT had drafted the grounds of appeal. In relation  to  ground  1,  she
    stated that at the last hearing during cross examination the judge  had
    answered the presenting officer's questions  and  therefore  there  was
    nothing for her to say. She stated that she felt that if she replied to
    the presenting officer it would not be any different so when the  judge
    replied to the presenting  officer  she  thought  that  the  judge  had
    understood her case thoroughly.

42. In relation to ground 2, she confirmed that her sister's  daughter  had
    depression and had panic attacks and that she had shown the  judge  the
    appointment letter. She stated that it not been raised that there would
    be any problem with considering her evidence or  else  she  would  have
    asked for an adjournment. She  stated  that  she  had  shown  that  her
    sister's child required medication and that a witness statement from  A
    had said that it was hard for her to leave her daughter. She  confirmed
    that Counsel did not apply for an adjournment. In respect of ground  3,
    she submitted that there was evidence from her  employer  stating  that
    she was honest and that he would help her remain in the United  Kingdom
    for employment. She stated that she had provided all the  documents  to
    the Home Office showing her career over a period of  two  years  as  an
    employee of x and that she had been a genuine student. Ms  N  explained
    that any application to renew her tier 2 status would have to  be  made
    from abroad and therefore the evidence from her employer supported  her
    claim that she was going back to Pakistan but  was  not  then  able  to
    because of the threats made by her father.

43. In relation to ground 4, she relied upon the written  grounds.  It  was
    accepted by the FtTJ that the appellant's first marriage  was  arranged
    by her father and that she had difficulties  during  the  marriage  and
    that the judge also accepted that marriages between cousins were common
    (paragraph 36). Therefore, the finding made by the judge  that  it  was
    not plausible that her father  would  arrange  a  second  marriage  was
    inconsistent with his earlier findings. Similarly at paragraphs 11 - 12
    of the grounds it was submitted that in reaching his assessment of  the
    evidence at paragraph 66 the judge neglected to consider paragraph 7 of
    the witness  statement  where  the  appellant  clarified  her  father's
    position regarding her education and that the judge had erred in law by
    failing to recognise that the appellant had summarised  her  subjective
    interpretation of her parents reaction and that  the  judge  had  given
    considerable weight to a sentence given which  had  not  been  properly
    scrutinised. In her oral statement she said that her  father  and  paid
    �7000 for a course and that if she had not obtained  a  visa  it  would
    have been deducted. She said that she had given evidence in court  that
    if she had studied in the UK and obtained her degree her  father  would
    have been proud of her and this was contrary to the finding made.

44. As to ground 5 in her oral submissions the appellant stated that whilst
    her ex-husband did not use the word "adultery" as soon as anyone  would
    read the petition Pakistan they would know that this was  alleged.  The
    written  grounds  refer  to  the  divorce  petition  stating  that  the
    appellant had "formed inappropriate relationships with another man" and
    that in light of the cultural objective evidence (expert evidence of Dr
    Bluth) that was sufficient to demonstrate a risk on  return.  Ground  6
    asserts that the judge failed to apply the benefit  of  doubt  rule  in
    favour of the appellant.

45. As to ground 7 it was submitted that the judge erred in his approach to
    Article 8. Ms N submitted that there had  been  no  assessment  of  the
    relationship between her  family  relatives'  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom and she referred to her relationship with her elder sister  and
    that she "called her mother". She described her  relatives  in  the  UK
    with whom she had relationships with. It was further  stated  that  her
    relationship with her partner was also  not  considered  by  the  judge
    although she had given evidence about him and it was referred to in her
    witness statement dated 17 October 2019. She conceded that there was no
    witness statement from him, but she stated that she  had  explained  to
    the court that if one was required he was waiting in the car park.  She
    said she tried to show photographs  of  her  and  her  partner  on  her
    telephone which the presenting officer refused to see  as  he  said  it
    could have been anyone.

46. I heard oral submissions  from  Ms  Petterson.  As  to  ground  1,  she
    submitted  that  it  was  hard  to  see  how  the  appellant  had  been
    disadvantaged as  the  judge  found  in  her  favour  on  many  of  the
    evidential points. However she submitted the ground did  not  show  any
    error of law and that if  it  had  been  said  that  Counsel  had  been
    prevented from  making any submissions then this may have been an error
    but here it was stated that the presenting officer  was  restricted  in
    questions. In any event she submitted the matters  complained  of  were
    not set out in any witness statement.

47. As to ground 2, she submitted that it was not  clear  how  crucial  the
    evidence of the witness A was to the case and in terms  of  credibility
    there was contradictory evidence identified by the judge  at  paragraph
    63 and the presence of  a  witness  would  not  have  been  sufficient.
    Dealing with ground 3, there was no error of law  in  failing  to  take
    into account her employer's  evidence.  She  submitted  the  judge  was
    entitled to look at  the  evidence  from  the  travel  agency  and  was
    entitled to conclude that there may be many reasons why she decided not
    to return to Pakistan and not just because of her claimed fear.  As  to
    the issue of the divorce petition,  Ms  Pettersen  submitted  that  the
    appellant's husband had not divorced her on the grounds of adultery and
    the judge was entitled to  conclude  that  some  of  the  matters  were
    contradictory. The fact that the content of the  petition  referred  to
    her acting inappropriately with a  man  was  not  the  same  as  having
    committed adultery.

48. As to ground 7 which related to the Article 8 assessment, the appellant
    was a student for a number of years and was also  working.  Whilst  she
    had relatives in the UK this was not  sufficient  to  establish  family
    life even if they did live in the same household. Even if this had been
    considered as part of her private life there was nothing to suggest  it
    would be disproportionate for the appellant to return to  Pakistan  and
    to retain her links with her family as before.  Ms  Pettersen  accepted
    that the judge did not deal with the relationship between the appellant
    and her partner. She submitted the photographs on her phone  would  not
    provide any evidence of his  identity  and  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence of his identity or nationality before the judge. The judge was
    entitled to conclude that whatever the relationship it was insufficient
    to bring it within Article 8. There was limited  evidence  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant and even if the photographs were considered  it
    did not get the appellant past  the  evidential  threshold.  Thus,  she
    submitted the judge did not deal with it given the paucity of evidence.
    Ms Pettersen invited me to uphold the decision.

49. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision  and  explained
    to the appellant that I would give my decision in writing and that if I
    found an error of law in the decision of the FtTJ I would  set  out  my
    reasons and the consequences of any legal error and  also  if  did  not
    find an error of law based on the issues raised I would also set out my
    reasons in a written decision.

Discussion:

50. I remind myself that I can only interfere with the decision of  a  FtTJ
    if it is demonstrated that the FtTJ made a decision which involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

51. I have had the opportunity to read the written  grounds,  to  hear  the
    submissions from appellant in person and from Ms Pettersen on behalf of
    the respondent and have considered them in the light of the decision of
    the FtTJ.

52. Dealing with ground 1,  the  written  grounds  assert  that  the  judge
    conducted the proceedings unfairly. It was said that during the  course
    of the proceedings the presenting officer was challenged by  the  judge
    and it said that he was not being  allowed  to  cross  examine  without
    constant  interventions.  It  is  asserted  that   the   judge   either
    scrutinised the line of questioning  or  responded  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant which meant that she was limited in  elaborating  on  answers
    being asked. It is said that the conduct of the judge would  appear  to
    an impartial observer that he was acting  outside  his  remit  and  not
    allowing the respondent or appellant to fully put forward their cases.

53. In her oral submissions, Ms N stated that at the hearing the presenting
    officer wanted to cross examine her but that  the  judge  had  answered
    him. She said she felt  that  if  she  replied  it  would  not  be  any
    different and she thought the judge understood her case thoroughly.  Ms
    Pettersen on behalf of the respondent submitted that  the  grounds  did
    not show any error of law on the basis of how they had been drafted and
    on the basis of the appellant's oral  submission  that  the  presenting
    officer was restricted in asking questions. She submitted that  if  the
    account given by the appellant had been that  she  had  been  prevented
    from making submissions, such a point could be taken. In any event  she
    stated the matters  complained  of  were  not  raised  in  any  witness
    statement.

54. I have given careful consideration to the written grounds and the  oral
    submissions of Miss N.  Having done so, I am not  satisfied  that  that
    this ground is made out.

55. What is absent in relation to the evidence relied upon by the appellant
    in support of the  allegation  of  unfairness,  is  anything  from  her
    Counsel in support of or  to  substantiate  this  claim.  There  is  no
    witness statement from Counsel or any copy  of  a  note  or  record  of
    proceedings compiled and there is nothing from  Counsel  asserting  any
    difficulty in properly  representing  the  appellant  or  claiming  the
    appellant did not receive a fair hearing before the Judge.

56. The appellant has stated that she has not provided a statement  because
    she has not been able to afford representation. However, the  appellant
    confirmed before me that Counsel had  drafted  the  grounds  where  the
    allegation was made and therefore  Counsel  would  have  been  able  to
    provide the necessary statement setting out the evidence relied upon at
    that time.

57. There is also no witness statement from the appellant setting  out  her
    recollection. As a  result  of  the  lack  of  evidence,  there  is  no
    evidential foundation upon which the FtTJ could be asked to comment.

58. It cannot be  in  dispute  that  as  a  general  principle  any  person
    appearing before a court or Tribunal has a right  to  a  fair  hearing.
    However, a FtTJ is entitled to choose how  to  conduct  their  hearing,
    even if this involved asking questions as a form of clarification  from
    either of the advocates.  As  a  lay  witness  who  may  not  have  any
    experience of court hearings, it may not be readily  understood  why  a
    judge may ask questions of the parties.  Therefore,  even  if  it  were
    right that the judge asked questions of the presenting officer, I  note
    that it is not the appellant's position that her  Counsel  was  stopped
    from re-examining before proceeding to submissions. The  appellant  had
    the benefit of Counsel representing her  and I am satisfied that it  is
    clear that Counsel instructed was able to engage fully with the  appeal
    process by being able to examine and re-examine  as  required,  and  to
    make submissions on the appellant's behalf.

59. I remind myself that the burden of proving the allegation of unfairness
    falls upon he appellant. The FtTJ made a number of positive findings in
    relation to the appellant's claim and  it  is  not  the  case  that  he
    rejected the appellant's claim in its  entirety.  Having  undertaken  a
    careful examination of the  decision  and  the  issues  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal, evidence, and submissions made, whilst the appellant
    was not satisfied with  the outcome of the appeal,  the  appellant  has
    failed to establish that she did not receive a fair hearing as asserted
    in Ground 1.

60. However, dealing with ground 2, I am satisfied that this ground is made
    out. It relates to the evidence of the appellant's sister, A.  She  had
    provided two witness statements which supported the appellant's account
    in material aspects. The second witness statement (p111AB; paragraph 4)
    gave first- hand evidence of the threats made by the appellant's father
    concerning a forced marriage  and  was  consistent  with  and  provided
    potentially corroborative evidence for the  witness  statement  of  the
    appellant's brother.

61. Whilst the appellant's brother had filed a witness statement he did not
    attend the hearing. The reason for his non-attendance was  set  out  at
    [67] that the appellant's  father  had  threatened  to  disinherit  her
    siblings if they continued to support the appellant and it was only her
    sister who was prepared to stand against this. As to the  circumstances
    of the appellant's sister, it was evident that she had intended to give
    evidence before the FtTJ but it was said that her daughter had a  panic
    attack the night before the  hearing  and  that  when  her  mother  had
    contacted the GP she was advised to take her to hospital. The  position
    before the Tribunal was that as a result, the  appellant's  sister  did
    not attend the hearing. The judge stated that Counsel had not  referred
    to any medical evidence in respect of her child's health but noted that
    there was  some  evidence  in  support  as  she  had  referred  to  her
    daughter's health issues in her witness statement (at [68]). The  judge
    also observed that he was surprised that the appellant did not ask  for
    an adjournment for her sister to attend or for a later hearing.

62. It does not appear that any further  consideration  was  given  to  the
    position of the supporting witnesses or the importance of A's  absence.
    I asked Ms N during the hearing whether an application was made for  an
    adjournment. She told me that  Counsel  had  not  made  an  application
    formally  before  the  judge  because  a  witness  statement  had  been
    provided. As I understand her summary before me, this  was  subject  to
    anything the judge might say about the statement.

63. In the absence of evidence from Counsel or any reference in the  record
    proceedings, it is unclear  to  me  what  view  was  taken  as  to  the
    necessity of an adjournment for the witness to attend or what, if  any,
    discussions ensued. However, what is clear is  that  the  FtTJ  made  a
    number of  important  findings  based  on  the  non-attendance  of  the
    witness. At [69] the FtTJ stated that in the absence of the appellant's
    siblings, the presenting officer was unable to test the content of  the
    statements and therefore this lessened the weight that he could  attach
    to the evidence. At [72] he referred to a point  in  the  evidence  and
    that due to her failure attend she had not explained the  omission.  At
    [68] he expressed the view that in the appellant's  brother's  absence,
    A's evidence became "highly significant". Furthermore at [80] the  FtTJ
    set out that  he  was  "troubled  by  the  absence  of  any  supporting
    witnesses" and whilst noting that corroboration  was  not  required  he
    stated that where there was evidence that was readily available  "I  am
    satisfied I am entitled to draw an adverse inference from  A's  failure
    to attend the hearing. Especially as the appellant's  brother  is  also
    absent and the appellant did not request an adjournment."

64. Against that background it is submitted on behalf of the appellant that
    had the judge indicated that he would draw an adverse inference by  the
    witnesses absence or found the absence  to  prejudice  the  appellant's
    case then the position of an adjournment  would  likely  to  have  been
    reconsidered. The grounds going to say that the appellant was not given
    the opportunity to reconsider the position  of  an  adjournment  or  to
    fully appreciate the consequences of her witness not being present.

65. Ms Pettersen on behalf of the respondent did not make  any  submissions
    as to this aspect of the grounds but submitted that it was unclear  how
    crucial the evidence of A was  and  there  was  contradictory  evidence
    within the witness statements in any event as to what the parties  knew
    or didn't know concerning the allegations made of adultery.

66. Having considered the position of  the  parties,  it  is  plain  in  my
    judgement that the evidence of A was considered  by  the  judge  to  be
    highly significant evidence as he stated at [68]. It is also plain that
    the  judge  was  troubled  by  the  witness's  absence.   Consequently,
    notwithstanding the submission made by  Ms  Pettersen,  the  judge  did
    consider that this evidence was of importance and did form part of  the
    factual matrix.

67. Furthermore, in light of the  positive  credibility  findings  made  in
    favour of the appellant relevant to her factual account, that  evidence
    had clear significance.

68. I have considered with care whether there was any duty on the judge  to
    raise the issue as the grounds submit. The relevant Procedure Rules set
    out the Tribunal's wide case management powers and in  particular  Rule
    4.  Rule 4 (3) provides that the Tribunal can decide on the form  of  a
    hearing and the Rules also provide for particular matters to  be  dealt
    with as a preliminary issue. Rule 4  (3)  (g)  provides  the  power  to
    adjourn or postpone the hearing. This must be exercised  in  accordance
    with the overriding objective  and  having  regard  to  other  relevant
    considerations. The decision in Nwaige (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00412 emphasises the  importance  of  the  test  of  fairness  and
    whether the party will be deprived of a fair hearing.

69. I have not found  this  an  easy  issue  to  determine  as  I  have  no
    indication from the record of proceedings as to any discussions between
    the parties nor do I have any statement  from  Counsel  concerning  the
    procedural aspects. It seems that no application for an adjournment was
    made and there is no general duty on a judge to put a party  on  notice
    of any particular credibility issue.  However,  in  the  light  of  the
    potential significance of the evidence and  in  the  context  of  there
    being some evidence in support  of  the  witnesses  non-attendance,  it
    seems to me that in terms  of  fairness  that  should  have  been  some
    discussion as to how that evidence may be viewed. Whilst  the  Tribunal
    has the power to admit and consider hearsay evidence, the weight of the
    evidence will be an  issue  to  be  determined  having  regard  to  its
    contents and the ability to test the evidence. Here the FtTJ went on to
    draw an adverse inference based on the  witness's  non-attendance  when
    there was a reason given as to why  she  had  not  attended  with  some
    evidence in support. In the light of the careful positive  findings  of
    credibility that  were  made  by  the  FtTJ,  that  evidence  did  have
    potential significance for the appellant's  claim.  When  applying  for
    permission to appeal, the appellant provided a letter/witness statement
    from her sister dated 26 November 2019 attesting to  why  she  had  not
    attended the hearing as a result of her daughter  who  she  stated  had
    mental health problems, who had had a panic attack in the  morning  and
    that she had to make an emergency  appointment  as  her  condition  was
    serious. She stated that she understood the importance of her being  at
    the hearing and would do her utmost to be there at any further hearing.
    Whilst that statement was not before the FtTJ, it provides some support
    for the reasons as to why she had not attended the hearing and reflects
    back on the position before the judge. I am  therefore  persuaded  that
    there was a procedural irregularity which went to the fairness  of  the
    proceedings and therefore had the effect  of  undermining  the  overall
    credibility assessment. The evidence was historically relevant  to  the
    risk of harm and return and it is sufficient in my view  to  result  in
    the setting aside of the decision. Consequently, I need not address the
    other grounds which are advanced in relation to the protection claim.

70. As to the Article 8 claim, ground 7 submits that the judge erred in his
    approach to Article 8 and that the assessment proceeded solely  on  the
    appellant's private life claim. The grounds submit that the  judge  did
    not assess the nature of the family life  between  the  appellant,  her
    sister and other family relatives with whom she lived  with  since  her
    arrival in the UK which had been  supported  by  the  written  and  the
    photographic evidence. It is also submitted that the appellant had said
    she was in a relationship with her partner since late 2017 and that she
    was unable to fully disclose the depth of relationship as  her  brother
    had conduct of the case initially which is why he was not  referred  to
    in her application and that he was now her husband having married on 24
    November  2019.  It  is  also  asserted  the  judge  refused  to   view
    photographic evidence on the phone in relation  to  her  partner  which
    would have added to her credibility and her claim on Article 8 grounds.

71. In her summary to the Tribunal, Ms N submitted  that  she  had  a  very
    close relationship with her eldest sister who she referred  to  as  her
    "mother" and whilst her sister entered the UK in  2000,  the  appellant
    had been visiting the UK frequently. She said that she had  established
    a family life with them that no consideration be given to that  in  the
    judge's decision.

72. Ms Pettersen on behalf of the respondent submitted that the  chronology
    of the appellant's life in the UK referred to her living apart from her
    sister in a different geographical location for a number of years.  She
    submitted that even if they had been in the same household  this  would
    not be sufficient to found a family life nor would it be considered  to
    be disproportionate as on return appellant could retain family links as
    before.

73. When looking at the decision it is plain that the judge considered  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim on the basis of her private life only.  The
    appellant's claim to have a family life with her relatives  in  the  UK
    was raised before the respondent  in  the  evidence  provided  for  her
    application for leave to remain on family and private life grounds.  In
    the decision letter her family life was considered  under  "exceptional
    circumstances" and at paragraph 130 - 132 it was  noted  that  she  had
    submitted a number of witness statements and that she had established a
    close relationships but that  "you  have  not  demonstrated  upon  your
    return to Pakistan that they are not able to  visit  you  and  continue
    these relationships." It appears from  the  decision  letter  that  the
    respondent proceeded on the basis of an acceptance of the establishment
    of family life.  However, at [90] the  judge  found  that  because  the
    appellant had not been wholly totally truthful about  her  relationship
    with her family and that because A did not attend the hearing,  he  was
    not satisfied that she had family life in  the  UK.   Therefore,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge did not fully consider the  basis  upon  which
    family life had been advanced.

74. As the relationship between the appellant and her partner as the  grant
    of permission sets out, the record of proceedings  refers  to  "claimed
    relationship; relationship is to be relied upon  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8. The respondent gives consent for the Tribunal  to  determine
    this issue."

75. It is common ground that the relationship was only disclosed at a  very
    late stage as indicated in  the  appellant's  witness  statement.  This
    would have been a "new matter" and could only have been  considered  by
    the FtTJ if the respondent gave consent. It appears  that  consent  was
    given as indicated in the record of  proceedings.  Evidence  was  given
    during the hearing concerning the relationship  between  the  appellant
    and her partner as to when they  met  and  that  they  had  kept  their
    relationship secret. That was set out in witness statement at paragraph
    3 (dated 17th of October 2019). At paragraph 20  of  the  decision  the
    judge set out that  evidence  and  at  paragraph  83  referred  to  the
    relationship she had with a partner and that she  "saw  a  future  with
    him".

76. Ms Pettersen accepted that the FtTJ did not deal with Article 8 on  the
    basis of a relationship with her partner but submitted that it was  not
    material given the paucity of the evidence. She submitted the claim was
    made late in the day and there  was  limited  evidence  available.  The
    photographs on the appellant's mobile phone would give no  evidence  of
    his identity and thus the evidential threshold was not made out.

77. Having looked at the evidence, it is plain to me that the issue of  the
    appellant's relationship was indeed a live issue as demonstrated by the
    respondent's agreement for the judge to consider it as a  "new  matter"
    combined with the evidence  in  the  witness  statement  and  the  oral
    evidence  given  by  the  appellant.  It  is  also  clear  that  whilst
    relationship was relied upon no factual  assessment  was  made  of  any
    kind. That said, it is right as Ms Pettersen  submits  that  there  was
    little evidence before the judge  in  the  light  of  the  relationship
    having been disclosed  at  a  late  stage  and  there  was  no  witness
    statement from him. Whilst Ms N submits there was photographic evidence
    on her mobile phone,  I  do  not  accept  that  any  such  photographic
    evidence would have assisted the judge in any Article 8 assessment.  Ms
    N description of the photographs were of her and her partner.  I  would
    accept that it is unlikely that she would pose with a man who  was  not
    her partner however, the photographic evidence would not be evidence of
    either his nationality, his  status  or  evidence  the  nature  of  the
    relationship or the circumstances relevant to  any  assessment  of  the
    nature of that relationship. Nor do I accept that as he was waiting  in
    the car park adjacent to the court, the  judge  should  have  summonsed
    him. There was no witness statement for him  and  in  the  interest  of
    fairness the respondent  would  be  entitled  to  have  notice  of  any
    evidence given.

78. In summary, whilst the judge was in error  by  failing  to  consider  a
    material  matter  relating   to   the   Article   8   assessment   (her
    relationship), as it was clearly an issue that had been  raised,  given
    the lack of evidence it is difficult to see how he could  have  reached
    any decision upon that relationship.  However, for the reasons set  out
    above I am satisfied that the judge did not consider family  life  with
    her family relatives which is  sufficient  to  demonstrate  a  material
    error of law in relation to the Article 8 assessment.

79. Since the hearing Ms N has  provided  further  evidence  that  was  not
    available to the FtTJ which demonstrates shortly after the  hearing  in
    November 2019 the appellant and her partner were married in an  Islamic
    ceremony followed by a  civil  ceremony  in  2020.  The  appellant  has
    provided evidence also of her pregnancy. There is  some  evidence  from
    her spouse and from her sister (relevant to the issue of  family  life)
    None of that evidence was before the FtTJ  and  is  fresh  evidence  of
    events that occurred after the hearing and as such  cannot  demonstrate
    that the FtTJ made a material error of law. However, in the light of my
    assessment  that  ground  2  is  made  out  which  has  the  effect  of
    undermining the assessment of the credibility of  her  claim,   I  have
    reached the conclusion that the decision should be set aside  and  this
    will also include the Article 8 assessment.

80. As to the remaking of the decision, it will be remade on  the  evidence
    as at the date of the hearing which will include both protection  claim
    and the Article 8 claim. Accordingly, it  will  be  necessary  to  take
    account of the fresh evidence relating to her marriage  and  thus  will
    require  further  oral  evidence  to  be  given  as  to   her   present
    circumstances.

81. I have therefore considered whether it should be remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In reaching that
    decision I have given  careful  consideration  to  the  Joint  Practice
    Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning  the
    disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

         "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:-

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal."

82. As it  will be necessary for the appellant, A and her spouse   to  give
    evidence and  to deal with the evidential issues, further  fact-finding
    will be necessary and in my judgement the best  course  and  consistent
    with the overriding objective is for it to be remitted to the FtT for a
    further hearing. The Tribunal will be seized of the task of undertaking
    a credibility assessment and an assessment of any Article 8  claim  and
    will be required to do so on the basis of the evidence as at  the  date
    of the hearing.

83. The circumstances of the appellant have significantly changed given her
    marriage. However, given the positive findings made at paragraphs 34  -
    46 they should be preserved findings at any future hearing.

84. I am satisfied that the decision of the FtTJ demonstrates the making of
    an error on a point  of  law  to  justify  the  setting  aside  of  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

85. The appellant's appeal is allowed on the basis that the decision of the
    FtTJ did involve the making of an error on a point of law; the decision
    is set aside and remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 22/ 9/2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
