
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08274/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2020                   |On 11 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                     R I
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel instructed by Law Dale
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpretation:   Mr A Smad in the Bengali language


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 12 October  1986.   He
    entered the United Kingdom as  a  student  on  20  October  2009.   His
    student leave was subsequently extended on several occasions  until  31
    May 2014.  On 13 July 2015 he made  an  Article  8  ECHR  private  life
    application.  This was rejected on 3 September 2015.

 2. The appellant claimed asylum on 29 January  2016.   An  appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed on 4  April  2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Onoufriou.  Permission to appeal was granted and the  appeal  was
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.  The  appeal
    was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet on 3 June 2019.   On  30
    July 2019 Resident Judge Appleyard granted permission to appeal against
    that decision and the  error  of  law  hearing  came  before  me  on  6
    September 2019.  I found that First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet had erred
    in law for the reasons set out in my decision of 15 November 2019 which
    is appended to this decision at Appendix A.

 3. The matter came before me to remake the appeal.

The Appellant's Claim

 4. The appellant fears that were he to return to Bangladesh he would  face
    serious harm from the ruling party, the Awami League, as  a  result  of
    his support for the Bangladesh National Party ("BNP").  He also asserts
    that he would  face  prosecution  for  politically  motivated  criminal
    charges.

 5. The appellant claims to have been persecuted in Bangladesh  on  account
    of his political activities. His family were all BNP supporters and  he
    became involved with the BNP student wing whilst still a student at the
    Government Bangla College in Dhaka. He held the position  of  Assistant
    Secretary of the college branch of the Bangladesh Jatiotabadi Chatradol
    ('BJC'), the student wing of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party.  In 2007
    he started studying civil engineering at the World University  and  was
    elected student welfare secretary. The appellant also  worked  for  the
    local MP candidate Mr  Khander  Delowar  Hossain,  the  then  Secretary
    General of the BNP who was the chief whip of the Bangladeshi parliament
    until 2006.

 6. There was conflict between the BNP and their opposing party  the  Awami
    League. On 20 March 2007 the appellant was attacked by the Awami League
    whilst he was on a local BNP procession. His  finger  was  cut  with  a
    machete during the attack and he sought medical assistance. There  were
    tensions in late 2008 in the lead up to the  elections.  The  situation
    deteriorated after the Awami League took  power  in  the  elections  in
    January 2009. On 1 February 2009 local  members  of  the  Awami  League
    attacked the shop and attempted to kill the appellant who was seriously
    wounded in his left heel.  He has also been attacked on  several  other
    occasions by Awami League members. It was these events  which  prompted
    him to leave Bangladesh.

 7. The appellant further asserts that false  politically  motivated  cases
    were brought against him on 12 July 2010 and 2 June 2012 after he  left
    Bangladesh  at  a  time  when  he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant's father died of a heart attack on 4 March 2014, brought  on,
    it is said, by the appellant becuase he was being harassed by the Awami
    League who were trying to take control of the family shops and  assets.
    The appellant also asserts that his brother, who was  also  politically
    active for the BNP, was abducted on 3  December  2014.   The  appellant
    believes  that  the  Awami  League  was  the  perpetrator.   Since  the
    appellant has  been  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  has  been
    politically active for the BNP  attending  meetings,  participating  in
    demonstrations and conferences.

 8. If the appellant is returned to Bangladesh he would be at risk of being
    prosecuted in  relation  to  the  false  cases  which  are  politically
    motivated. This would constitute persecution.  Alternatively,  he  will
    be at risk of being persecuted by the Awami  League  because  he  is  a
    genuine  and  committed  BNP  supporter  who  would  continue   to   be
    politically active in Bangladesh and he would come to the attention  of
    the authorities.

Reasons for Refusal

 9. The respondent accepts that the appellant was involved with the BNP  in
    Bangladesh because he was able to demonstrate knowledge of the BNP  and
    its history, provide details as to the general objectives of the  party
    and the process for joining, and also provided a  detailed  description
    of his roles and activity within the party.

10. The respondent does not accept  that  the  appellant  subsequently  had
    problems with the Awami League.  The  respondent  takes  issue  with  a
    number of  the  documents  which  were  submitted  in  support  of  the
    appellant's claim for asylum. In  particular  an  advert  placed  in  a
    Bangladeshi  newspaper  in  relation  to  the   appellant's   brother's
    disappearance in 2014 was not lodged until a  year  later  in  December
    2015. This is not considered to be plausible.

11. On the appellant's father's death certificate his  cause  of  death  is
    stated to be "Awami Terrorists ambush  Kriya  closed  die  of  a  heart
    attack".  The death  certificate  is  written  in  basic  and  confused
    English and it is unclear why the cause of death refers to  non-medical
    incidents.

12. The letter from the appellant's mother is considered to be wholly self-
    serving.  The letter was written on 3 December 2015 and  yet  addresses
    events which occurred in March and  December  2014.   The  letter  also
    refers to false cases which were lodged in 2010 and 2012.  The document
    from the appellant's branch of the BNP in Bangladesh is vague referring
    to several false cases against him and  asserts  that  the  police  are
    regularly looking for the appellant but provides no details as  to  how
    this information has been obtained.  It is not considered credible that
    the police would continue to look for the appellant in the  local  area
    when he had been out of the country for  four  years.   The  respondent
    points  to  the  prevalence  of  fraudulently  obtained  documents   in
    Bangladesh.  It is also not  considered  plausible  that  Awami  League
    members would try to force the appellant to join his party.

13. The appellant's family are wealthy and have remained in the  same  area
    of Bangladesh and have made no attempt to relocate to another  part  of
    Bangladesh, which also undermines the appellant's account.  It  is  not
    accepted that the appellant has encountered problems as he claims as  a
    result of his BNP support.

14. Section 8(2) of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004 applies because of the delay in the  appellant  claiming
    asylum.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2009 but  did  not
    claim asylum until 2016.  This  is  behaviour  to  which  Section  8(2)
    applies.

15. The respondent goes  on  to  consider  that  there  is  sufficiency  of
    protection in Bangladesh. It is said that the appellant would  be  able
    to defend himself from any false charges against him and would be  able
    seek protection  from  the  authorities  in  relation  to  the  alleged
    attacks.  It is also open  to  the  appellant  to  relocate  internally
    within Bangladesh away from his home area to avoid being persecuted  by
    the local Awami League members.

16. The respondent does not accept that the appellant is at risk of serious
    harm from the authorities in Bangladesh if returned there  and  refuses
    his claim for asylum,  his  claim  for  humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of the immigration rules as well as his  Article  2  and
    Article 3 ECHR claims.  Further, the removal of the appellant would not
    breach Article 8 ECHR since the appellant does  not  meet  any  of  the
    requirements of the immigration rules and there are no very significant
    obstacles to his reintegration to Bangladesh.  There are no exceptional
    circumstances which would warrant the exercise of discretion outside of
    the context of the Immigration Rules.

Grounds of Appeal

17. At the outset of the appeal Mr Biggs confirmed for the  appellant  that
    he was relying on Refugee Convention and Article 3  grounds  only.   He
    would not submit that it would be a breach of the  appellant's  private
    or family life to return him to Bangladesh.  He also confirmed that  he
    was not putting forward an Article 3 ECHR medical claim.

The Burden and Standard of Proof

18. The burden of proof is on the appellant to demonstrate that as  at  the
    date of the hearing there are substantial grounds for believing,  or  a
    real risk that he meets the requirements of the Refugee  or  Person  in
    Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006.

The Law

19. In order to qualify for international protection,  the  appellant  must
    meet the requirements of the 1951 Convention, Article 1A, as  reflected
    in  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification)  Regulations  2006  and  the  provisions  set  out   in
    paragraphs 327 to 339P of the Immigration Rules which implement Council
    Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004  on  minimum  standards  for  the
    qualification and status of third country nationals as refugees  or  as
    persons who otherwise need international protection.

20. Paragraph 339L (implementing Article 4(5) of the  Directive)  indicates
    that it is the duty of the appellant to substantiate the claim and sets
    out the relevant conditions to be met when assessing evidence.  I  have
    also had regard to the case of Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439  in
    respect of the documents submitted with the claim.

Documentation

21. At the outset of the appeal I clarified with the parties  that  we  all
    had the same documentation.  This comprised of the respondent's  bundle
    enclosing  the  appellant's  screening  interview,  statement,   asylum
    interview and documents provided in support of his asylum claim as well
    as three appellant bundles comprising of those documents set out in the
    detailed indexes and an additional  witness  statement  dated  6  March
    2019.  Counsel also handed up the  authorities  of  MA  (Bangladesh)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 175 as  well
    as RT (Zimbabwe) & Ors [2012] UKSC 38.

22. I have considered all of the documentation before me.

The Hearing

23. The appellant gave evidence in  Bengali  through  the  court  appointed
    interpreter.  He confirmed  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  that  he
    understood the interpreter.  The appellant adopted  his  five  separate
    statements as evidence-in-chief and confirmed that  the  contents  were
    true.  The  oral  evidence  is  set  out  in  full  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and I will refer to  those  relevant  parts  throughout  my
    determination.

24. Both representatives made submissions which are also  set  out  in  the
    Record of Proceedings.

25. There was evidence before the Tribunal that the appellant has PTSD  and
    on this basis I decided  to  treat  him  as  a  vulnerable  witness.  I
    ascertained that he was comfortable reminded him  that  he  could  take
    breaks and asked during the hearing if he needed to  take  a  break.  I
    also reminded Mr Kandoola about the appropriate way of cross  examining
    a vulnerable witness.

Findings and Reasons

Support for BNP and situation in Bangladesh

26. The starting point in this appeal is that the respondent accepts, which
    was also conceded by Mr Kandola at the outset of the appeal,  that  the
    appellant was historically involved  with  the  BNP.   The  appellant's
    description of his activities for the BNP in Bangladesh are set out  in
    his statements and asylum interview.  In summary he  describes  himself
    as a political activist in Bangladesh.  He became involved in  the  BNP
    because of his older  brothers'  and  his  father's  involvement.   The
    appellant's father was a member of the BNP and his  older  brother  was
    the President of the Youth Wing of the Dalut Pur.  The appellant became
    involved with the party in 2004 when he was  attending  the  Government
    Bangla College in Dhaka.  At that point he joined  the  BJC  and  later
    became  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  college   branch   of   the
    organisation because of his hard work and dedication to the  party.  He
    regularly attended processions and demonstrations as  well  as  various
    commemorative days and events.  He describes himself  as  carrying  out
    party activities as instructed by  the  Central  Organisation  General-
    Secretary.  He organised meetings and rallies,  celebrated  and  hosted
    different national days such as Independence Days.  He  worked  closely
    with the Central Secretary, a Mr Hossain and a Mr Islam and a Mr Rizvi.



27. In 2007 the appellant commenced a degree at  a  private  university  in
    Dhaka undertaking an engineering course and was elected to  become  the
    student welfare secretary.  These activities are all  accepted  by  the
    respondent on the basis of the detailed answers that the appellant gave
    in his asylum interview in relation to the leadership and  the  setting
    up of the party, its aims  and  aspirations,  his  activities  and  his
    description of his personal involvement and  I  am  in  agreement  with
    this.

28. The respondent remains silent  on  whether  it  is  accepted  that  the
    appellant  was  attacked  in  Bangladesh  by  the  Awami  League.   The
    appellant's evidence is on 20 March 2007 after returning  home  from  a
    meeting of his party he was attacked by a group of people in the "Hasan
    Ali and Hamida Group".  The appellant describes being  beaten,  punched
    and kicked severely.  One of them took a sharp  knife  or  machete  and
    slashed the appellant on his finger.  Local people broke up the  attack
    and the appellant was taken  to  hospital  where  he  received  medical
    treatment.   The  appellant  knew  the  Hasan  Ali  and  Hamida   Group
    personally, Mr Hasan Ali being the leader of the local student wing  of
    the Awami League.  The appellant describes being personally targeted as
    a  representative  of  the  rival   student   party.    The   situation
    deteriorated after 2008 when the Awami League came to power.   In  2009
    the appellant was  present  at  a  demonstration  in  his  local  area,
    Manikgonj, when he was attacked by members of  the  Awami  League  with
    sticks and machetes, cocktail bombs and stones.  Between 2008 and  2009
    there were numerous occasions when the appellant, along with many other
    party colleagues, was shouted at, pushed, spat on and verbally  abused.



29. On 1 February 2009 the appellant was in his shop with his  father  when
    the Awami League stormed his shop looting the money from the cash  box,
    pushing his father and cutting the appellant's  foot  with  a  machete.
    The appellant was taken to  the  same  hospital  as  a  result  of  his
    injuries.  During this time the Awami League would frequently visit the
    appellant's father's shop and forcibly steal items and money out of the
    cash box.

30. I have considered this supporting evidence in respect of these  attacks
    which include clinical notes from Dr Md Nuruzzaman from  the  Noorjahan
    General Hospital which were obtained by the appellant after he  claimed
    asylum to support the account of what happened to him.  The  notes  are
    handwritten  in  English  on  the  hospital  notepaper.   There  is   a
    contemporaneous note  dated  20  March  2007  which  records  that  the
    appellant attended the clinic following an assault, with an  injury  on
    his right small finger which  states  that  his  finger  was  bleeding.
    Similarly, a second contemporaneous note dated 1 February 2009  records
    that the appellant was a victim of assault with a cut injury  by  sharp
    weapons on  his  left  heel.   These  notes  are  consistent  with  the
    appellant's description of the  injuries  he  sustained  and  are  also
    consistent with photographs that the  appellant  has  provided  of  his
    injuries. There is a noticeable scar on his finger.

31. Mr Kandola questioned why  the  reports  were  in  English.   I  am  in
    agreement with Mr Biggs that it is plausible that many of  the  doctors
    in Bangladesh are highly educated  and  would  use  English  given  the
    former colonial history of  Bangladesh  and  I  do  not  disregard  the
    documents on this basis. I also agree with Mr Biggs  that  the  medical
    evidence is entirely consistent with the appellant's consistent account
    of these two attacks.  The appellant in his asylum interview  and  over
    five statements has consistently stated that he was attacked  on  these
    two occasions.

32. The appellant also relied on a medical report  dated  12  January  2020
    prepared by a locum consultant psychiatrist,  Dr  Razia  Hussain.   The
    account given by the appellant to Dr Hussain was  consistent  with  the
    appellant's account of being attacked  in  2007  and  2009  which  adds
    further weight to the fact that these events happened.

33. Dr Hussain found at [7] that the appellant's clinical presentation  was
    consistent with PTSD and her opinion is based on the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's physical, mental  and  emotional  symptoms.   Dr  Hussain's
    declaration and experience and qualifications are set out in the report
    and indicate that she is a professional on whose opinion weight can  be
    placed.  Dr Hussain's report is consistent with the  guidance  provided
    in JL (medical reports - credibility) China [2013]  UKUT  000145  (IAC)
    but does not address the credibility of  the  account  concluding  only
    that the appellant is suffering from PTSD.  The appellant's account was
    that this was caused both as a result of being attacked  in  Bangladesh
    but also as a result of his worries about being returned and that there
    has been  a  deterioration  in  his  mental  health  since  his  asylum
    application was refused.  I find that the report  is  evidence  of  the
    appellant's current mental state, that there are potentially more  than
    one cause for this, but I agree with Mr Biggs that the  report  on  the
    lower standard does indicate that the appellant has suffered some  kind
    of trauma in the past which is consistent with  his  account  of  being
    attacked in Bangladesh.  In summary, the consistency of the appellant's
    evidence in relation to the events in Bangladesh, the degree of  detail
    that he provided and the conclusions of Dr Hussain indicate strongly to
    me that he is a credible witness when describing events that took place
    in Bangladesh.

34. I have also had regard to the background  material  in  the  background
    material including the Country  Information  Policy  Note,  Bangladesh:
    Opposition to the government dated January 2018 Version 2. This reports
    high levels of inter-party violence between the Awami  League  and  the
    BNP, which occurs frequently during  periods  of  heightened  political
    unrest.  At 8.1.1 it is said that student fronts are mostly responsible
    for political violence in  Bangladesh  which  is  consistent  with  the
    appellant's account in relation to the clashes that took place in  2007
    to 2009 when the appellant was involved with the student  wing  of  the
    BNP.  Background material also  refers  to  Awami  League  members  and
    activists extorting BNP business owners.  I find  that  the  background
    material is entirely  supportive  of  the  appellant's  description  of
    events in  Bangladesh,  and  given  that  the  appellant's  account  of
    belonging to and being active for the Bangladesh National  Party  at  a
    time leading up to and including the time when the  Awami  League  took
    power, I find  the  appellant's  account  of  being  attacked  entirely
    credible.

35. There has been a longstanding  conflict  between  the  governing  Awami
    League Party led by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina  and  the  opposition,
    Bangladesh National Party (BNP) led by Khalida Zia.

36. The appellant claims to come from a wealthy family which owned shops in
    the  local  Amtali  Bazaar.   I  note  from  the   country   background
    information that Bangladeshi society is characterised by 'clientelism'.



37. At 4.1.3 It is said

         'Major political parties have strong organisations which operate in
         a hierarchical manner and follow well-planned  command  structures.
         They have student, youth, labour and women's organisations as  well
         as professional groups and cultural  organisations.   These  groups
         play a vital role in interest aggregation and mobilisation and help
         the  party  to  provide  political  input  for   managing   diverse
         interests.  A culture of clientelism dominates all parties.   Those
         who contribute money, provide muscle power or organise local- level
         support, enjoy benefits when  the  party  comes  to  power.   Those
         benefits include government contracts, access to jobs and  business
         opportunities.  The client groups  help  organise  violence  during
         blockades  to  help  the  political  party  to   establish   street
         superiority to pressure the Government.   They  contribute  to  the
         volatile  political  situation.   Clientelism   is   pervasive   in
         Bangladesh...'.

38. I consider the appellant's claim against this background  and  in  this
    context.  I find that at the time that the appellant  began  supporting
    the BNP they were in power and that his family,  including  his  father
    and brothers and extended family were all supporters of  the  party  in
    power.  I find it entirely plausible that as local business people  who
    had benefitted from their political connections with the  ruling  party
    that their business should come under attack by the Awami  League  when
    that party won the elections and took power after January 2009.  I also
    take note that the appellant, from the outset has claimed to be from  a
    well-connected family.  He was personally connected with members of his
    local party in his area and  names  these  individuals  in  his  asylum
    interview.   Having viewed all of this evidence  in  the  round,  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant has given a truthful account about  events
    in Bangladesh prior to him coming to the UK including the fact that  he
    and his family were personally targeted by local Awami League activists
    and that he was heavily involved in BNP politics. I accept that a large
    part of the motivation for the appellant coming to the UK to  study  in
    2009 was to escape from these political problems.

Events after the appellant came to the UK

39. The respondent does not accept the appellant's account of  events  that
    have occurred since the appellant  left  Bangladesh  and  came  to  the
    United  Kingdom.   The  primary  objections  for  this  revolve  around
    objections to the supporting  documents  as  well  as  the  appellant's
    general credibility because of the late timing of his claim for asylum.



40. I turn first to the appellant's consistent claim that his  father  died
    on 4 March 2014 and that his brother disappeared on  3  December  2014.
    The appellant's oral evidence was that after he left Bangladesh he  was
    in contact with his mother and father over the telephone.    His  uncle
    had a telephone and he spoke regularly to his mother,  perhaps  two  or
    three times a week.  He also spoke to his father on occasion.

41. I accept on the lower standard that the appellant's father is  deceased
    on the basis of his oral evidence and the consistent  evidence  in  his
    statements to this effect. The appellant's oral evidence  was  that  he
    was immediately informed by his mother about his  father's  death.  The
    appellant has provided a  translation  of  a  death  certificate.   The
    respondent objected to the fact it was in English.  The  appellant  has
    now produced an original death certificate in Bengali.  It  is  unclear
    why the death certificate states that the appellant's father died as  a
    result of an 'Awami Terrorist  ambush  Kriya  closed  die  of  a  heart
    attack'. This is a poor translation. There is also no  credible  reason
    provided why the certificate was issued  on  14  August  2014  so  many
    months after the death.  I have concerns about the actual document.  It
    is not plausible that a medical certificate would attribute a death  to
    a political party, and I  place  little  weight  on  the  actual  death
    certificate itself.  In this respect I take into account  Mr  Kandola's
    submission that it is possible to obtain false documents with  ease  in
    Bangladesh. I also note however that just  because  the  appellant  has
    obtained a false document this  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the
    underlying fact is not true,  I have accepted  that  the  family  as  a
    wealthy prominent BNP supporting family have been under  pressure  from
    Awami League and that their business has been attacked which  may  well
    have  contributed  to  the   appellant's   father   feeling   stressed.
    Nevertheless, I also  accept  that  it  means  that  the  appellant  is
    prepared to obtain unreliable documents to support his claim  and  this
    must impact on the assessment of his credibility.

42. The appellant's evidence is that he became aware that his  brother  had
    disappeared shortly after the event on  3  December  2014  because  his
    mother  informed  him  immediately.   He  believes  that  his   brother
    disappeared because he was also politically active for  the  BNP.   The
    documents in support  of  this  event   include  a  'First  Information
    Report' made by the appellant's mother a few days after  his  brother's
    disappearance which states that  his  brother  left  the  home  in  the
    morning of 3 December 2014, what he was wearing, and that  he  did  not
    return.  The respondent has not taken issue with this  document  and  I
    find that this is  more  plausible,  reliable  and  credible  than  the
    newspaper  document.   The  First  Information  Report  is  made  at  a
    contemporaneous  date  and  it  is  made  by  the  appellant's  mother,
    presumably because by that date his father was deceased.  I am prepared
    to accept that since the appellant  was  active  in  the  BNP  and  his
    evidence is that his family as a whole were BNP  supporters,  that  his
    brother also played an active role in the  BNP  and  this  could  be  a
    reason for his disappearance.  The Country Information  and  Background
    Report, according to Human Rights Watch Report of July 2017  quoted  at
    6.1.2 states:-

         "Bangladesh law enforcement agencies have a long history  of  human
         rights violations.  The ruling Awami League party  took  office  in
         January 2009  with  the  promise  to  end  such  abuses.   However,
         according to Odhikar,  a  Dhaka-based  human  rights  organization,
         Bangladesh law enforcement agencies have since  'disappeared'  over
         320 people, including suspected  criminals,  militants,  and,  more
         recently,  opposition  members.   Of  these   ...   dozens   remain
         [missing]."

43. The USSD Report 2016 also states, "Targets of  disappearances  included
    individuals  affiliated  with  opposition  political   parties".    The
    background information also refers to violence  before  and  after  the
    national elections in January 2014 and  in  2015  following  the  Awami
    League's decision to forcibly confine the leader of the BNP to a  party
    office.  The background material supports the  appellant's  account  in
    that many opposition members have disappeared.

44. While I am prepared to  accept  on  this  basis  that  the  appellant's
    brother has disappeared because of his  political  activities,  I  have
    some doubts about the newspaper cutting which was placed in a newspaper
    on 15 December 2015, a  year  after  the  brother  went  missing.   The
    appellant's explanation is firstly that his mother  had  made  previous
    attempts to find him and this  was  a  last  resort.  Later  he  stated
    somewhat inconsistently that his mother had put previous adverts in the
    newspapers but had not kept those earlier adverts.  I am  not  entirely
    persuaded by this explanation, however, I find that the fact  that  the
    appellant's mother placed this advert in a newspaper does not  displace
    the unchallenged evidence of the First Information Report  in  relation
    to the disappearance.

Remaining documents and court cases

45. I also place little weight on the newspaper advert which proclaims  the
    appellant's own difficulties in Bangladesh which is  badly  worded  and
    vague.  The appellant's oral evidence was that his mother had put  this
    advert in the newspaper.  I take into consideration the timing  of  the
    newspaper which is dated 10 January 2016, six days after the  appellant
    made an appointment with the Asylum Screening Unit at Croydon.  I  find
    that this advert was placed at the request  of  the  appellant  by  his
    mother in order to provide evidence to support his asylum claim  and  I
    place no reliance on it.

46. Similarly, I find that a letter from the  appellant's  mother  dated  3
    December 2015 has also been written in order  to  provide  evidence  in
    support of the appellant's asylum claim.  It was written  approximately
    a month before the appellant claimed asylum.  His evidence is  that  he
    would speak to his mother on the telephone two or three  times  a  week
    and this is the only letter that she wrote to him.  I find that  having
    said that, just because the appellant's  mother  deliberately  wrote  a
    letter setting out what had happened to the family to assist her son to
    evidence his asylum claim does not mean that the contents of the letter
    are not true.  Having found that the Awami League was still  in  power,
    had won the elections in January 2014 and  the  background  information
    set out above, it is not implausible that for example  that  the  Awami
    League attacked and vandalised the appellant's family's shop  in  March
    2014 and on 7 November 2015.

47. I consider the evidence  in  relation  to  the  alleged  false  charges
    against the appellant.  According to the appellant, false charges  were
    made against him in  2010  and  2012.   The  appellant  is  accused  of
    forcefully entering a house,  assault,  snatching  ornaments,  breaking
    down furniture and threats.  A charge sheet has been submitted in court
    and it is said that a warrant  has  been  issued  for  the  appellant's
    arrest.  There is a second charge dated  2  June  2012  in  respect  of
    attempted murder.  A second charge sheet was submitted on 18  September
    2012.  The First  Information  Reports  and  charge  sheets  have  been
    procured  in  respect  of  these  charges.    Whilst   the   background
    information states  that  false  charges  are  made  against  political
    activists, I find that these documents are implausible.  Firstly,  both
    charges were laid against the appellant after he had  left  Bangladesh.
    I can see no reason why political opponents would bring  false  charges
    against an individual who was not present in  Bangladesh  at  the  time
    that the charges were made or why the police would be looking  for  him
    when he was not in the  country.   I  also  note  that  these  kind  of
    documents are easily obtainable.  I also take into  consideration  that
    despite the appellant's evidence that he became aware  of  these  false
    charges in 2012 to 213 that he took no steps to claim  asylum  at  this
    time.

48. Further, there is a letter from a Mr Dey who is said  to  be  a  lawyer
    from the Court Chamber, Manikganj,  dated  24  October  2013.   Mr  Dey
    claims to have been instructed to "conduct and  supervise  those  cases
    which was filed against you".  The appellant was asked what the  lawyer
    had done to assist the appellant to refute the charges? The appellant's
    answer was very vague. He states that his mother was dealing with  this
    and is no longer alive.  I do not find it credible that in 2013,  at  a
    time when the appellant's family was  wealthy and still  in  possession
    of their shops, when both of the appellant's parents were  alive,  that
    if these false charges were real,  that  his  parents  would  not  have
    instructed lawyers to fight the charges by providing evidence that  the
    appellant was out of the United Kingdom and therefore was  not  present
    when any of these allegations took place.  The  appellant  himself  was
    asked if he had spoken to the lawyer himself and he said  it  was  'too
    expensive'.  Given that the appellant was able to speak to  his  mother
    on the telephone and his parents were  supporting  him  financially  at
    this stage, I reject this explanation. I find that  there  is  no  good
    reason why he could have not got in touch with the  lawyer  himself  in
    2013-2014 if these charges were genuine.   I  also  find  that  if  the
    appellant had genuinely been charged with murder and  assault  that  he
    would have sought advice in seeking asylum at this stage.  I  find  the
    appellant's explanation for the actions taken by his family in  respect
    of these trumped up cases to be inadequate.

49. I note  the  ease  with  which  false  documents  can  be  obtained  in
    Bangladesh and I am not persuaded to the  lower  standard  that  I  can
    place any weight on these documents which I find have been procured  in
    order to bolster the appellant's claim for asylum.  The  appellant  was
    adamant in his oral evidence that these cases are genuine  and  he  has
    referred to them in his  statements  and  I  bear  this  in  mind  when
    assessing his overall credibility.  Mr Biggs asserted that if I take  a
    holistic view of the  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  always  been
    consistent about these charges.  However, I find that this is the  most
    problematic part of his claim and I do not accept  that  false  charges
    have been taken against the appellant for the reasons given above.

50.  Mr Biggs also submitted  in  relation  to  these  documents  that  the
    authority of MA (Bangladesh) [2016] EWCA Civ 175 should apply  in  that
    these documents were  central  to  the  claim  and  easily  verifiable.
    Although I find that the court documents are central to one  aspect  of
    the appellant's claim, I do not agree with Mr  Biggs'  submission  that
    these documents  could  be  simply  and  easily  verified.   There  are
    significant discrepancies  with  these  documents  and  ultimately  the
    burden is on the appellant to make out his claim for asylum.

The timing of the asylum claim

51. I now turn to the timing of the asylum  claim.   Mr  Kandola  submitted
    that Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004 applies.  His view was that the appellant had  given  no
    clear reason why there was such a long delay in his  claim  for  asylum
    and the delay in claiming asylum casts doubt on the credibility of  the
    appellant's claim.  There was indeed a significant  delay  between  the
    appellant arriving in the United Kingdom in  2009  and  his  claim  for
    asylum in January 2016, particularly when  the  appellant's  consistent
    evidence is that he left Bangladesh as a result of the problems he  was
    experiencing and because he was even then afraid of being attacked  and
    harmed by the Awami League as a result of his political activities.

52. With regard to the earlier part of the delay the appellant's  evidence,
    which I accept, is that he had no  need  to  claim  asylum  as  he  was
    lawfully in the United Kingdom as a  student  and  he  was  waiting  to
    assess how events developed in Bangladesh with the aim of returning  to
    Bangladesh.  The difficulty comes in that the appellant's student  visa
    expired on 31 May 2014.  The appellant was asked repeatedly why he  had
    not claimed asylum at that point.  He was adamant that during this time
    he still had an appeal in relation to his  student  leave  outstanding.
    There was no record of this before me.  Mr Biggs submitted  that  there
    may  have  been  other  proceedings,  for  instance   judicial   review
    proceedings.  It is  clear  from  the  chronology  of  the  appellant's
    immigration history that at some point his student leave was  curtailed
    but then reinstated as a result of proceedings which were not mentioned
    in the chronology and it is  possible  that  the  judicial  review  was
    outstanding at this time.  I am satisfied that the appellant either had
    student leave outstanding or that he believed that he did so.

53. The other reason that  the  appellant  gave  for  not  claiming  asylum
    earlier is that he was intending to return to Bangladesh because he was
    waiting for the outcome of the 2014 elections.  Elections took place in
    Bangladesh in January  2014.   In  the  event  the  BNP  boycotted  the
    elections  and  the  Awami  League  swept  to  power.   As  Mr  Kandola
    submitted, this does not assist the appellant since he still failed  to
    claim asylum for a period of two  years  after  the  elections  instead
    submitting an application on the basis of his Article  8  private  life
    outside of the immigration rules.  His evidence  in  this  respect  was
    again muddled.  At one point he stated that did not have  a  solicitor,
    but he then conceded that he had used his previous  solicitor  to  make
    this application.  After being asked repeatedly why he had not  claimed
    asylum at the date of his application rather than putting  in  a  human
    rights claim in which he had  not  mentioned  his  fear  of  return  to
    Bangladesh, the appellant finally gave evidence that he had  made  this
    application because he had been advised by his representative  that  it
    would be better for him.  I find that his explanations are muddled  and
    that the late claim for asylum, particularly his failure to mention his
    fear of persecution when he made his human rights claim in  2015  does,
    to some extent, undermine his credibility.  However, I  agree  with  Mr
    Biggs that this is not determinative of the claim as a whole and is not
    sufficient to undermine the claim completely particularly  as  some  of
    his evidence  is  supported  by  documentary  evidence,  is  internally
    consistent and is plausible with the background material.

54. Having considered all the evidence including his oral evidence that  he
    did not want to claim asylum,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  been
    reluctant all along to claim asylum in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  has
    consistently stated that he is from a wealthy family in Bangladesh  and
    educated, that he had a good life there and that he has always intended
    to return and that he  claimed  asylum  as  a  last  resort  after  his
    application did not succeed because he had no  other  option.   He  was
    advised to claim asylum by his  political  friends.   I  find  that  he
    claimed asylum when he had tried all other methods of staying in the UK
    and when he felt he had no other option

55. I turn to other  objections  by  the  respondent.   The  appellant  has
    obtained a letter  from  the  Bangladesh  Nationalist  Party  from  the
    Dalutpur Upazila.  This is dated 5 September 2014 and on the face of it
    indicates that the appellant was considering claiming  asylum  at  that
    stage as he clearly had tried  to  obtain  evidence  of  his  political
    activities in Bangladesh.  When asked about this the  appellant  stated
    that he wanted to obtain a letter from Mr Alam who was the President of
    the Dalutpur section and he knew him well because he might need to  use
    this letter in future on his return  to  Bangladesh  if  he  wanted  to
    become involved in the party as Mr Alam was moving on.  This  does  not
    sit well with the letter which states:-

         "the present ruling party harasses him after filing  several  false
         cases against him.  As per our advice, he is now residing in London
         with a view to get the  higher  education.   The  police  force  is
         searching him regularly due to remain a warrant order  against  him
         by the court.  In this regard, it is not safe for him to come  back
         in the country."

56. Mr Biggs submitted that this letter was consistent with the appellant's
    evidence that he had  left  Bangladesh  due  to  his  political  fears.
    However, I find that it undermines the appellant's evidence that he was
    not intending to claim asylum at this stage.  On his own  evidence  the
    appellant admits that he requested this evidence for  himself  and  the
    information in the letter that there were court cases against  him  can
    only have come from the appellant.  I find that the appellant requested
    this letter as a way of supporting his asylum claim.   He  was  clearly
    contemplating claiming asylum by  September  2014.   I  find  that  the
    appellant obtained  the  newspaper  reports  in  relation  to  his  own
    activities, the letter from his mother, the letter from  the  BNP,  the
    court documents and the death certificate in order to bolster his claim
    for asylum.  In general, I find that this documentation is  unreliable,
    and I place little weight on  this  documentation.   I  find  that  the
    appellant's propensity to produce unreliable documentation  in  support
    of his asylum claim casts light on his general credibility.

57. However I note and take  into  account  that  just  because  an  asylum
    claimant exaggerates  one  aspect  of  his  claim  or  obtains  dubious
    documents, this does not necessarily mean  that  the  entirety  of  the
    claim is to be disregarded if there is other  reliable  and  consistent
    evidence.

Activities for the BNP in the UK

58. I turn to the appellant's activities for the BNP in the United Kingdom.
     The appellant from the outset of his asylum claim has  claimed  to  be
    active with the BNP in the United Kingdom.  In his asylum interview  he
    stated:-

         "Here in the UK I am involved with the voluntary unit of the BNP UK
         branch.  I do attend all the meetings and party programmes.  I am a
         member of the voluntary unit and I attend  meetings  at  the  Royal
         Regency in East London, Altab Ali Park in Whitechapel".

59. He confirms this in his initial statement in which he says that he  has
    been involved with  the  local  branch  of  the  BNP  in  carrying  out
    activities  which   are   mainly   attending   protest   meetings   and
    demonstrations at various venues and  raising  awareness  of  political
    oppression within the community and wider world.

60. The appellant has provided evidence of his involvement in  politics  in
    the United Kingdom in the form of a letter  from  Mr  Nasir  Ahmed  the
    Convenor of  the   Bangladeshi   Jatiyatabadi  Schasebak  Dal,dated  23
    December 2015 , who confirms that the appellant  is  a  member  of  the
    Bangladesh Nationalist Party and that  he  has  been  working  for  the
    Bangladesh Shechchasebok Dol since his arrival in the United Kingdom in
    2009.  The appellant  was  able  to  point  out  Mr  Ahmed  in  various
    photographs in which he was also present and I accept that this  letter
    is a genuine letter.   There is further  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    political involvement in the UK in  the  form  of  various  photographs
    which are from 2016 until 2020, over a number of years.  The  appellant
    is seen attending annual events to commemorate the BNP  founder,  Ziaur
    Rahman's birthday, on 19 January 2016.   The  appellant  is  also  seen
    attending a BNP conference in London on 25  February  2016,  at  a  BNP
    event to protest against the political imprisonment of Shafique  Rahman
    on 21 April 2016, event on 20 February 2016 participating  in  the  BNP
    annual event celebrating Bangladesh Mother Language  Day,  attending  a
    BNP seminar/programme at Stepney Green on 15 February 2016.  There  are
    also photographs of him taken in February 2019 at Altab Ali Park  at  a
    BNP annual meeting celebrating Bangladeshi "Mother Language Day".   The
    appellant has produced more recent photographs of him attending  a  BNP
    event to commemorate Ziaur Rahman's birthday.  On 19 January  2020  the
    appellant  is  pictured  with  the  Vice-Chairman  Mr  Rahman  and  the
    President of the UK BNP, Mr Malik.  The appellant's evidence  was  that
    he regularly attends the BNP offices in Whitechapel and is  politically
    active in the United Kingdom.

61. Given the  respondent's  acceptance  that  the  appellant  carried  out
    historic BNP political activities in Bangladesh and the  level  of  his
    previous  involvement,  I  find  on  the  lower  standard  that   these
    photographs  and  letter  as  well  as  the  appellant's  evidence   is
    sufficient to persuade me that he is currently  politically  active  in
    the United Kingdom.  When giving his evidence the appellant  also  came
    across as being very passionate about  his  political  views  referring
    repeatedly to the Awami League as  'thugs'  and  'terrorists',  stating
    that he would never abandon his political views for  the  rest  of  his
    life.  I find that the appellant does have strong political views  note
    least because of the damage that his political opponents have  done  to
    his family and that he has continued to be politically  active  in  the
    United Kingdom.

62. I asked the appellant why he had not brought anybody from the party  to
    give evidence on his behalf and the appellant stated  that  he  thought
    that he had already  provided  sufficient  evidence  and  that  he  was
    mentally  unwell  and  I  accept  this  explanation.   The  appellant's
    evidence is that if he returns to Bangladesh he  will  be  involved  in
    politics and would become a General-Secretary.  He would continue to be
    active even though  his  life  was  at  risk.   He  would  continue  to
    participate in programmes, demonstrations and campaign for the  release
    of the BNP political leaders who are in prison and  speak  out  against
    the Awami League. I find that he would be more than an 'ordinary member
    or supporter' because he would be an active campaigner,  he  has  links
    with well known party officials and he would have a profile as  he  had
    before.

63. Having found that the appellant would continue to be politically active
    in Bangladesh and that he would hold a position in the  party,  I  find
    that he would be at risk in his local area.  I also  find  that  as  an
    active campaigner, if he were to relocate elsewhere in  Bangladesh,  he
    would also be active for his party and that he would be at risk in  the
    other areas as the agent of persecution is the state himself.   I  take
    into account that  the  appellant  has  previously  been  a  victim  of
    persecution.  He has been attacked and assaulted as  a  result  of  his
    political views and I find that these actions amount to  serious  harm.
    I therefore find that paragraph 339K of the immigration rules  applies.
    The political  situation  has  not  changed  in  Bangladesh  since  the
    appellant left, indeed the Awami League has more power and continues to
    carry out acts of persecution against political opponents with impunity
    on a larger scale than when the appellant was living in Bangladesh.

64. Since I am not persuaded that the charges  against  the  appellant  are
    real, I do not find that he would be at risk  of  being  prosecuted  on
    trumped up charges.  I add that even were he  to  be  charged  that  he
    would be in a good position to defend these charges given that  he  was
    out of the country when the alleged crimes took place.

65. For all of these reasons I find that the appellant has  shown  that  he
    faces a real risk of serious harm on return to Bangladesh as  a  result
    of his political opinion and that he is entitled to protection in  line
    with the Refugee Convention  and Article 3 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

66. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.

67. The appeal is remade and allowed on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            R J Owens                      Date 28 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08274/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 September 2019                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MR RI
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright, Counsel, instructed by Law Dale
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. RI is a national of Bangladesh born in 1986.  The Secretary of State
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet
    allowing RI's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.
    Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted to the Secretary of
    State on 30 July 2019 by Resident First-tier Tribunal Judge Appleyard.

 2. The protection claim advanced before the First-tier Tribunal ['FtT']was
    that RI has a well-founded fear of persecution in Bangladesh because of
    outstanding false charges against him in Bangladesh, on account of his
    activities for the Bangladesh National Party ("BNP") in the UK and
    because since he has arrived in the UK, his brother has been abducted
    by an opposition party

 3. RI entered the United Kingdom on 20 October 2009 as a student.  He
    subsequently applied for leave to remain on the basis of his family and
    private life.  He claimed asylum on 29 January 2016.

 4. The Secretary of State rejected RI's account for want of credibility
    and refused to grant him asylum.  When the matter came before the FtT
    there were two matters in issue; first, was the account given by the
    appellant true? If so; did the facts of his claim lead to a well-
    founded fear of persecution in Bangladesh?  The burden in respect of
    both matters lay with RI and the lower standard of proof applied in
    respect of each.  The FtT concluded at [64]:

"Applying the lower standard of proof, and with some concerns as to the
appellant's overall credibility, I have however concluded that the
appellant is at risk on return in view of his activities on behalf of the
BNP, and the charges which remain pending against him."

The Grounds of Challenge

 5. The Secretary of State submits that the decision of the FtT is flawed
    in the following material respects:

Failure to give adequate reasons and resolve conflicts in the evidence.

It is said that the Secretary of State had raised numerous issues in
relation to the RI's credibility both in the refusal letter and at the
hearing and that the FtT, having recorded the oral evidence given in cross-
examination and having acknowledged that there were inconsistencies in the
evidence, then failed to go on and state what weight was attached to which
evidence, how that affected the analysis of the RI's credibility or making
findings based on that analysis.

         The grounds point to various evidential issues such as whether the
         charge sheets and court documents are genuine or not; to the fact
         that these documents indicate that RI is no longer wanted by the
         authorities; to an absence of findings about the level of RI's sur
         place activities in the United Kingdom and whether this would
         attract any adverse risk to him;  as well as to the failure to
         engage with the reasons RI gave for the six year delay in claiming
         asylum.

RI's Defence

 6. RI did not submit a Rule 24 response, although his representative did
    make further submissions in response to a direction by Resident First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Appleyard that he was proposing to use his power of
    review under Rule 35 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 to set aside the FtT's
    decision and order the appeal to be re-heard by the FtT.  RI's main
    argument is that whilst the FtT's reasons are very brief, the informed
    observer would be able to understand why the appeal was allowed.  It is
    said that the determination is adequately reasoned in accordance with
    MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641.

Discussion and Findings

Ground 1: Failure to give adequate reasons.

 7. It is trite law that the task of the FtT is to engage with the
    evidence, resolve material issues in dispute and give adequate reasons
    for factual findings (see MK).

 8. Mr Jarvis elaborated on the grounds, which set out numerous occasions
    where it is said the FtT failed to evaluate evidence such as
    discrepancies in the court documents, discrepancies in letters provided
    in support of RI' appeal and the timings of events. Ultimately, it is
    submitted, the FtT failed to resolve matters in dispute such as whether
    the court documents submitted by RI were genuine.

 9. At [63] it is said:

"There are indeed inconsistencies in respect of the appellant's evidence,
many of which were raised by the Presenting Officer, and I place particular
weight on the appellant's failure to claim asylum until 2016 - over five
years after he arrived in the United Kingdom."

10. The FtT goes on to state:

         "The challenge to the previous Tribunal Judge's determination of
         April 2017 related to his assessment of credibility, and the Upper
         Tribunal had confirmed that this was 'a difficult case to
         resolve'."

11. Mr Jarvis submits that the FtT did not evaluate the evidence, resolve
    the issues or give adequate reasons for the findings. Indeed, he
    submits that there is a complete lack of findings in respect of several
    material issues.  He also points to the lack of adequate reasons given
    for why the FtT did not find that the six-year delay in claiming asylum
    had an adverse impact on the RI's credibility in line with Section 8 of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 or
    JT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA
    Civ 878.

12. Mr Jarvis also pointed to a failure to apply the principles in RT
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.  The FtT pointed to some evidence of RI
    undertaking activities in the United Kingdom but failed to assess the
    nature and level of those activities and make findings to what extent
    RI would carry out those activities if returned to Bangladesh.  There
    was a lack of adequate reasons and a lack of findings in respect of
    this important issue. The FtT also failed to make findings in relation
    to the Secretary of State's submission that the Court documents
    themselves appeared to indicate that RI was no longer at risk because
    he had been released.  These issues were not resolved.

13. Mr Jarvis also pointed to the fact that the Resident Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal had also indicated in his preliminary notice that in his
    view, there was a material error of law.

14. Mr Plowright's position was that the FtT had heard evidence over two
    days and that the evidence was meticulously recorded at [16] through to
    [42], including the cross-examination of the witness and the
    submissions.  It is clear that, having heard all of the evidence that
    the FtT had taken into account all of these issues in relation to the
    inconsistencies in the evidence when stating at [63] and [64]:

"63. Looking at the matter in the round, I have to consider this case on
the lower standard of proof.  There are indeed inconsistencies in respect
of the appellant's evidence, many of which were raised by the Presenting
Officer, and I place particular weight on the appellant's failure to claim
asylum until 2016 - over five years after he arrived in the United Kingdom.
 This is despite the fact that he was made aware of the false charges
against him in 2012.  The respondent accepts that he was involved in BNP
activities in Bangladesh (when he was General Secretary of the Student
Wing).  There has also been evidence of his activities on behalf of the BNP
in the United Kingdom, and he stated in oral evidence that he last attended
a meeting last week with the Vice Chairman of the BNP UK Party.  There is
also some photographic evidence of his activities at demonstrations and
meetings in 2017.  The challenge to the previous Tribunal Judge's
determination of April 2017 related to his assessment of credibility, and
the Upper Tribunal had confirmed that this was 'a difficult case to
resolve'.

64.  One of the issues in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] related to an individual
being at risk of persecution on the ground of political imputed opinion,
and whether there was a real and substantial risk that the appellant might
be persecuted on return.  Applying the lower standard of proof, and with
some concerns as to the appellant's overall credibility, I have however
concluded that the appellant is at risk on return in view of his activities
on behalf of the BNP, and the charges which remain pending against him."

15. Mr Plowright's submission was that in accordance with UT (Sri Lanka)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 the Upper Tribunal should approach the facts and
    findings of the FtT in the recognition that that FtT has specialist
    expertise. The Upper Tribunal should not confuse disagreement with the
    decision with a finding of an error of law.  Mr Plowright referred me
    to R (Jones) v First Tier Tribunal and Criminal Injuries Compensation
    Authority [2013] UKSC 19.  The Appellate Court should not assume too
    readily that the Tribunal misdirected itself just because not every
    step in its reasoning is fully set out in it.  Mr Plowright's
    submission was that the reasoning was 'tolerably clear'.

16. Having heard both of the arguments, I am in agreement with Mr Jarvis
    that there is a lack of analysis of the evidence in this decision and a
    failure to give adequate reasons for the FtT's decision that the RI is
    at risk of serious harm in Bangladesh.  The Presenting Officer, in the
    closing submissions pointed to numerous difficulties with the oral and
    documentary evidence, including inconsistencies around the chronology
    of events, why the appellant did not mention false charges against him
    when first interviewed in respect of his asylum claim in 2016 several
    years after the charges had allegedly been brought, why supporting
    evidence from the BNP dated 5 September 2014 did not refer to the false
    charges, inconsistencies in relation to RI's evidence that he was
    living in fear and that police protection was not available in 2009 and
    yet that his father had felt able to lodged a police complaint at that
    time, as well as numerous other inconsistencies.  I find that the FtT
    was aware that there were inconsistencies in the evidence because these
    are mentioned at [63] and [64] and yet the FtT failed to analyse the
    evidence sufficiently and grapple with the conflicts in the evidence.

17. I take into account Mr Plowright's submission that the FtT has
    meticulously set out the evidence before the FtT. However the task of
    the FtT is not only to record the evidence but to engage meaningfully
    with it and explain what weight is given to which evidence and why.
    There is no specific finding in the decision as to whether the Tribunal
    accepted that the charges and false accusations were genuine or not,
    and also no specific findings on the extent of the RI's activities for
    the BNP in the United Kingdom and why such activities would have come
    to attention to the Bangladeshi authorities. Nor were there specific
    findings in respect of whether it would be reasonably likely that RI
    would continue to engage in these activities in Bangladesh.  These are
    all relevant to the assessment of risk to RI in Bangladesh.

18. In my view there is a complete failure to make findings on material
    issues.  In this appeal, the lack of analysis of the evidence and the
    failure to weigh up and give findings on conflicting evidence goes well
    beyond a mere lack of explanation of the FtT's reasoning.

19. I find that from [63] onwards it is as if the FtT, having set out all
    of the evidence and stated explicitly that the appeal was a difficult
    one, then failed to carry out the difficult task of resolving the
    issues in the evidence and making findings. Instead the FtT has brushed
    over those difficulties by concluding that on the lower standard of
    proof RI is at risk in Bangladesh.

20. I find that the approach of the FtT is flawed. The reasons given for
    the findings that RI is at risk in Bangladesh are manifestly inadequate
    given the failure to engage with the contradictions in the evidence and
    make findings on material issues.



21. This is a material error of law because without a proper assessment of
    the evidence and findings in relation to what is accepted and what is
    not accepted and the extent of the appellant's political involvement in
    the UK, it is not possible for the FtT to make proper findings on
    whether there is a real risk to RI on return to Bangladesh.

22. In this respect I note and take into account, that Mr Plowright
    acknowledged that the FtT's decision was a difficult to defend and that
    the FtT's findings were 'succinct'.

23. I set aside the decision of the FtT on the basis that there has been a
    material error of law and I indicated my intention to do this to the
    parties.

24. I then heard submissions by the parties of how to go on to deal with
    the remaking of the appeal.  Mr Plowright submitted that it was
    appropriate to send the judgment back to the same Judge in order to
    give him an opportunity to amplify his reasons.  He pointed to the
    authority of English v Emery EWCA Civ 605, where it is said that where
    the Judge who has heard the evidence has based a rational decision on
    it, the successful party will suffer an injustice if that decision is
    appealed, let alone set aside, simply because the Judge has not
    included in his judgment adequate reasons for his decision.

25. I find that in this appeal, this approach would not be fair or in the
    interests of justice.  This appeal can be distinguished from that in
    English v Emery because the decision is not rational. The FtT failed to
    engage with the conflicts in the evidence and make proper findings.
    The FtT could only make rational findings on risk, having made factual
    findings on the historical account and the current situation of the
    appellant in the context of the current situation in Bangladesh.

26. I find that is fair and in the interests of justice for the appeal to
    be heard de novo in front of a different Tribunal.  In my view, it is
    appropriate for this appeal to be dealt with by the Upper Tribunal.
    The appeal has been twice before the First-tier Tribunal and twice
    overturned. I have taken into account the Senior Presidential Practice
    Direction which suggests that where credibility issues are at large the
    appeal should normally be re-made by the First-tier Tribunal.
    Nevertheless, this is a matter for my discretion.  This is clearly, as
    highlighted by two different FtT Judges, a difficult appeal. Two First-
    tier Tribunals have failed to give adequate reasons for their
    decisions.  In these circumstances, given that this is the third time
    this appeal will be heard, I find it is appropriate for the Upper
    Tribunal to remake this appeal de novo.

27. I therefore set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Sweet and I
    adjourn the appeal for remaking by the Upper Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

28   Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            R J Owens                      Date 11 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens
