

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08643/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:   |
|On 21 February 2019                          |On 25 February 2019               |
|                                             |                                  |
|                                             |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    S A M

                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Marian Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by
                  Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the respondent:    Ms Rhoda Petterson, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal  to  refuse  him  international  protection  on  asylum  or
   humanitarian protection grounds, or leave to remain in the United Kingdom
   on human rights grounds.  The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Iraq  and  is
   Kurdish.

Background

2. The appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely,  on  his
   account, on 27 December 2017 and claimed asylum the next day when he  was
   encountered by Warwickshire Police.   The appellant's  asylum  claim  was
   based on his assertion that he is gay and that this would put him at risk
   on return.

3. The appellant claimed  to  have  travelled  through  Turkey  and  various
   unknown countries on the way to the United Kingdom from Iraq, his country
   of origin. The claimant had no CSID when interviewed but  the  respondent
   considered that as he still had family and a friend in Iraq, he would  be
   able to obtain one either before returning to Iraq  or  in  Baghdad  very
   soon after his return.

4. The respondent  refused  the  appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
   claims and the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

5. The First-tier Judge found the asylum claim to  be  fabricated  and  that
   the appellant's evidence was totally lacking in  credibility.   He  noted
   that Sulaymaniyah, where the appellant came from, was in the IKR and that
   the appellant could obtain a CSID by contacting family or friends  there,
   or with their help, very soon after his return to  Baghdad.   The  First-
   tier Judge found that there was no Article 15(c) risk to the appellant in
   his home area.

6.  The  Article  3  ECHR  claim  fell  with  the  asylum  and  humanitarian
   protection claims.  The appellant had never been lawfully in  the  United
   Kingdom, had no family life here and applying section 117B(4)(a),  little
   weight could be given to any private life which he had developed  in  the
   short time he had been living in the United Kingdom.

7. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal and the  appellant  appealed
   to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

8. The appellant's appeal was self-drafted and is no more than a joinder  of
   issue on the First-tier Tribunal's findings of fact and credibility:

         "I'm seeking permission to appeal.  The Judge finds my  account  to
         lack credibility.  He bases his findings on the perception  of  the
         likelihood of my account  being  true,  but  not  by  balancing  my
         account against the objective evidence."

9. In the light of those very brief grounds,  the  grant  of  permission  is
   generous.   After extending time for appealing, the Judge  granted  leave
   on the following limited basis, which (in effect)  he  considered  to  be
   arguably Robinson obvious:

         "The  Judge  did  not  make  express  reference  to   the   further
         consideration reported some several weeks before the hearing in AAH
         (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 by  the
         Upper Tribunal of the Country Guidance given by the Court of Appeal
         in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2018]
         EWCA Civ 944.  Although the Judge considered  return  to  both  the
         Kurdish Regional Governorate and to Baghdad, he did  not  expressly
         direct his attention to the guidance in AAH on the approach  to  be
         taken to the assessment of the likelihood a returnee would be  able
         to procure a Civil Status Identity Document  (CSID).   This  is  an
         arguable error of law and permission to appeal is granted  on  this
         ground alone. "

Rule 24 Reply

10. The respondent filed no Rule 24 Reply.

11. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

12. At the hearing, Ms Cleghorn recognised  that  the  appellant  could  not
   succeed on the basis of the  CSID  point  in  the  grant  of  permission.
   Although the First-tier Tribunal had not referred in its decision to AAH,
   the Tribunal's decision was in line with the country guidance and, unless
   he deliberately obstructed removal by refusing to apply for  a  CSID,  he
   would be able to obtain one either before travel or in Baghdad.

13. The appellant comes from the IKR and he cannot  rely  on  Article  15(c)
   risk  for  humanitarian  protection  if  his  asylum   claim   fails   as
   Sulaymaniyah is not a contested area.

14. The grant of permission was expressly limited  to  the  CSID  point,  on
   which Ms Cleghorn accepted that the appellant could not succeed.

15. Ms Cleghorn contended that there  might  have  been  an  arguable  point
   arising out of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq  CG  [2017]  UKUT  18  (IAC),
   promulgated by the Upper Tribunal on 23 January 2017.   I  observed  that
   the appeal had not been  argued  on  that  basis  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, when the appellant  was  legally  represented  by  a  different
   Counsel.   Absent any reliance either before the First-tier  Tribunal  or
   in the grounds of appeal on BA (Iraq), and with no draft amended  grounds
   or application for permission to appeal, I  was  not  prepared  to  admit
   argument on that basis.

16. This appeal cannot succeed and I dismiss it.

DECISION

17. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law

   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Date:         21 February 2019               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson




