
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08554/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford via Skype          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2020                    |20 October 2020                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     YM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer instructed by Ison Harrison Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


      1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Myers, promulgated on the 15 October 2019, in  which
         the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection and  human
         rights grounds.
      2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
         Tribunal in the following terms:

             "The grounds amount to no more than a  disagreement  with  the
             findings of the judge, an attempt to reargue  the  appeal  and
             they did not identify any arguable error or errors of law  but
             for which the outcome of the appeal might have been different.
             Mindful  however  that  the  appellant  prepared  the  grounds
             personally I have considered the judge's decision in order  to
             ascertain whether it disclosed an arguable error or errors  of
             law but for which the outcome of the appeal  might  have  been
             different. Two  arguable  concerns  arose.  First,  the  judge
             arguably failed to take into account a relevant  consideration
             before finding that the appellant had  not  given  a  credible
             account of events and  of  his  experiences  in  his  country.
             Notwithstanding  that  the  appellant's  bundle  contained   a
             substantial body of background evidence confirming  conditions
             prevailing in Iraq the judge did not avert to such evidence or
             propositions  to  be  distilled  from  such  evidence   before
             arriving at a finding that  the  appellant  had  not  given  a
             credible account. Second, the judge arguably failed to provide
             any or any adequate reasons before arriving at her findings as
             to the appellant's credibility. The  judge's  extremely  short
             analysis was to be found at paragraphs 22 to 28 inclusive  and
             may fairly  be  characterised  as  amounting  to  an  outright
             rejection  of  the  appellant's  claims  of  fact.  The  judge
             arguably did not embark upon that global assessment  which  is
             the essence of an assessment of the credibility of one such as
             the appellant. The application for permission is granted."


Error of law

      3. Both parties have filed written submissions  in  support  of  their
         case following the issue of Covid -  19  directions  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal.
      4. The Judges findings are set out between [22 - 28] and  are  in  the
         following terms:

             "22.     I only make a finding  on  credibility  after  taking
                  great care and reminding myself that  asylum  seekers  may
                  exaggerate and embellish their  cases  and  yet  still  be
                  telling the truth. However, in this case I find  that  the
                  Appellant lacks credibility for the reasons given below.


             23.  I do not accept that the Appellant, who was only aged  16
                  at the time, decided to accompany  his  cousin  [N]  to  a
                  gunfight which did not involve him despite  being  scared.
                  In such dangerous circumstances I would expect a  16  year
                  old child to either hide in the house where he was safe or
                  go back to his own home, rather than accompany his  cousin
                  on a 15 to 20 minute jog to [S's] house while  carrying  a
                  Kalashnikov and a big bag of bullets. I cannot accept  the
                  submission  made  on  the  Appellant's   behalf   it   was
                  reasonable for him to think that he will be safer  outside
                  with his cousin in the middle of the gunfight rather  than
                  staying in the house by himself.


             24.  Furthermore, on his own evidence the Appellant  then  hid
                  downstairs at [S's] house and could not have had any first-
                  hand knowledge  of  what  [N]  with  doing  on  the  roof,
                  although he claims to know what [N] did.


             25.  The Appellant describes being scared and deciding to  run
                  away. I find that it makes no sense that rather than  keep
                  to the back of the house where it was dark, and  he  could
                  not be seen that he decided to go to the  front  where  he
                  would be visible and in the line of  fire.  Neither  do  I
                  accept that he was seen by [S's] brother who  allowed  him
                  to proceed without firing at him.


             26.  In addition, I do  not  accept  that  by  coincidence  he
                  happened to meet his cousin [SA] while he was running away
                  even though [SA] lives in Erbil.


             27.  I find it lacks credibility his family would  send  a  16
                  year old child away from his family and  homeland  without
                  giving him their contact details so he could get in  touch
                  and let them know that he was safe. Neither  do  I  accept
                  the Appellant's evidence that despite owning an iPhone  he
                  does not have any social media accounts  or  know  how  to
                  operate them.


             28.  In conclusion I find that he has fabricated  his  account
                  and I do not accept he is at risk on return  to  the  IKR.
                  Neither do I accept  that  he  has  no  contact  with  his
                  family.  Accordingly  I  find  that  even  if  he  is  not
                  currently in possession of his CSID he can contact  family
                  to have it sent to him or obtain a replacement  and  as  a
                  Kurd originating from the IKR there is nothing to  prevent
                  him from returning once he reaches the age of majority  in
                  a few months' time.

      5. At the date of the hearing before the Judge the appellant was still
         a minor. The Judge was required to consider the application of  the
         Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of  2010:  Child,  vulnerable
         adult  and  sensitive  appellant  guidance   when   assessing   the
         appellant's evidence. Such guidance is mandatory  as  confirmed  by
         the Court of Appeal in AM [2017] EWCA Civ 1123. The failure to make
         reference to the guidance and conscientiously apply it is an  error
         of law. There is nothing in the decision to indicate the Judge, who
         was clearly aware of the appellant's  age,  did  so.  There  is  no
         reference to the guidance and no reference to whether  any  special
         arrangements needed to be made to assist the  appellant.   Even  if
         there were none, of more concern is that there is no  reference  to
         how the Judge factored the appellant's age into the  assessment  of
         his evidence. As there is no expressed or implied reference to this
         aspect, the only conclusion open to this Tribunal is that the Judge
         failed to take into account the appellant's age when assessing  his
         credibility.
      6. There is also merit in the appellant's submission the  Judge  finds
         the appellant's account inherently improbable and implausible based
         upon the Judge's own view of the possibility of the events referred
         to by the appellant occurring. If  a  Judge  considers  an  account
         implausible proper reasons must be  given  for  such  a  conclusion
         which can, arguably, only be undertaken by assessing the subjective
         evidence against the available  country  evidence  and  based  upon
         reasonably draw inferences rather than conjecture and  speculation.
         A finding that because an alternative approach is  more  believable
         and using the same to reject the appellant's own  account,  amounts
         to an arguable legal error in the  circumstances  of  this  appeal.
         There is no  evidence  the  required  holistic  assessment  of  the
         evidence was undertaken.
      7. Also of concern is the Judge's finding the appellant's  account  is
         implausible and lacks  credibility  partly  on  the  basis  of  the
         Judge's own assessment of how a 16-year-old boy will be expected to
         behave and that, accordingly, the appellant's account of how he did
         behave is irrational. It is not clear from  the  determination  the
         basis on which it was concluded a 16-year-old Kurdish boy from Iraq
         is expected to behave and  how  the  behaviour  of  this  appellant
         differed, supported by adequate  reasons.  There  is  merit  in  Mr
         Greer's argument that even if the appellant did  not  behave  in  a
         reasonable manner or a manner that made sense  to  the  Judge  that
         this meant the claim was not true. The  appellant  in  his  witness
         statement explained why he behaved in the manner he did which Judge
         does not deal with adequately in the body of the determination.
      8. I find when considering matters a whole that the Judge has erred in
         law in a manner material to the decision to dismiss the appeal such
         that that determination must be set aside. The failure to  properly
         consider the guidance relating to vulnerable  witnesses  means  the
         appellant has not had a proper assessment  of  the  merits  of  his
         appeal and that the findings made to date  are  unsafe.  There  can
         therefore be no preserved findings.
      9. Following discussion it was agreed that as there has been a further
         country guidance case relating to Iraq since  the  original  appeal
         was heard and in light of the need for extensive  further  findings
         of fact to be made supported by adequate reasons, and in  light  of
         the Presidential Guidance on remittal of appeals, this  is  a  case
         that must  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
         Bradford to be heard afresh, de novo, by a judge other  than  Judge
         Myers.

Decision

     10. The First-tier Judge materially erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the
         decision of the original Judge. I remit the appeal  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford for a heard of fresh, de novo, by
         a judge other than Judge Myers.

    Anonymity.

     11. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9 October 2020

