
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/08333/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 September 2017                     |  On 16 October 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                    z s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed of Counsel, Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on  14  February
    1992.  He arrived in the UK on 23 November 2016. He claimed asylum on 4
    February 2016.  He claimed to  fear  reprisals  from  the  Taliban  for
    having worked with someone who  helped  American  and  French  military
    forces.  The respondent refused the appellant's claim on 3 August 2016.
     The respondent did not accept the appellant's account  and  considered
    that in any event the appellant would be able to reasonably and  safely
    relocate internally in Afghanistan.  The appellant appealed against the
    respondent's decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In the decision promulgated on 2 March 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Brian dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The judge did not  find  the
    appellant's account  to  be  credible,  finding  that  the  appellant's
    account was an invention.  The judge found that the appellant therefore
    faced no real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  on  return  to
    Afghanistan.  The judge also found that the appellant  would  not  face
    any obstacles to reintegration into Afghanistan or that  removal  would
    impinge on his private or family life.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  On 21 June 2017 First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dineen refused the appellant permission to appeal.   The
    appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal and on 8 August 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge  Black  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. The first ground of appeal asserts that the judge  misdirected  himself
    in law by  concluding  that  the  appellant's  account  was  improbable
    without any reference to the background material.  It is submitted that
    in reaching the findings in this way the judge  failed  to  assess  the
    plausibility of the account by looking through the spectacles  provided
    by the information he has about conditions in the country in  question.
    The judge made no reference to the background material when he  reached
    findings and failed to consider whether  the  background  material  was
    supportive or otherwise of the appellant's  account  of  the  Taliban's
    activity in relation to him and his family.  It is  asserted  that  the
    judge as not entitled to conclude that the appellant's account  was  so
    internally illogical or improbable  that  it  is  incapable  of  belief
    without first informing himself about the manner in which  the  Taliban
    was known to operate.

 6. Ground 2 asserts that in reaching the conclusion that  the  appellant's
    account was an invention, before considering the corroborative evidence
    upon which reliance had been placed was a material error of law as  the
    kind described in the case of Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 365.   The  judge
    only considered the report of Mr Viyaar after reaching his finding that
    the appellant's account was an invention.  The  reasons  given  by  the
    judge for rejecting Mr Viyaar's report were legally inadequate.  It  is
    asserted that it did not suffice to state that the report  was  a  most
    unimpressive and unprofessional piece of work.  Nor was it  permissible
    to suggest that there was no good reason why Mr Viyaar could  not  have
    been called to confirm the truth of his report.  It is  submitted  that
    there were very good reasons why the expert could not be called to give
    evidence, firstly he is a foreign lawyer  and  it  would  be  extremely
    expensive for him to have attended from Afghanistan and that it  is  by
    no means clear that he would have been permitted to enter  the  UK  for
    that purpose.

 7. It is asserted that the judge erred in failing to consider in the round
    the corroborative evidence before he  reached  a  final  conclusion  in
    respect of the appellant's credibility and he failed in giving adequate
    reasons for rejecting the report of Mr Viyaar.

 8. The judge erred in treating the appellant's delay in claiming asylum as
    "damaging per se".  Such  behaviour  is  not  damaging  per  se  to  an
    individual's credibility it is only potentially damaging.

 9. Mr Ahmed submitted that at paragraph 45 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision the judge rejected the expert report very briefly and gave  no
    reasons as to why he found it to be  unimpressive  and  unprofessional.
    Mr Viyaar is a lawyer in Afghanistan.  It appears that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to consider that Mr Viyaar was in Afghanistan
    when considering that there was no good reason why he  could  not  have
    been called to confirm the truth of his report.  There  was  no  proper
    assessment of the expert's report.  Whilst it is a matter for the judge
    as to what weight to place on an expert's  report,  in  this  case  the
    judge has not given any reasons at all as  to  why  he  has  placed  no
    weight on the report and there is no engagement with the report.

10. Mr Walker accepted that the judge seemed to have been unaware that  the
    author of the report, Mr Viyaar, was in Afghanistan and that  this  may
    have coloured the judge's view of the report.  He submitted that whilst
    that may be an error in this case it is not  material  when  the  other
    aspects of the case  are  taken  into  account.   With  regard  to  the
    conclusions on credibility he submitted that on reading the decision it
    appears that the judge has fallen into two errors, namely an  incorrect
    assumption about the whereabouts of the author of the expert report and
    a prior finding on credibility before considering the  other  objective
    evidence.

11. In reply Mr Ahmed submitted that from the determination it is not clear
    that the judge took the evidence into consideration  when  arriving  at
    conclusions on credibility and that there had been no reasons given  or
    engagement with the expert's report.

Discussion

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in this case at paragraph 13 states:

         "13. I took into account  all  of  the  evidence  to  which  I  was
             referred, whether  or  not  mentioned  specifically  in  these
             reasons."

13. The judge recorded at paragraph 12 that the appellant's bundle included
    his witness statement, a letter from his brother-in-law, a letter  from
    Mr M Z, photographs, instructions to and a report from  Mr  Viyaar  and
    background evidence about Afghanistan.  Between paragraphs  36  and  43
    under the heading of "Findings" the judge sets  out  and  analyses  the
    appellant's claim.  At paragraph 43 the judge finds:

         'Overall I am forced to the conclusion that the appellant's account
         is not even reasonably likely to be true but instead that it is  an
         invention...'

14. Although it is clear that there are a number of factors  in  this  case
    that could have led  to  the  judge  concluding  that  the  appellant's
    account is not even reasonably likely to be true but instead that it is
    an  invention,  the  judge  has  reached  firm  conclusions  prior   to
    considering the objective evidence about Afghanistan  or  the  expert's
    report.  Whilst this may have been simply the structure of the decision
    I cannot be satisfied  that  when  assessing  whether  the  appellant's
    account was in fact credible, in light of the situation in Afghanistan,
    the judge did take into account the objective evidence and the expert's
    report.  Following the finding above, at paragraph  44  the  judge  set
    out:

         "44. As will be clear from my conclusions above,  I  am  unable  to
             place any reliance on the claimed Taliban  letter  and  police
             report.  Similarly, weighing the letters claimed to  from  the
             Appellant's brother-in-law and village  representative  within
             the context of  the  Appellant's  general  credibility,  I  am
             unable to give them any credence.

         45.  As for Mr Viyaar's report,  it  is  a  most  unimpressive  and
             unprofessional piece of work.   Moreover,  there  is  no  good
             reason why Mr Viyaar could not have been called to confirm the
             truth of his report.  As it is,  I  am  unable  to  place  any
             weight on the contents of the report."

15. It would appear from these paragraphs that the judge  has  fallen  into
    the error identified in the case of Mibanga.   The  judge  has  reached
    conclusions prior to consideration of the background  evidence  or  the
    expert's report.

16. Further, the judge has failed to give any reasons  as  to  why  he  had
    found the expert report unimpressive and unprofessional  and  does  not
    appear to have taken into account  the  fact  that  Mr  Viyaar  was  in
    Afghanistan when finding that here is no good reason why he  could  not
    have been called.

17. Given the requirements for anxious scrutiny in asylum claims the  judge
    ought not to  have  reached  conclusions  on  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account without first considering  the  objective  evidence
    and the expert's report. The judge ought  to  have  engaged  with  that
    evidence.  Whilst it is a matter for the judge as  to  what  weight  to
    place on the evidence, at least brief reasons need to be given for  the
    rejection of any such evidence.

18. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

19. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal

20. The matter is remitted to Hatton Cross for a de novo hearing before any
    judge other than Judge O'Brian to be heard on the next available  date.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of  law.
The decision is set aside and the  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a de-novo hearing.



Signed        P M Ramshaw                        Date 12 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

