
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      Appeal Number: PA/08695/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|By Remote Hearing                    |On 12 October 2020                   |
|On 30 September 2020                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     VC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Panagiotopoulou, Counsel instructed by Yemets
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties, and neither party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, a citizen of Ukraine born in  August  1989,  applied
         for asylum on the basis of  being  a  draft  evader  who  had  been
         sentenced  (in  his  absence)  to  two  years'  imprisonment.   His
         application was refused by the respondent on 23  August  2019.  The
         appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal  was
         heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clarke ("the judge").  In
         a decision promulgated on 13 March 2020 the appeal  was  dismissed.
         The appellant is now appealing against that decision.

      2. To corroborate his asylum  claim,  the  appellant  submitted  three
         documents: two call up notices  (dated  16  December  2017  and  24
         January 2018) which he claimed had been handed to  his  wife  ("the
         Notices"); and an interim military  certificate  dated  17  October
         2017. An interim  military  certificate  is  a  temporary  document
         issued by the local military authorities,  typically  where  a  new
         military identification booklet is to be issued. A call  up  notice
         (also referred to as a call up summons) is the document  dispatched
         to summon a person for military service.

      3. The judge found the appellant to not  be  a  credible  or  reliable
         witness and rejected his account in its entirety. At  paragraph  26
         of the decision, the judge stated, inter alia, that he did not find
         that the appellant had evaded the draft.

      4. The appellant relied on a report by Professor Galeotti,  an  expert
         on Ukraine. The report comprises of a detailed  assessment  of  the
         three documents submitted  by  the  appellant.  Professor  Galeotti
         expressed the view that, on the balance of probabilities,  the  two
         Notices are genuine. He explained  that  he  has  handled  35  such
         documents in the past, of which he  has  retained  18  to  use  for
         comparison purposes. Professor Galeotti reached his  conclusion  on
         the  basis  of  an  assessment  of   the   layout,   content,   and
         corroborating details of the Notices.

      5. Professor Galeotti undertook a similar assessment  of  the  interim
         military certificate. He  expressed  the  view  that  the  document
         appeared genuine, but added the caveat that although  he  has  seen
         such documents before he did not have a copy himself with which  to
         compare it.

      6. At paragraph 13 of the decision the  judge  set  out  reasons  why,
         notwithstanding the view of Professor Galeotti, he did  not  accept
         that the interim military certificate  was  genuine.  There  is  no
         equivalent consideration in the decision  of  Professor  Galeotti's
         assessment of the Notices.

      7. The appellant advanced five grounds  of  appeal.  The  first  three
         concern  the  judge's  findings  about  the  aforementioned   three
         documents. The second two concern the  judge's  assessment  of  the
         appellant's credibility. It is not necessary to consider  all  five
         grounds because there is a single error, identified  in  the  first
         ground, which undermines the decision to such  an  extent  that  it
         will need to be set aside and re-made afresh without  any  findings
         of fact preserved.

      8. The error concerns the absence of any consideration of  the  expert
         evidence concerning the genuineness of the Notices.

      9. The core of the appellant's claim was that  on  two  occasions  his
         wife had been handed a call up  notice  that  he  had  ignored.  He
         submitted the Notices, along with a report from  an  expert  (whose
         expertise was not  challenged),  in  which,  based  on  a  detailed
         assessment of both their form and  content,  the  expert  expressed
         confidence that the Notices were genuine.

     10. The judge was not bound to accept the view of Professor Galeotti as
         to the genuineness of the Notices. However, it was a material error
         of law to not engage with Professor Galeotti's  assessment  of  the
         Notices and to not give reasons explaining why Professor Galeotti's
         opinion was rejected.

     11. I have considered whether other findings in  the  decision  can  be
         preserved and have reached the conclusion that they cannot. This is
         because the Notices are central to the appellant's  claim  and  the
         evaluation of the appellant's credibility cannot be separated  from
         the question of whether they are genuine.

     12. As the appeal will need to be considered afresh  with  no  findings
         preserved, having  regard  to  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice
         Statements of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier
         Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, I have decided that the appeal  should
         be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

 1. The appeal is allowed.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a different
    judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                         |                                 |
|                                         |                                 |
|Signed                                   |                                 |
|                                         |                                 |
|D. Sheridan                              |Dated: 7 October 2020            |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan            |                                 |

