
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08082/2019 (V)
                                                           PA/11270/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|At George House, Edinburgh           |On 14 October 2020                   |
|Heard On 7 October 2020              |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                        ADELOS ADONIN AREVALO MARIN &
                         ELIAS MISAEL MARIN AREVALO
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr O Olabamiji, of DMO Olabamiji, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decisions dated 8 August and 11 November 2019.

     ii) The appellants' grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Montgomery, promulgated on 22 April 2020.



     iv) The appellants' grounds of appeal to the UT, 1 - 3, stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal dated 4 May 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 20 May 2020.

 2. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely.   The  technology  functioned  well,  enabling  an  effective
    hearing.  I am obliged to both representatives for their submissions.

 3. Having heard those submissions, I reserved my decision.

 4. The grounds of appeal are:

      i) Inadequate assessment of risk on return  due  to  past  work  as  a
         police officer.

     ii)  Failure  to  treat  an  expert  report  as  an  integral  part  of
         credibility findings.

    iii) Inadequate assessment of sufficiency of protection.

 5. Ground (i) accepts that the judge considered risk based simply  on  the
    former occupation of the first  appellant  as  a  police  officer,  but
    alleges  that  the  judge  "overly  emphasised   the   lack   of   past
    persecution".  The ground cites case law on absence of past persecution
    not denying future risk,  and  cites  background  evidence  that  gangs
    target police officers, particularly  lower  ranking  and  poorly  paid
    officers, and their families.  It is said to be unclear how  the  judge
    weighed this evidence.  Finally, the ground cites authority  that  even
    in the case of a person who has been completely disbelieved, there  may
    be risk due to perception on return.

 6. Submissions did not add significantly to this ground.

 7. As Mr Whitwell said in  reply,  the  legal  principles  and  background
    evidence cited are not in dispute.

 8. As the ground accepts, the judge did deal with the point, as explicitly
    as could be:

         "[92]    Having accepted that  the  first  appellant  worked  as  a
         police officer, I must consider whether he  would  be  at  risk  on
         return  to  El  Salvador  merely  on  the  basis  of   his   former
         occupation."

 9. The appellant has not referred to anything in the decision  which  runs
    against that approach, or from which it might be taken that  the  judge
    thought that her finding of no past persecution meant there could be no
    future risk.  The tenor of the decision is to the contrary.

10. Ground (ii) cites authority on not dealing with a  report  as  an  "add
    on"; suggests that the report was not dealt with as an integral part of
    the credibility findings; and cites the report on  the  possibility  of
    delayed action by a gang against an officer, on the bribing of  judges,
    and on risk, based on a gang's knowledge  of  the  appellant  filing  a
    police report before he left the country.

11. Further to this ground, Mr Olabamiji emphasised [11]  of  the  grounds,
    and [7] and [44] of the report by Professor Young, where he opined that
    the first appellant was in grave danger of retaliation, having filed  a
    report of which a gang would be aware.

12. I do not consider that ground (ii) fairly reflects the decision,  which
    is clearly and meticulously explained.  A judge has to adopt some order
    of  treatment.   She  cites  authority  at  [50]  on  how  to  approach
    credibility, and she applies that approach.  Although the  ground  says
    that when dealing with external factors at [72] - [78]  the  judge  did
    not deal with the  report,  she  found  at  [75]  that  the  claim  was
    consistent with external factors.  The features of the report cited  in
    ground (ii) take that matter no further.

13. Decisions are to be read as a whole.   The  judge  says  at  [87],  "In
    reaching my conclusions I had regard to the expert report".   There  is
    no reason not to take her at her  word.   She  accepts  that  Professor
    Young is an expert, and accepts his evidence on the  general  situation
    in El Salvador at [88].

14. The expert's views  at  [7]  and  [44]  of  his  report  were  entirely
    conditioned on the truth of the appellant's claims, which was  for  the
    judge to determine.  In that exercise, the expert's  views  were  given
    full value.

15. There is nothing in the expert's  report  whereby  allegations  to  the
    police of invented incidents, designed to set up an asylum claim, might
    create a risk from anyone.

16. On ground (iii), Mr Olabamiji said  that  the  SSHD's  latest  guidance
    concedes that there is no sufficiency of protection in El Salvador.  He
    accepted that the item emerged only post-decision, but he  argued  that
    the evidence of a high risk of persecution of  police  officers,  along
    with the respondent's policy, required the UT to reverse the outcome of
    the present appeals.

17. Mr Olabamiji did not refer directly to the policy, but Mr Whitwell  was
    able to identify it and supply the link in course of  submissions.   It
    is the respondent's Country Policy and Information Note - El  Salvador:
    Gangs Version 1.0 February 2020.  It  has  a  publication  date  of  24
    February  2020,  which  is  2  days  after  the  FtT's   decision   was
    promulgated.  The relevant policy statement is at 2.5.13:

         'In general, given the weaknesses in the  criminal  justice  system
         and the size, capability and influence of the main gangs, while the
         state is likely to be willing it is unlikely to be able to  provide
         effective protection. However, each case will need to be considered
         on its facts, taking into account the nature, capability and intent
         of the gang and the profile of person in fear of harm.'

18. Mr Whitwell suggested that the policy should not be considered, because
    it post-dates the decision; is not part of the grounds or the grant  of
    permission; and was not referred to in any form, prior to  the  hearing
    in the UT.

19. Those were well taken points; but in any event, the CPIN  discloses  no
    error by the FtT, even with the benefit of hindsight.

20. The evidence underpinning the policy statement is cited  later  in  the
    document.  There is no need to refer to it, because  it  has  not  been
    suggested that the policy is not soundly based on the evidence.

21. The  policy  is  not  quite  as  sweeping  as  was  suggested  for  the
    appellants.  Each case turns on its own facts, even where an  appellant
    has shown risk from a gang.

22. Whether there is general sufficiency of protection against risks of the
    nature claimed is irrelevant, when the appellants have not  shown  that
    any gang has any interest in them.

23. The final submission for the appellants was that the finding  that  the
    first appellant was a police officer in El  Salvador,  taken  with  the
    background evidence of targeting of police officers by gangs,  and  the
    absence of sufficiency of protection,  was  enough  to  show  that  the
    outcome should be reversed.  However, for all the above reasons, I find
    that the FtT was correct to find that those propositions go beyond  the
    evidence.

24. The grounds do not show error on (i) assessment of  risk  to  a  police
    officer,  (ii)  integration  of  the  report   into   the   credibility
    assessment, or (iii) sufficiency  of  protection,  based  on  materials
    before the tribunal; and (iii) was not, in any event, a decisive issue.



25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

26. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]
      8 October 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

