
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08006/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th February 2018                   |On 6th March 2018                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                              FARAIDOON RAHMANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iran born on 24th January 1993.   He
    first arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  4th  August  2008  when  he
    unsuccessfully applied for asylum.   He  subsequently  made  a  further
    application which was refused  for  the  reasons  given  in  an  Asylum
    Decision dated 12th July 2016.  The Appellant appealed and  his  appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Juss (the Judge)  sitting
    at Birmingham on 24th February 2017.  He decided to dismiss the appeal
    for the reasons given in his Decision dated 25th  February  2017.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision and  on  12th  September
    2017 such permission was granted.

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At the hearing before me, there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant, and no explanation for his  absence.   I  was  satisfied
    that the Appellant had been properly notified of the  time,  date,  and
    place of the hearing and I decided to proceed to hear the appeal in the
    absence of the Appellant  under  the  provisions  of  Rule  38  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I considered it in the
    interests of justice to do so.

 4. The Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that he was  at  risk  on
    return to Iran because in the UK he had attended two demonstrations  in
    support of the PJAK.  Further, the Appellant had  engaged  in  blogging
    activity on his Facebook account critical of the Iranian  regime  which
    would be discovered on his return.

 5. The Judge dismissed the appeal because he found  that  the  Appellant's
    sur place activities in the UK would not put  him  at  risk  on  return
    following the decisions in BA  (Demonstrators  in  Britain -  risk  on
    return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 and AB (Internet  Activity -  State  of
    Evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.

 7. At the hearing before me, Mr Mills was content only  to  refer  to  the
    Rule 24 response and to argue that there was no error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the Judge.

 8. I find no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   As
    he stated at paragraph 12 of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  gave  careful
    consideration to  all  the  documentary  and  oral  evidence.   He  was
    entitled to find that the Appellant's involvement in two demonstrations
    in the UK amounted to very little  and  that  therefore  there  was  no
    reasonable likelihood that this activity would come to the attention of
    the Iranian authorities.  Further, the Judge was entitled to find  that
    the Appellant was not at risk on return in accordance with the decision
    in AB as the Appellant had been discreet  in  allowing  access  to  his
    Facebook account.  I therefore find no error of law in the decision  of
    the Judge.

Notice of Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside that decision.

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.  I was not
    asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Dated 2nd March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
