
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08664/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th February 2018                         |On 22nd March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                  Miss T.M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Basharat of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Fujiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made.  As a protection claim, it is appropriate
to do so.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Pakistan (born 28th July 1999) appeals  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  a  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge N M K  Lawrence)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal to grant her international protection.



Background

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 4th July 2011 on a visit visa, as  a
    minor.  She was 11-years-old and was accompanied by two elder siblings,
    her brother who has since been deported/removed from  the  UK  and  her
    sister S.  Her sister remains here with unknown status and is  said  to
    be living in the Stoke-on-Trent area.  The Appellant  claims  that  she
    and her sister are estranged.

 3. On 28th February 2017 the Appellant claimed asylum.  The basis  of  her
    claim is that, if returned  to  Pakistan,  she  would  be  forced  into
    marriage with a 65-year-old man K.S., chosen for her  by  her  parents.
    Her father is indebted to this man.

 4. She said that she learned of the proposed marriage in a phone call from
    her father in October 2015.   Her  father  informed  her  that  he  was
    marrying her to K.S. because of a monetary debt.  Her sister, with whom
    she was living at that time, told her that she could no  longer  remain
    with her.  This was because her sister was worried that the debt  would
    fall upon her shoulders.

 5. The Appellant therefore left her sister's house, arrived in London  and
    stayed at the home of a woman named Atiqa for a few months.   She  then
    left Atiqa's house and went to live at  the  home  of  a  woman  called
    Naseem.  She remained there for a time, in exchange for doing household
    chores.  During that time she enrolled  in  college.  When  at  college
    other students informed her that she should start applying for asylum.

 6. When she told Naseem that she was applying for asylum, Naseem said  she
    could no longer accommodate her.  The Appellant left that house and now
    lives in a hostel in London.

 7. The Appellant's claim for asylum was considered by the  Respondent  and
    refused.   In  the  refusal  decision  the  Respondent   rejected   the
    Appellant's claim that she  was  being  forced  into  marriage  by  her
    parents. It followed from that refusal that there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances warranting grant of leave on account of  her  Art.8  ECHR
    human rights.

 8. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's refusal  and  the  appeal  came
    before the FtT.  After hearing oral evidence and noting the documentary
    evidence which included communications from the Appellant's parents and
    K.S., the judge decided that he did not  accept  the  veracity  of  the
    Appellant's core claim and dismissed her appeal.

 9.  The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.



The Grounds

10. Two Grounds of Appeal were put forward. It was said that FtTJ erred:

      i) in making a misdirection of law on material matters; and

     ii) in that there was a lack of  adequate  reasoning  when  considering
         material relevant to the outcome.

11. For the purposes of this decision it is right to say that the grant  of
    permission is restricted to ground (ii) above and  permission  is  only
    granted on the basis that it is arguable that the FtTJ failed  to  make
    proper findings in relation to the Article 8 ECHR claim which had  been
    made by the Appellant.

12. Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the
    FtTJ contains material error requiring it to be set aside and remade.



Error of Law Hearing

13. Before me Miss Basharat appeared for the Appellant and Ms Fujiwala  for
    the Respondent.  I heard submissions from both parties.  Miss  Basharat
    referred to the grounds seeking permission and  acknowledged  that  the
    grant of permission was restricted to one ground only, namely  that  it
    was arguable that the judge's reasoning was inadequate  in  respect  of
    the Appellant's family/private life. She said that the judge had failed
    to adequately take into account that the Appellant had been in  the  UK
    from the age of 11 years, and that he failed to recognise the obstacles
    which the Appellant would  face  on  return  to  Pakistan.   The  judge
    therefore had failed to recognise the extent of the Art.8 private  life
    which the Appellant had built up in the UK.   The  decision  could  not
    stand and should be set aside to be remade in the FtT.

14. Ms Fujiwala on behalf of the Respondent  defended  the  decision.   She
    said that the grounds simply amounted to no more  than  a  disagreement
    with the proper findings made by the FtTJ.  She referred  to  [20]  and
    [21] and said it was clear that the judge had concluded that  the  core
    element of the Appellant's claim, not merely  lacked  credibility,  but
    was fictitious.  The judge had given proper reasons for coming to  that
    conclusion.

15. She referred me to the Appellant's bundle and in particular to the  two
    witness statements made by the Appellant dated 20th March 2017 and 22nd
    September 2017 respectively.  She  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had
    entered the UK as a visitor and therefore any leave which she  had  was
    always precarious.  With reference to the two witness  statements  made
    by the Appellant, she said both those statements focus heavily  on  the
    Appellant's core claim that she could not return to Pakistan because of
    the  prospect  of  the  forced  marriage.   The  judge  comprehensively
    disbelieved the core claim.  The  only  reference  in  the  Appellant's
    witness  statement  to  her  private  life  is  contained  in  a  short
    declaration at [17] in the 22nd September 2017 statement.  In that  she
    simply says that she has been in the UK for the past  seven  years  and
    spent  her  teenage  years  here.   There  is  no  other  evidence   of
    integration put forward.

16. She further stated that the judge had looked at  all  the  evidence  in
    making his findings and in particular turned his mind to the background
    evidence concerning forced marriages but nevertheless found  the  claim
    not made out.  In addition whilst he has not made specific reference to
    it, he has followed the principles set out under Article  8  ECHR.  Any
    perceived error in this regard is  immaterial  because  inevitably  the
    judge would have reached a decision that the Article 8  claim  was  not
    made out.

17. Miss Basharat  following  instructions  from  the  Appellant's  support
    worker who attended the hearing, made a response. She raised a question
    concerning the application for adjournment which had been  made  before
    the FtTJ (see [4] of  the  decision).   She  said  the  application  to
    adjourn was made so that a social work report could be  obtained  which
    would outline elements of the Appellant's integration.  I informed Miss
    Basharat that I would note what was said in response but indicated that
    the judge recorded clearly in his decision his reasons for refusing the
    adjournment and without giving notice it was late to raise  this  issue
    now.

18.  At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which I now give with
    my reasons.



Discussion

19. The evidence which was before the judge amounted to a  claim  that  the
    Appellant could not return to Pakistan on account of a  fear  that  now
    having reached the age of 18 years, she would be forced into a marriage
    with an older man  to  whom  her  father  was  indebted.  The  man  had
    threatened not only the Appellant's family but the Appellant herself.

20. In support of that  claim  she  went  into  various  details  outlining
    threatening messages she had received, the fact that she and her  older
    sister are estranged because of these events, and the fact that the man
    himself had threatened her parents should she not return.

21. The judge in a well set out decision  comprehensively  disbelieved  the
    Appellant's core claim.  He spent several  lengthy  paragraphs  [10-19]
    setting out his reasons for this disbelief.  He took into account  when
    doing so, the documents which had been  exhibited  in  support  of  the
    claim and properly directed himself on the case of Tanveer Ahmed [2002]
    Imm AR 318.

22. He also took into account at [15] the Appellant's age,  the  fact  that
    she had been  brought  to  the  UK  aged  11  years,  but  nevertheless
    concluded that the claim lacked credibility.  Indeed he went so far  as
    to say the claim was a manufactured one. Therefore her  claim  was  not
    made out.

23. That being so it is clear from a reading  of  the  decision,  that  the
    judge  also  held  in  mind  the  principles  set  out  in  Article   8
    jurisprudence. Again he found that there was no evidence before him  to
    show that there would be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant
    returning to Pakistan. He  spent  several  paragraphs  discussing  this
    issue [22-25] and concluded at  [26]  that  there  was  not  sufficient
    evidence before him to take this case outside the rules into Article 8.

24. I am satisfied that the decision shows that the judge kept in mind that
    the Appellant had been here since  the  age  of  11  years  because  he
    mentions it in [1] of his decision and also in [15].  It is clear  that
    he has an awareness of the Appellant's age.

25. What is submitted before me  now  is  that  the  judge  has  not  given
    sufficient recognition to the Appellant's private life bearing in  mind
    that she has been in the UK for the past seven years and has spent  her
    teenage years here.  However I find force in Ms  Fujiwala's  submission
    that, in this case, there is no real evidence of integration sufficient
    to show that there would  be  any  unjustified  interference  with  the
    Appellant's family/private life.

26. The judge has taken into account all  the  evidence  which  was  placed
    before him and properly evaluated that evidence.  It follows  therefore
    that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  discloses  no
    material error of law sufficient to vitiate the decision.  This  appeal
    is therefore dismissed.



Notice of Decision

27. Appeal dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

