
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/08481/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                           |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2018                         |On 14 November 2018        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     E M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Clark (counsel) instructed by Hoole & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the anonymity direction deemed necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal promulgated on 12 January 2018,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 3 March 1997 and is a national of  Afghanistan.
On 17 August 2017 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's  protection
claim. application.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  Hawden-Beal  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 8 February  2018
Judge Brunnen gave permission to appeal stating

      1. By decision promulgated on 12 January 2018, Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Hawden-Beal dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
      respondent's decision to refuse his protection claim.


      2. The grounds on which permission to appeal is  sought  make  several
      submissions concerning the Judge's finding that the appellant  is  not
      at risk from the Taliban or the government of Afghanistan. There is no
      arguable merit in these submissions, which amount only to  an  attempt
      to re-argue the appeal. The Judge gave clear  and  sufficient  reasons
      for her findings.


      3. The grounds make further submissions  concerning  the  respondent's
      stated intention of returning the appellant to Kabul. It is  submitted
      that the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the  appellant  had  failed
      adequately to deal with the issue of family support on his return  and
      failed to consider whether it would be unduly harsh for the  appellant
      to relocate to Kabul, as opposed to whether there is an Art.15(c) risk
      in Kabul. It is further submitted that the Judge failed  to  consider,
      for  the  purposes  of  the  appellant's  case  under  paragraph   276
      ADE(1)(vi), whether there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
      integration in Afghanistan. These points are arguable.

Rule 24 Response

5. On 13 March 2018 the respondent submitted a rule 24 response  which  says
inter alia

      The  respondent  does  not  oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
      permission to appeal and invites the tribunal to determine the  appeal
      with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing to consider paragraph 276  ADE
      and whether the appellant has family support in Afghanistan.

The Hearing

6. (a) For the appellant  Mr  Clarke  adopted  the  terms  of  the  skeleton
argument he had prepared and took me through the procedural history of  this
appeal. This case called before one of my confrere's on 10  September  2018.
On that date my fellow Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge decided  that  the  grant
of  permission  to  appeal  was  limited  to  arguments   in   relation   to
humanitarian protection and  paragraph  276  ADE(1)(vi).  That  hearing  was
adjourned to enable the appellant's solicitors to  make  an  application  to
extend the grounds of  appeal  to  encompass  arguments  about  asylum.  The
application was to be submitted not later than 25  September  2018  and  has
not been submitted.

(b) Mr Clarke referred me to Ferrer (limited appeal  grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]
UKUT 304 and argued that all the grounds of  appeal  require  consideration.
He asked me to set the decision aside in its entirety. He told me  that  the
appeal goes to the Judge's assessment of credibility. He  argued  that  none
of the  Judge's  findings  of  fact  can  stand  and  a  re-hearing  of  the
appellant's case in its entirety is required in the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. Mr Diwnycz for the  respondent  relied  on  the  rule  24  response.  He
conceded that the decision contains a material error of law, and  adopted  a
neutral position about the extent of the grant of permission to  appeal.  He
asked me to set the decision aside.

Analysis

8.  In Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT  00304(IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) In deciding an application for permission to  appeal
to the Upper Tribunal a judge should  consider  carefully  the  utility  of
granting permission only on limited grounds. In practice,  such  a  limited
grant is unlikely to be as helpful as a general grant, which identifies the
ground or grounds that are considered by the judge to  have  the  strongest
prospect of success. (ii) Where the judge  nevertheless  intends  to  grant
permission only in respect of certain of the applicant's grounds, the judge
should make this abundantly plain, both in  his  or  her  decision  and  by
ensuring that the Tribunal's  administrative  staff  send  out  the  proper
notice, informing the applicant of the right to apply to the Upper Tribunal
for permission to appeal  on  grounds  on  which  the  applicant  has  been
unsuccessful in the application to the First-tier Tribunal; (iii) (3) If an
applicant who has been granted permission to appeal to the  UT  on  limited
grounds only applies to the Upper Tribunal on grounds in respect  of  which
permission has been refused, the  Upper  Tribunal  judge  considering  that
application should not regard his or her task as merely some form of review
of the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the application; (iv) In  the  IAC
the overriding objective of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 is unlikely to be advanced by adopting a procedure whereby new grounds
of appeal can be advanced without the  permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
under rule 5 of those Rules.

9. It was established at the hearing until September  2018  that  the  wrong
notice had been sent to the  appellant  informing  him  that  permission  to
appeal was granted. The notice dated 22nd of February 2018 simply tells  the
appellant that permission to appeal is  granted.  There  is  no  mention  of
refusal of permission on some grounds. The terms of the grant of  permission
to appeal are that there is no arguable merit  in  submissions  relating  to
asylum in the grounds seeking permission to appeal, but the  Judge  granting
permission to appeal did not specifically refuse permission to move  any  of
the grounds of appeal. The grant of permission to appeal  is  ambiguous  and
can be read as an unrestricted grant of permission to appeal.

10. I know that my view is differs from  that  of  my  fellow  Deputy  Upper
Tribunal Judge, but no conclusion was  reached  on  10  September  2018.  No
directions were made on 10 September  2018  which  limited  the  grounds  of
appeal, and no decision finding an error of law was  made  on  10  September
2018. In fairness to the appellant, I treat this hearing as an error of  law
hearing and consider each of the grounds of appeal.

11. The first eight grounds of appeal drive at the Judge's findings of  fact
in relation to the appellant's  asylum  claim.  Five  of  those  grounds  of
appeal are bald assertions that the Judge

      Was wrong to find that....

12. Those five grounds of appeal amount to nothing more than a  disagreement
with the facts as the Judge found them to be and an  attempt  to  relitigate
aspects of the case. Those grounds of appeal are  directed  at  the  Judge's
finding  that  the  appellant  has  been  dishonest  about  his   age.   The
application for permission  to  appeal  sets  out  arguments  based  on  the
premise that the appellant is not challenging an  age  assessment  and  that
the appellant does not actually know his date of birth.

13. At [30] of the decision the Judge notes that  the  appellant  bases  his
belief about his age on what he was told by a maternal uncle, and  that  the
appellant has not challenged an age assessment. The Judge does not take  the
appellant's belief about his age, or an age assessment which says  that  the
appellant is older than he  thought  he  was,  as  the  foundation  for  the
remaining credibility findings

14. The remaining grounds of appeal relating to  the  asylum  claim  suggest
that the Judge erred in her approach to an expert report and that the  Judge
has not properly understood the background materials.

15. Between [3] and [7] the Judge summarises the  respondent's  reasons  for
refusing the appellant's claim. Between [8] and [16] the  appellant's  claim
is summarised by the Judge. The Judge directs herself in  law  between  [24]
and [29]. The Judge's findings start at [30].

16. Between [31] and [36] the Judge  explains  why  inconsistencies  in  the
appellant's account damage his credibility. At  [37]  the  Judge  starts  to
consider the expert report prepared by Dr Foxley. Between [37] and [39]  the
Judge compares Dr Foxley's opinion with the facts and circumstances  of  the
appellant's account, and at [39] notes that Dr Foxley's conclusion  is  that
the Taliban would have no interest in following the appellant to  Kabul.  At
[38] the Judge correctly notes that the respondent  intends  to  return  the
appellant to Kabul.

17. The  Judge  makes  clear,  sustainable,  findings  in  relation  to  the
appellant's asylum claim. The Judge clearly  considers  the  experts  report
before reaching the conclusion that the appellant was not approached by  the
Taliban (at [34]).   That  finding  removes  the  very  foundation  for  the
appellant's asylum claim and is a finding which is well within the range  of
reasonable conclusions that the Judge could reach  on  the  evidence  placed
before the tribunal. An expert's report is simply an adminicle  of  evidence
and does not replace the Judge's  fact-finding  role.  The  Judge  correctly
considered the expert's report as one strand of  the  totality  of  evidence
and reached a sustainable conclusion, for which she gave adequate reasons.

18. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

19. In relation to the asylum appeal, the Judge directed  herself  correctly
in law. There is nothing wrong with the Judge's  fact-finding.  The  grounds
of appeal directed at the  asylum  claim  amount  to  nothing  more  than  a
disagreement with the facts as the Judge found them to be.

20. All parties are  agreed  that  the  Judge  applied  the  wrong  test  to
internal relocation, and that her consideration of  humanitarian  protection
and paragraph 276  ADE(1)(vi)  is  flawed.  Parties  agree  that  these  are
material errors of law. Consideration of article 8 ECHR  grounds  of  appeal
is limited to [44] of the  decision.  There,  the  Judge  completely  elides
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules. That is a material error  of  law.  At
[43] the Judge manifestly applies the wrong test in law  when  superficially
considering humanitarian protection. That is another material error of law.

21. Two months after the Judge's decision was promulgated  the  decision  in
AS (safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2018]  UKUT  00118  became  available.
The Upper Tribunal held that having regard to the security and  humanitarian
situation in Kabul as well as  the  difficulties  faced  by  the  population
living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs  and  other  returnees,
which are not dissimilar to the conditions faced throughout may other  parts
of Afghanistan); it will not, in general be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh
for a single adult male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does
not have any specific connections or support  network  in  Kabul.   However,
the particular circumstances of an individual applicant must be  taken  into
account in the context of conditions in the place of  relocation,  including
a person's age, nature  and  quality  of  support  network/connections  with
Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental  health,  and  their  language,
education and vocational skills when  determining  whether  a  person  falls
within that general position.  A person with a support network  or  specific
connections in Kabul is likely to be in  a  more  advantageous  position  on
return, which may counter a particular vulnerability  of  an  individual  on
return.

22. Mr Clark told me that he was not in a position to proceed to the  second
stage of the hearing. Even though those instructing him received  directions
that they should be ready for a hearing which could lead  to  a  substituted
decision, no rule 15(2A) notice has been served.  He  told  me  that  it  is
hoped  that  an  updated  expert  report  can  be  obtained  and  that   the
appellant's evidence still needs to be updated. The result is that I do  not
have sufficient information to substitute my own decision.

23. The Judge's decision contains material errors  of  law  in  relation  to
humanitarian protection and paragraph  276  ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  immigration
rules. It does not contain errors in  relation  to  the  appellant's  asylum
claim.
24. In YZ (China) V SSHD [2017] CSIH 41 the Court of Session  explained  (at
[42]) the basis on which the Upper Tribunal is entitled  to  interfere  with
findings of fact made in the First-tier  Tribunal.   An  appeal  lies  on  a
point of law; there is no appeal against the judge's factual  findings.   In
some cases (such as whether certain conduct is reasonable  or  proportionate
or where the First- tier Tribunal has failed to take into  account  relevant
matters or has taken into account irrelevant ones) the finding of  an  error
of law in identifying what factors are to be taken into account may open  up
the  findings  available  for   reconsideration,   including   findings   of
apparently  pure  fact.   However,  when  the  Upper  Tribunal  remakes  the
decision, although it can make additional  supplementary  findings  it  does
not have the  power  to  overturn  pure  findings  of  fact  which  are  not
undermined or infected by any error of law.
25. I cannot substitute my own decision  because  the  appellant  solicitors
were not prepared for the second stage of  this  hearing.  A  further  fact-
finding exercise is necessary solely in relation to humanitarian  protection
and paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi). Because of the  extent  of  the  further  fact
finding necessary I remit the appeals of the First-tier Tribunal  preserving
the Judge's findings in relation to the appellant's asylum claim.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

26. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

27. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  The Judge's findings  in  relation
to the asylum appeal stand, but the remaining findings are set aside.

28. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Newport  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Hawden-Beal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 12 January 2018. The  appeal
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so that the  Humanitarian  Protection
and article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal can be determined of new.



Signed
                       Date 8 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



