
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08567/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2020                            |On 15 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [A L]

                                                                  Respondent




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal.  The Respondent, whom I  shall
    call "the claimant" claims to be a national  of  Eritrea,  at  risk  of
    persecution there because of his liability to  military  service.   His
    asylum, claim was refused on 22  August  2019  and  he  appealed.   His
    appeal was heard by Judge O'Rourke.

 2. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  at
    the hearing.  Judge O'Rourke heard oral evidence from the claimant  and
    considered the material on file.  He accepted the claimant's account of
    his nationality and the risks of being in Eritrea and  so  allowed  the
    appeal.

 3. The Secretary of State appeals solely  on  the  grounds  of  procedural
    unfairness.  The grounds are as follows:

         "The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal has made a material error  of
law in the             Determination.

         Introduction

         The appellant's appeal was allowed on asylum grounds.

                 1.  Committing  or  permitting  a   procedural   or   other
                    irregularity capable of making a material difference  to
                    the outcome or the fairness of the proceedings.

                    a) At [12] of the determination the First Tier  Tribunal
                       Judge (FTTJ) states,

                           "Notification was received from the  Respondent's
                           Cardiff Representation unit that no  Home  Office
                           Presenting Officer would attend today's  hearing.
                           As the Respondent has  had  due  notice  of  this
                           hearing and he Appellant was ready to proceed,  I
                           considered it in the interests of justice  to  do
                           so."

                    b) It  is  respectfully  submitted  that  the  FTTJ  has
                       incorrectly treated the adjournment request (attached
                       as  separate  email)  submitted  on  9/12/2019  as  a
                       notification that no Presenting Officer would attend,
                       rather than the application for an adjournment of the
                       hearing.  It is submitted that no reference  is  made
                       to the refusal of  the  adjournment  and  no  reasons
                       provided by the FTTJ for  why  this  application  was
                       refused.

                    c) It is noted from the adjournment  request,  that  the
                       adjournment was sought as the presenting officer that
                       was due  to  attend  was  unable  to  attend  due  to
                       sickness.  It is  also  noted  that  the  adjournment
                       request also states that counsel was unable to accept
                       instructions due to short notice.  It is  noted  that
                       the adjournment was refused as it was considered that
                       alternative  counsel  could  be  instructed.   It  is
                       submitted that the refusal of the adjournment request
                       by the duty Immigration  judge  fails  to  take  into
                       account  the  difficulty  in  obtaining   alternative
                       counsel at short notice.

                    d) It  is  argued  that  the  refusal  to  consider  the
                       adjournment request by the FTTJ has led to procedural
                       unfairness as the respondent was unable to  challenge
                       the evidence of the appellant at the hearing.   Given
                       that the appellant's nationality was in  dispute,  it
                       is submitted that this  inability  to  challenge  the
                       appellant's evidence has  resulted  in  a  procedural
                       unfairness has materially affected the outcome of the
                       hearing.

                    e) Reliance is placed  on  the  findings  of  the  Upper
                       Tribunal in Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]
                       UKUT 00418 (IAC) head note of which states,

                           "If  a  Tribunal  refuses   to   accede   to   an
                           adjournment  request,  such  decision  could,  in
                           principle,  be  erroneous  in  law   in   several
                           respects: these include a failure  to  take  into
                           account all material  considerations;  permitting
                           immaterial considerations to intrude; denying the
                           party concerned a fair hearing; failing to  apply
                           the correct test; and  acting  irrationally.   In
                           practice, in most  cases  the  question  will  be
                           whether the refusal deprived the  affected  party
                           of  his  right  to  a  fair  hearing.   Where  an
                           adjournment refusal  is  challenged  on  fairness
                           grounds, it is important to  recognise  that  the
                           question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether
                           the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be
                           applied is  that  of  fairness:   was  there  any
                           deprivation of the affected party's  right  to  a
                           fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of
                           State for the Home  Department  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
                           1284."

         Permission to appeal is respectfully sought.

         An oral hearing is requested."

 4.  Permission  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because   the
    adjournment request, said to  be  attached  the  application,  was  not
    attached and could not be found on the file.  Judge Coker in the  Upper
    Tribunal granted permission to appeal, apparently  without  seeing  the
    adjournment request.  On 7 April 2020 I directed that  it  be  provided
    within 14 days.  Mr Lindsey,  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    responded, but without sending  a  copy  of  the  adjournment  request,
    despite purporting to attach it.   Not  until  29  July  2020  did  the
    Secretary of State produce this document which  ought  to  have  formed
    part of the original application for permission, for which time expired
    early in January 2020.

 5. It is now clear that what happened was as follows.  The hearing  before
    Judge O'Rourke was listed to take place on 10 December  2019.   On  the
    previous day, 9 December, at 10:42am, a Presenting Officer emailed  the
    Tribunal as follows:

         "Dear Sirs,

         I am writing to request an adjournment for  the  cases  in  List  4
         tomorrow  (10th  December  2019).   Jan  Lewis  is  the   allocated
         Presenting Officer who is dealing with the list.  However, she  has
         telephoned me this morning to confirm that she is unwell.   She  is
         therefore unable to prepare for her list today and is not  well  to
         go to court to present her list tomorrow.  Due to  this  unforeseen
         circumstance and that we do not have another PO available  to  take
         over her substantive cases and to present the cases in the Tribunal
         at this short notice, I would respectfully request  an  adjournment
         of  these  cases.   Neither  party  would  be  prejudiced   by   an
         adjournment, a Presenting Officer needs to be available  to  cross-
         examine and test the evidence in court, and it  is  submitted  that
         adjourning would be in the interests of justice to ensure that  the
         Secretary of State is  represented  at  these  hearings.   We  have
         contacted Counsel who we  regularly  instruct  to  ascertain  their
         availability but due to the short notice, they are already booked."

 6. The application was put before the Duty Judge at Newport, and at  13:49
    a response was sent by email as follows:

         "Your request has been placed before the Duty Judge, Judge Osborne,
         who has instructed that the adjournment request is refused and  has
         directed that alternative counsel should be instructed."

 7. It is not suggested that the Secretary of State  made  any  attempt  to
    take the matter further, for example  by  making  further  attempts  to
    instruct counsel outside the small group of "Counsel who  we  regularly
    instruct". The adjournment request was not renewed.

 8. Judge O'Rourke wrote as follows:

         "[12] Notification  was  received  from  the  Respondent's  Cardiff
         Representation unit that no Home Office  Presenting  Officer  would
         attend today's hearing.  As the Respondent has had  due  notice  of
         this hearing and the Appellant was ready to proceed,  I  considered
         it in the interests of justice to do so."

 9. I directed that the parties make written submissions in  the  light  of
    the need to take into account the difficulties posed by  the  pandemic.
    The parties were asked to give any reasons  why  determination  of  the
    question whether  there  had  been  an  error  of  law  should  not  be
    determined without a hearing.  Substantive submissions were filed by Mr
    Lindsey on behalf of the Secretary of State and Mr Dieu  on  behalf  of
    the claimant.  Although the Secretary  of  State's  original  position,
    unsupported by any reasons,  was  that  she  requested  a  hearing,  Mr
    Lindsey made no  submissions  on  procedure.   Mr  Dieu  said  that  he
    requested a hearing "to be able to engage fully with the  Tribunal  and
    the arguments presented or later to be submitted by the  [Secretary  of
    State]".  I have no idea what it was that Mr Dieu wanted or  needed  to
    say that he could not say in writing.  I have considered  the  material
    before me.  In my judgment fairness does not require a hearing in  this
    case.  The parties have set out their positions and  there  is  nothing
    more that I need in order to make my decision.

10. Mr Lindsey relies on the grounds  of  appeal,  to  which  he  adds  the
    following:

         "Submissions

         6. As can be seen from the adjournment application dated 9 December
          2019, the  SSHD  was  unpresented  before  the  FtT  due  to  non-
          availability of any Presenting  Officer  or  counsel.   Reasonable
          efforts had been made to secure representation.

         7. The response of the Duty Judge, Judge Osborne (also  9  December
          2019) refusing the adjournment request  fails,  with  respect,  to
          adequately engage with the application.  The SSHD was directed  by
          that response to instruct alternative counsel.  However, this  was
          not  possible  in  the  circumstances,   as   had   already   been
          communicated to the Tribunal.

         8. It appears that the FtT Judge  who  decided  the  appeal,  Judge
          O'Rourke, was not aware that an adjournment request had been  made
          by the SSHD prior to the hearing.  At any event, the Tribunal  did
          not refer to that request in its determination.

         9.  The Judge stated at [12] that:

             "Notification  was  received  from  the  Respondent's  Cardiff
             Representation unit that no  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
             would attend today's hearing.  As the Respondent has  had  due
             notice of this hearing and the Appellant was ready to proceed,
             I considered it in the interests of justice to do so."

         10. With respect, this statement  does  not  fully  and  accurately
           reflect the SSHD's  position  as  set  out  in  the  adjournment
           application.   It was clear from the application that  the  SSHD
           wished to be represented at the hearing, and this fact  was  not
           considered by the Judge.




         11.  It is  respectfully  submitted  (and  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
           invited to take judicial notice of the fact) that usual Tribunal
           procedure in circumstances where  one  party  to  an  appeal  is
           unrepresented is to  contact  that  party,  via  the  Tribunal's
           clerk.  This is particularly so in circumstances where the party
           has indicated in writing that they have not been able to arrange
           representation, despite efforts to do so having been made.




         12.  It is respectfully submitted that, had the  Tribunal  followed
           this course and contacted the SSHD (via the Presenting  Officer'
           Unit in Cardiff), there is clearly a realistic possibility  that
           the hearing would have been adjourned.  It  is  noted  that  the
           adjournment application contained full contact details  for  the
           relevant Home  Office  official.   The  Tribunal  was  expressly
           invited to notify that named contact, if any further information
           was needed.




         13. The fact that the SSHD was not contacted by the Tribunal on the
           day of the hearing arguably amounted to  procedural  unfairness;
           and that fairness was material to the outcome."

11.  It  appears  to  me   that   these   submissions   operate   under   a
    misapprehension.  There  was  no  application  for  Judge  O'Rourke  to
    consider.  The only application that had been  made  had  been  decided
    judicially the previous day,  and  the  Secretary  of  State  had  been
    notified of the decision.  It would  in  the  circumstances  have  been
    quite wrong for Judge O'Rourke to consider it.  The Secretary of  State
    was aware of the decison, and knew that the present  position  (in  the
    absence of any further application by her) was that the  hearing  would
    proceed without representation from her side.

12. It is in the light of those facts that the complaints in paragraphs  8-
    11 of the submissions fall to be considered.  This was not a case where
    the lack of a Presenting Officer was unexplained.  On the contrary, the
    adjournment application had made it clear that a Presenting Officer was
    not to be expected.  And the fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    received and apparently accepted Judge Osborne's  decision  meant  that
    everybody involved was entitled to think that the  Secretary  of  State
    chose not to take the mater any further.  As Mr Dieu  puts  it  in  his
    submissions:

         "It was open to the [Secretary of State] to  inform  the  Tribunal,
         and renew her application,  if  it  were  the  position  that  even
         alternative counsel couldn't be found.  The  [Secretary  of  State]
         having failed to do so it was not on the Tribunal to be chasing any
         party as to how they might conduct their case".

13. I agree entirely.

14. Paragraph 6 of Mr Lindsey's submissions raises a complaint about  Judge
    Osborne's decision.  That formed no  part  of  the  grounds  of  appeal
    against Judge O'Rourke's decision, and rightly so.  If the Secretary of
    State thought that there  was  something  wrong  with  Judge  Osborne's
    decision she should have taken  the  matter  up  promptly,  instead  of
    waiting silently and only objecting when the substantive decision  went
    against her.  In any event, as already pointed out, the application did
    not suggest that it was not possible to instruct  counsel.   It  merely
    sought  indulgence  because  those  regularly   instructed   were   not
    available.

15. It seems to me that Judge O'Rourke was  not  misinformed  and  did  not
    behave in a way that was unfair.  What is being asserted on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State is that Judge O'Rourke should have  granted  her
    an indulgence that she did not seek from him, in order  to  reduce  the
    chances of her losing this appeal.  If he had done so,  that  certainly
    would have been unfair.  Indeed, it would probably have been unfair for
    him even to consider it.

16. In the circumstances of this case, therefore, the grounds of appeal and
    Mr Lindsey's submissions come nowhere  near  showing  unfairness.   His
    citation of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418 does not assist.

17. The Secretary of State was not at any stage deprived of the ability  to
    show that it was not possible to obtain representation or to renew  the
    application for adjournment on that or indeed any other ground.  As she
    did not take advantage of that, there is no basis for saying  that  she
    was deprived of the right to a fair hearing.

18. Judge O'Rourke made no error of law and his decision stands.



                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 4 December 2020

