
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08511/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 March 2018                        |On 16 March 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     HD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Scott, of Pickup Scott, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal,  in  form  at  least,  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on [ ]  2002.   She  arrived
     in the UK on 12 January  2017  and  claimed  asylum  on  arrival.   Her
     application was refused on 22 August 2017 for the reasons  set  out  in
     the respondent's detailed reasons for refusal.

3.   She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and her appeal was heard  on  2
     October 2017. It was agreed that the only issue  was  that  of  asylum.
     The judge accepted the appellant's account of the events leading to her
     departure from Somalia and found that she would  be  at  real  risk  of
     persecution or serious harm on return there for the reasons set out  in
     his decision at [24]-[27].

4.   However, in the formal notice of decision at the end of  his  decision,
    the judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

5.   The appellant was granted permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis  that,
    although the judge appeared to have made a slip, it was not the sort of
    slip that could be corrected by operation of the First-tier  Tribunal's
    slip rule.

6.   In the light of the Upper Tribunal decision in Katsonga  ("Slip  Rule";
    FtT's general powers) [2016] UKUT 228, the slip rule in Rule 31 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)(Immigration and Asylum)  Rules
    2014 cannot be used to reverse the effect  of  a  decision.   In  these
    circumstances, the error  can  only  be  corrected  on  appeal.   I  am
    satisfied, and the respondent accepts, that it was the intention of the
    judge to allow the appeal on  asylum  grounds  and  that  the  decision
    dismissing the appeal was simply a clerical error.  To this extent  the
    judge erred in law and the proper course is for the asylum decision  to
    be set aside and for a decision to be substituted allowing  the  appeal
    on asylum grounds.

Decision

7.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  The decision is  set  aside.   I
    re-make the decision by allowing the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.  The
    humanitarian protection decision is dismissed and there is no need  for
    a decision on human rights grounds.

8.   The anonymity direction made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  remains  in
    force until further order.


Signed   H J E Latter                            Date: 15 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
