
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08697/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 18 September 2018                |On 05 October 2018                       |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                            ms Scholastica sharif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Tapfumaneyi, PT Law & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of Malawi, has permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Durance of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent  on  26
    July 2018 dismissing her  appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 24 August 2017 to refuse her protection claim.

2.   The permission granted  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  grounds  was
    limited to two points: that it was arguable that the  judge  materially
    erred in law by  speculating  without  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    daughter returned to the UK and that this error infected the assessment
    under para EX.1; and that it  was  arguable  the  judge  had  erred  in
    failing to consider humanitarian protection.

3.   It is convenient to deal with  the  second  ground  first,  as  it  was
    (sensibly) not pursued by Mr Tapfumaneyi.  The judge gave sound reasons
    for rejecting the appellant's asylum claim (which was based  mainly  on
    being at risk as a lesbian) and the appellant's grounds contain nothing
    to cast doubt on those reasons.  Based on those reasons  the  appellant
    could not succeed on humanitarian protection grounds save  possibly  in
    respect of her health circumstances.  However, her health circumstances
    were dealt with by the judge both as regards Articles 3 and  8  of  the
    ECHR and again the grounds raise no objections to these findings.   The
    CJEU has confirmed that Article 15(b) of  the  Qualification  Directive
    broadly corresponds to Article 3 ECHR save that it does not  extend  to
    cases in which lack of health  treatment  is  predominantly  caused  by
    state actions (see e.g. Case C-353/16. MP, 24  April  2018.   Hence  in
    substance the judge's treatment of the  appellant's  Article  3  health
    circumstances entails that she  cannot  succeed  under  Article  15(b).
    This ground is devoid of arguable merit.

4.   Turning to the first ground, I find it  wholly  fails  to  identify  an
    error of law.  Contrary to what is asserted, the judge's  finding  that
    both the appellant and her youngest daughter  had failed to  show  that
    they had been continuously resident in  the  UK  since  2004  and  2007
    respectively, was not based on speculation but on documentary  evidence
    in the form of: IABS search results; entry clearance applications  from
    2007 and 2014,;a screenshot of an embarkation  from  2010;  fingerprint
    matches showing that a person using a different  name  (that  of  Parce
    Melissa  Clara)  from  the  youngest  daughter  but   with   the   same
    fingerprints was  refused  an  entry  clearance  visa  from  the  Entry
    Clearance Officers in Pretoria in 2014; and a letter from Chapel Street
    Primary School confirming that the youngest daughter left school on  19
    March 2010 for the reason that she was emigrating to Malawi.  This body
    of evidence also included a witness statement from a Higher  Scientific
    Officer of the Office Fingerprint Bureau (IFB) dated 19  February  2018
    confirming that the prints of the appellant's youngest daughter matched
    those used by someone using the name Parce Melissa Clara.

5.   At the hearing before the judge the appellant gave  evidence  that  she
    and her youngest daughter had not left the UK as alleged and her eldest
    daughter corroborated her evidence.

6.   In my judgment the judge was clearly entitled to reject their  evidence
    since not only did it conflict with the documentary  evidence  produced
    by the respondent  (as  identified  above)  but  the  appellant  wholly
    failed, despite  ample  opportunity  to  do  so,  to  produce  counter-
    evidence of her and/or her  youngest  daughter's  presence  in  the  UK
    between 2010 and 2015.  The judge's observations regarding this lack at
    para 31 were wholly apposite.  The burden of proof rested ultimately on
    the appellant and she had manifestly failed to discharge that burden.

7.   Mr Tapfumaneyi sought to submit that the judge was wrong to  find  that
    the appellant was a  dishonest  witness  because  in  relation  to  the
    alleged deception practised by  the  youngest  daughter  in  her  entry
    clearance application, the burden of proof rested  on  the  respondent.
    He is certainly right to state that in relation  to  an  allegation  of
    deception, the burden rests on the respondent, but that burden was more
    than adequately discharged by  the  documentary  evidence  produced  to
    support it. included, In response to  this  documentary  evidence,  the
    evidential burden shifted to the appellant and  she  wholly  failed  to
    discharge it.

8.   Mr Tapfumaneyi submitted that the judge  should  have  regarded  it  as
    inherently unlikely that the appellant did not leave  the  UK  in  2010
    since the Home Office had possession of her  passport  throughout  this
    period.  Even assuming the Home Office did have her passport  for  that
    entire period,  it does not  assist  the  appellant  in  rebutting  the
    documentary evidence  that  she  had  left  the  UK  without  being  in
    possession of her own passport.

9.   Given the  lack  of  legal  error  in  the  judge's  findings  and  the
    significant interruption in the appellant's and her daughter's  periods
    of residence in the UK, it was clearly open to the  judge  to  conclude
    that their Article 8 claim was based upon less than 3 years'  residency
    in the immediate past.  The  judge  properly  weighed  in  the  balance
    against the appellant that the best intentions of the youngest daughter
    lay with continuing to live with the appellant and that there  were  no
    significant obstacles to  both  of  them  being  returned  together  to
    Malawi.  The judge properly concluded that the  appellant's  Article  8
    grounds of appeal were  not  made  out.   In  turn,  I  find  that  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are not made out.

10.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT Judge did not  materially
    err in law and that the decision of the FtT Judge shall stand.

11.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                                 Date: 28 September 2018
[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

