
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/08670/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 May 2019                           |On 20 May 2019                    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                 MIRIAME [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mis Mason from Broudie Jackson & Cantor
For the Respondent: Mr Tan Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald, promulgated on
    8 February 2019 which allowed the Appellant's appeal against a  refusal
    of refugee protection.

 3. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that it was not open to the Judge
    to reject the reasons given for her flight from the DRC but accept that
    such mistreatment occurred as a result of detention by the authorities;
    failed to identify the reasons why she was persecuted; it was not  open
    to find the medical evidence in  isolation  and  determinative  of  the
    appeal; gave no reason for why the Appellant would continue  to  be  at
    risk on return as she did not come in any of the risk categories in BM

 4.  On 18 March 2019 Designated Judge Manuell gave permission to appeal.

 5. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Tan  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that:

      a) At paragraph 15 (j) the Judge rejects the  reasons  given  for  her
         flight from the DRC and then makes a finding that she was  'somehow
         detained' and is  unclear  about  why  ultimately  concluding  that
         detention was by the authorities without explaining why.  He  fails
         to explain why the Appellants case engages the convention.

      b) The Judge was required to look at the  evidence  as  a  whole.  The
         Judge compartmentalizes the  evidence  rejecting  her  history  and
         makes the medical evidence determinative.

      c) The Judge fails to identify why she would be at risk on  return  as
         she clearly does not come within any risk  factor  in  the  country
         guidance case.

 6. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Mason submitted that:

      a) The Judge  accepts  at  paragraph  15(j)  that  the  Appellant  was
         involved  with  an  opposition  political  party.  Having  suffered
         extensive injuries in the context of the background evidence it was
         reasonable to conclude that it was the state who detained her.

      b) The Appellant cannot provide a consistent account  because  of  her
         PTSD.

      c) Having escaped from detention it was likely that she would  be  the
         subject of further detention and harm.

      d) In respect of the medical evidence that was the only evidence.  Her
         own evidence is inconsistent and the medical evidence  states  this
         is because she has PTSD.

 7. In reply Mr Tan on behalf of the Respondent submitted that there was no
    positive finding that the Appellant was arrested but rather a rejection
    of the account that she was.





The Law

 8.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

11. I am satisfied that when read as a whole the Judge  has  made  confused
    and  irreconcilable  findings   and   reached   conclusion   that   are
    inadequately reasoned.

12. This Appellants case very briefly is that she first fled from  the  DRC
    because of an abusive marriage and fled to France.  She  then  after  a
    period returned to the DRC where she joined a human rights group called
    Filimbi and attended monthly meetings. She was  detained  and  tortured
    physically and sexually by the authorities for 9 weeks. She was  helped
    to escape and came to the UK where she claimed asylum. She  engaged  in
    low level sur place activity.

13. At paragraph 15 (b)(d) the Judge sets out the claim and her account  of
    her detention and mistreatment by the DRC authorities on her return  to
    the country after fleeing to France. The Judge considers the challenges
    to that account and appears to accept this history finding at paragraph
    15(f) and (i) that the discrepancies and inconsistencies in her account
    are explained by the PTSD that is described in the medical reports. Had
    he then gone on to simply says that the medical evidence supported  her
    account as she had scarring consistent  with  her  claim  his  decision
    would in my view have been sustainable.

14. However in paragraph 15(j) he finds:

         "I accept that the Appellant became involved with Filimbi, although
         I am not persuaded, even to the lower standard of proof,  that  the
         Appellant faced such difficulties which caused her to flee DRC."

    I find this is irreconcilable with his previous apparent acceptance  of
    her account which included the fact that her involvement  with  Filimbi
    led to her detention and mistreatment by the authorities and caused her
    to flee from the DRC. The Judge then continues

         "she was somehow detained in  DRC,  because  the  evidence  of  the
         Medical Foundation  is,  to  that  extent,  cogent  persuasive  and
         eventually overwhelming."

15. At this point the Judge does not adequately explain why, given that  he
    had in the previous sentence rejected her account of  fleeing  the  DRC
    because of problems arising out of her  involvement  with  Filimbi,  he
    concludes that any mistreatment she suffered was at the  hands  of  the
    authorities as opposed to say criminals. He  also  fails  to  make  any
    clear finding for her mistreatment that engages the convention.

16. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety. All matters to be redetermined afresh.

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    the Judge has failed to make adequate findings on disputed evidence,  I
    consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.


Signed                                                              Date
17.5.2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

