


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      PA/08861/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 28th January 2020                       |On: 30th January 2020          |
|                                            |                               |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                                     RAA
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Holmes, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent RAA is a national of Iraq born in  1997.   On  the  30th
    October 2019 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly) allowed  his  appeal
    on protection grounds. The Secretary of  State  has  now  been  granted
    permission to appeal against that decision.







 2. The substance of the First-tier Tribunal decision was that  RAA  was  a
    Kurd with no identity documents. Applying AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC)  he  would  therefore  face
    considerable  difficulties  upon  arrival  in  Baghdad.   Without   the
    necessary papers he would be unable to board  a  domestic  flight  from
    Baghdad to the IKR. He would therefore have  to  make  the  journey  by
    land. Without identity papers he would be detained at  each  checkpoint
    along the way. The Tribunal appeared to accept that RAA  was  estranged
    from his family and that they would not therefore assist him in proving
    his identity at said checkpoints.  On this narrow ground, the  Tribunal
    found that RAA qualified for a grant of "humanitarian  protection"  and
    the appeal was allowed.


 3. The Secretary of State's grounds complain  that  the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal are perverse.  The  Tribunal  accepted  the  police
    would be able to assist RAA in obtaining a replacement CSID/INIC but it
    failed to explain why this assistance would be limited to Ranya. It  is
    submitted that in  the  absence  of  any  finding  on  that  point  the
    Tribunal's conclusion - that the assistance would not be forthcoming at
    Baghdad airport - is irrational.

 4. Whilst I accept that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal could have
    dealt with the point more  explicitly,  it  seems  to  me  that  it  is
    implicit in the evidence and findings that the Kurdish police force  in
    Ranya would be unlikely to be able  to  offer  RAA  any  assistance  at
    Baghdad airport. The point here was that the IKR police force know  who
    RAA is because he reported various  threats  etc  to  them  during  the
    course of an intra-familial dispute in 2018/early 2019.  If he reported
    to a police station in Ranya, they could  pull  his  file,  this  would
    contain the numbers of his CSID  cards  etc,  and  he  could  use  this
    information to obtain replacement documents. I can  see  no  reasonable
    prospect, and no evidential foundation for finding,  that RAA would  be
    able to organise that exchange of information from Baghdad airport,  or
    get a new card whilst there. Nor does it seem remotely  likely  that  a
    police officer from the IKR would venture 300 miles south in  order  to
    help this one man get through checkpoints on the road.     I  find  the
    Secretary of State's one  ground  of  appeal  to  be  misconceived  and
    without merit.

 5. Since permission to appeal was granted on the  4th  December  2019  the
    Upper Tribunal has issued fresh country guidance on Iraq: SMO, KSP & IM
    (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).  I
    note for the sake of completeness that the Secretary of State  did  not
    seek to amend her grounds in light of that decision.










    Anonymity Order

 6. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to  make  an  order  in  the
    following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld  and  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.


 8. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    28th
                                January 2020
