
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08582/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                    M A H
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Alex Burrett, Counsel instructed by Wilsons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal from the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Monson promulgated on  20  March  2019.   I  have  been  assisted  in
       determining this appeal by the clarity of the grounds drafted on  the
       appellant's behalf and by the pragmatic acceptance on behalf  of  the
       Home Secretary that there are a number of ways in which the  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal is unsatisfactory.

    2. Both individually and cumulatively these matters  amount  to  one  or
       more errors of law. In the circumstances, I cannot be satisfied  that
       the appeal received the anxious scrutiny as required  in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. The proper course is to set  aside  the  decision  and
       remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it to be  reheard  de
       novo by a judge other than Judge Monson.

    3. Because of the concessions wisely made this morning on the  Secretary
       of State's behalf, I need say very little by way of reasons.

    4. The principal flaw was the judge's approach to the expert evidence of
       Professor Katona. The  issue  concerned  causative  factors  for  the
       appellant's  post-traumatic  stress  disorder.  The  judge  gave  the
       impression that the key issue was "essentially subjective" and beyond
       Professor Katona's direct knowledge. Any expert medical adviser draws
       heavily on the reliability of the patient as a historian and to  that
       extent all medical reports have a self-serving content to  them.  But
       it is very clear from a full reading  of  this  medical  report  that
       Professor Katona applied his mind and his considerable experience  to
       more than a regurgitation of the  appellant's  own  evidence.  In  my
       assessment the judge too readily dismissed the content of that expert
       report on the erroneous basis that it was entirely self-serving.

    5. In addition to that the judge was  critical  of  the  report  on  the
       assumed basis that Professor  Katona  did  not  have  regard  to  the
       appellant's general practitioner notes.  Regrettably  the  judge  did
       not put this concern to the appellant or to his representative.   Had
       he done so it would have become apparent that the expert  had  indeed
       seen and considered the GP notes, albeit he neglected to record  this
       fact in the text of the report.   I  have  seen  a  detailed  witness
       statement from Counsel who appeared in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
       well as a confirmatory letter from Professor Katona to  verify  this.
       It was therefore not appropriate for the judge to discount the expert
       evidence on this false premise.

    6. There are other features of the decision which  are  the  subject  of
       criticism  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  but  in  the  light  of  the
       respondent's concession, which I consider properly  made,  I  do  not
       need to deal with them.  Having already concluded that this  decision
       cannot be upheld, the less I say, the better.



Notice of Decision

    1) An error of law having been found, the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal is set aside.

    2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  afresh
       by a judge other than Judge Monson.

    3) No findings of fact are preserved.

    4) An anonymity direction is made in the following terms.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     5 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

