
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08583/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th December 2017                         |                              |
|                                              |On 22nd January 2018          |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                  mrs esah
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya born  on  29th  August  1984.   She
    claimed asylum on 2nd March 2016.  By  Notice  of  Refusal  dated  10th
    August 2016 her application was refused by the Secretary of State.

 2. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal.  The appeal came  before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Malik sitting at Manchester on 16th February
    2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  14th  March  2017  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 28th March 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
     On 13th July 2017 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Froom  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Froom noted that there was no dispute over
    the Appellant's nationality namely that she was Libyan and referred  to
    the recent authority of ZMM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT  00263
    (IAC) the headnote of which states

         "The  violence  in  Libya  has  reached  such  a  high  level  that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  returning
         civilian would, solely on account of his presence on the  territory
         of that country or region, face a real risk of being subject  to  a
         threat to his life or person."

    Judge  Froom  and  indeed  those  attending  in  front  of   me   today
    acknowledged that that authority was not before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and no criticism can consequently be made of her.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by her  instructed  Counsel
    Mr Holmes.  The  Respondent  appears  by  her  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer Mr Diwnycz.

 5. I am considerably assisted in this matter by the concession made by  Mr
    Diwnycz.  He indicates that in the light of the recent authorities  the
    Secretary of State is prepared  to  grant  the  Appellant  humanitarian
    protection on the basis that  her  other  appeals  are  dismissed.   Mr
    Holmes agrees with this approach.  It is I gather an approach that  has
    been adopted in several other cases.

 6. For the matter of completeness the judge materially erred in law in the
    First-tier Tribunal by failing to follow the country guidance given  in
    ZMM.  As I have mentioned above she cannot be criticised for  this.   I
    find that there is a material error of law, set aside the decision  and
    remake the decision allowing  the  Appellant's  claim  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained a material error  of
law and is set aside.  The  decision  is  remade  allowing  the  Appellant's
claim on humanitarian protection grounds only.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and that order will remain in  place.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 10th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 10th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
