
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: PA/08603/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Glasgow                                                 Decision
Promulgated
On 8 February 2019                                               On 19
March 2019





                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                   MR.SLA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant


                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Latta and Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Govan, Presenting Officer

Introduction

1. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq from Sulaymaniyah.


2.  There are two strands to his claim for protection which connect with
   each other.


3. Firstly, he says as is customary, his sister married his wife's brother.
   Her marriage did not work out and she sought a divorce. His wife's family
   in turn felt reparation was due from the appellant and to this end took
   his wife and their child back to her family home. Consequently, he claims
   to fear them

4. One night, in his wife's absence, he was eavesdropping on a neighbour's
   telephone conversation. The neighbour was one house away from his. The
   conversation related to a drug deal. His own phone rang and he believes
   the neighbour then was aware of his presence. In any event, he decided to
   inform the authorities about what he had heard and this resulted in his
   neighbour and others being arrested.

5. Following this his neighbour's father came to his home and tried to kill
   him, shooting through a window. The appellant then moved to live at his
   father's which was nearby. There were two more incidents. Fearful of what
   might happen he decided to leave. His wife was able to join him and
   having passed through several countries they arrived in the United
   Kingdom. Whilst in the United Kingdom his wife gave birth to their 2nd
   child. In support of his claim he produced what purported to be a letter
   of commendation and a press release of the arrest of drug offenders.

6. His claim was refused on credibility grounds. If there were any truth to
   the claim then the respondent said he could reasonably relocate within
   the IKR to avoid what was seen as localised difficulties. The refusal
   letter goes on to consider the practicalities of return and the need for
   a CSI D document. The refusal said the appellant had provided no evidence
   he had made a genuine attempt to obtain evidence of his identity or
   documentation. It felt he could replace his documentation through the
   Iraqi Embassy in London. He also could grant authority to a lawyer in his
   home country to obtain a replacement.

The First-tier Tribunal

7. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge David C Clapham SSC
   and was dismissed. At paragraph 9 to 66 judge sets out in detail what
   took place at the hearing. The judge did not find the appellant credible.
   The judge did not accept the appellant had reported a drug crime as
   claimed. Reasons are given at paragraph 68 to 76. Whilst the judge
   accepted there may have been differences between the appellant and his
   father-in-law he did not find he was at risk of any honour killing. At
   paragraph 77 the judge acknowledged the appellant would need
   documentation to be returned but pointed out the papers included copy of
   his marriage certificate and this would be a starting point to allow the
   relevant authorities to trace the necessary details.

8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that the
   judge erred in law in drawing an adverse inference from the appellant not
   being named in the press release he had submitted. The grounds argue that
   the press release was credible and was directed towards the arrest rather
   than naming an informer. To have done so could place them in danger. A
   second-ground was that the judge arguably erred in law in relation to the
   appellant's ability to obtain documentation and the absence of reference
   to relevant case law.

9. At hearing the appellant's representative referred me to the grounds for
   which permission had been sought. In particular, emphasis was placed upon
   the question of documentation and his return.

10. In response, the presenting officer contended that adequate reasons for
   rejecting the claim were given at paragraph 68 through to 71. At
   paragraph 72 the judge had referred to the appellant's claim of receiving
   a threatening text message but questioned how his number could have been
   obtained. Regarding the press release the judge evaluated this in the
   context of all the evidence.

Conclusions

11. The detailed decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge David C Clapham SSC
   demonstrates the careful consideration he gave to the claim. The evidence
   was recorded in detail. He then gave numerous reasons for rejecting the
   claim. The grounds contend that the judge did not find the claim
   plausible but did not give reasons. An example is the comment that the
   judge found implausible a drug dealer would carry out a compromising
   conversation as described. It was for the judge to assess the claim and
   he has given numerous sustainable reasons for not finding it credible. I
   can find no material error disclosed.


12. Regarding documentation, it is correct to send judge does not deal with
   this in great detail. However, in the circumstance there was no need to
   do so. The background to the documentation issue and the case law was set
   out in detail in the refusal letter and it was unnecessary in the
   circumstance for the judge to repeat this. At para 17 the judge records
   that the appellant and his wife had their own passports but these were
   taken by the smuggler engaged.

13. The decision reflects that the emphasis was upon the determination of
   the underlying claim rather than documentation. The appellant's
   representative accepted that the case turned upon the appellant's
   credibility. Paragraph 59 refers to the presenting officer in submissions
   stating that the appellant's family could assist with documentation. The
   appeal bundle would have contained the appellant screening and
   substantive interview as well as his statement.

14. At paragraph 1.8 of his screening he confirmed they had travelled on
   their own passports but claimed the agent then took them in Turkey. He is
   college-educated. At 6.3 he said he had a solicitor in Iraq who would be
   able to send documentation. In his substantive interview he said that he
   had family in Iraq including his parents, 3 sisters and 2 brothers as
   well as extended family members. He confirmed he was in contact with
   them. At question 52 he said he had a civil status ID card when in Iraq.
   He also confirmed he had a passport. He had not made any effort to obtain
   replacement documentation. He simply said his physical presence was
   necessary. He claimed not to know the details of the family registration
   book. However, he was able to provide details of his marriage. AAH (Iraqi
   Kurds- Internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 pointed out that
   with a marriage certificate the process of obtaining replacement
   documentation should be straightforward. All of this material was in
   front of the judge.

15. Consequently, the comments made at paragraph 77 were appropriate. The
   onus is on the person to show why they cannot reasonably obtain necessary
   documentation. Against any such claim, he had not been found credible on
   his substantive claim and had not made led any evidence about
   unsuccessful attempts to obtain documentation.

Decision

I find no material error of law established. Consequently, the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge David C Clapham SSC dismissing the appeal shall
stand.


DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

