
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08674/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Skype for Business at Field House|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 September 2020                       |On 20 October 2020              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimmons, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan who appealed to a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 19
    August 2019 refusing to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection.

2.   There is an anonymity direction  in  this  case  which  is  maintained,
    there having been no application to withdraw it.

3.   The appellant had a previous appeal in 2011, having come to the  United
    Kingdom, on  his  account,  in  2008.   Following  refusal  of  further
    submissions in May 2013 he absconded and was then  encountered  by  the
    police nearly three years later and served with removal directions.

4.   The essence of his claim was that his life was  in  danger  because  of
    the Taliban.  He stated that his father was a group leader and sometime
    after he left the Taliban he was killed and the  family  was  dispersed
    and separated and he had no one left in Afghanistan  and  no  means  of
    contacting them.  He believes that his  life  would  be  in  danger  on
    return.

5.   The judge did not accept that the appellant's father was  a  member  of
    the Taliban nor did he accept that his father had been killed.  It  was
    noted that the family had waited in the same  house  before  apparently
    leaving Afghanistan.  Also, he had left it  very  late  to  attempt  to
    trace his family, having made such contact just  two  days  before  the
    hearing in 2011.  The judge did not accept risk on return to  his  home
    village in Laghman Province or to Kabul.

6.   The factual basis of the appellant's claim  was  not  different  before
    the judge in the instant appeal.  However, the appellant  had  provided
    expert evidence in the form of  a  report  from  Dr  Ahmad  who  was  a
    lecturer in Global Health at St George's University of London, and also
    a psychiatric report prepared by  Dr  Burman-Roy  diagnosing  PTSD  and
    depression.  There was also a country expert report from Dr  Giustozzi.



7.   In his findings, having noted the appellant's immigration history,  the
    judge referred to the decision in Devaseelan and applied the principles
    set out there as a starting point for  consideration  of  this  appeal.
    The judge noted that the claim of the appellant specific to Afghanistan
    had not changed.  Whilst reliance was  placed  upon  the  deteriorating
    security situation in the home area and in the country in  general  the
    claim was the same.  There had been no further threats issued.  No  new
    factual information had been presented by the appellant in relation  to
    his claim.  The judge noted that reliance was placed upon the fact that
    there  was  no  medical  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  in  2011  and
    specifically the diagnosis of PTSD and depression.  The judge  remarked
    that this was accurate but it was also true that it was not advanced on
    behalf of or from the appellant.  It was to be remembered that  at  the
    time of his appeal in 2011 he had been in local  authority  care  as  a
    minor, since his arrival in 2008.  However, no one on  his  behalf  had
    considered it realistic to suggest that he was vulnerable on account of
    PTSD at the time and the judge concluded that that was clearly  because
    it did not exist at the date of the appeal.

8.   He considered that the important fact about  this  case  was  that  the
    appellant's claim was rejected, and the factual basis of his claim  was
    not accepted.  If, therefore, he now suffered from PTSD and  depression
    it was reasonable to conclude that these factors were wholly  unrelated
    to his stated fears and claim in Afghanistan.  He also noted  that  his
    condition had not prevented him from absconding knowing full well  that
    he had no basis to be in the UK, and also noting that he was fully able
    to engage with the appeal  in  perfect  English  having  been  able  to
    instruct an expert.

9.   The judge went on to say, with regard to the evidence of Dr  Ahmed  and
    Dr Burman-Roy that the problem with both was that they both relied upon
    the factual account  that  had  been  given  by  the  appellant.   They
    regarded it as "a given".  The problem was that this account  had  been
    rejected and dismissed by a Judge of the Tribunal,  a  decision  upheld
    and supported by the Upper Tribunal.  The judge considered that if  the
    appellant did have PTSD and  depression  they  were  related  to  other
    factors totally unconnected  with  his  expressed  fear  of  return  to
    Afghanistan.  The Tribunal saw no reason to depart from the findings of
    the judge in 2011.  The claim had been of limited credibility then  and
    remained so now.  Nothing had occurred factually  to  alter  or  depart
    from the judge's findings in 2011.

10.  The judge's decision was challenged by the appellant  on  three  bases.
    The first was that the judge had erred in his credibility  findings  in
    that the psychiatric evidence before him  clearly  concluded  that  the
    appellant's  PTSD  and  depression  were  materially  caused   by   his
    experiences in Afghanistan and pre-dated his 2011 appeal.   Dr  Burman-
    Roy had accepted the appellant's mental health conditions  were  caused
    at least in part by his experiences  in  Afghanistan.   The  judge  had
    erred in the way described in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  It was also
    said to be irrelevant taking into account the appellant's mental health
    to say that it had not prevented him from absconding.  Neither this nor
    his ability to instruct an expert in perfect English were  reasons  for
    querying an unchallenged diagnosis of PTSD and depression.

11.  It was also  argued  that  the  judge's  reasoning  for  rejecting  the
    Article 15(c) claim was inadequate in that no substantive reasons  were
    given for rejecting the claim in this regard.  It was also  argued  the
    judge had erred in not referring to the UNHCR's Eligibility  Guidelines
    from August 2018 with regard to the viability of internal relocation in
    Kabul.  Permission was granted on all grounds.

12.  In her submissions Ms Fitzsimmons  adopted  and  developed  the  points
    made in the grounds.  With  regard  to  ground  1,  the  mental  health
    diagnosis went to the issue of the appellant being a sensitive  witness
    before the Secretary of State and the judge and it was relevant to  the
    question of  credibility  how  his  evidence  was  assessed.   It  also
    supported his account of events in  Afghanistan  before  he  fled.   Dr
    Burman-Roy was fully aware of the credibility  landscape  as  could  be
    seen from the report, and reasons were given for the diagnosis  and  an
    explanation that was consistent and scored on the ratings.  The  expert
    had considered matters such as potential malingering and had also taken
    into account the Istanbul Protocol.  He concluded that the  appellant's
    condition was as a result of a situation  of  catastrophic  stress  and
    considered the events as they  impacted  on  him  in  Afghanistan  were
    consistent with the course of events.  He had  fled  Afghanistan  as  a
    minor and was separated from his family and these and  other  potential
    causes were considered but not because of PTSD  which  only  events  of
    Afghanistan would cause.  This was important as all possible causes had
    to be considered.  It was concluded as a consequence that the appellant
    was a vulnerable witness.  It was therefore an objective assessment  by
    the expert who had not just taken the appellant's word for it  but  had
    considered other causes.

13.  As regards humanitarian protection  this  had  been  addressed  in  the
    skeleton argument before the  judge.   The  judge's  paragraph  75  was
    insufficient to deal with the claim.  What had been said in  the  first
    decision of the Tribunal in AS with regard to the EASO evidence was  of
    materiality.

14.  As regards the country evidence and the UNHCR Guidelines, the  decision
    was before the second Tribunal decision in AS but it was still  a  good
    submission  with  regard  to  the  judge's  assessment  of   risk   and
    relocation.  It had been accepted in the second AS decision that mental
    health was very important in Afghan cases and there  was  a  dearth  of
    mental health provision in Afghanistan and the judge's failure to  deal
    with  the  UNHCR  evidence  was  material  and  was  relevant  to   the
    reasonableness of relocation to Kabul.

15.  In his submissions Mr Clarke argued there was  a  significant  flaw  in
    the medical evidence in that it did not  say  that  the  appellant  had
    mental health problems in 2011 and however  there  was  not  enough  to
    underline the findings from 2011.   He  referred  to  paragraph  40  of
    Devaseelan - the requirement that with respect to matters  which  could
    have been before the earlier judge which were now put forward should be
    treated with the greatest circumspection.  It would be less so if there
    was  a good reason and that was claimed to  be  the  medical  evidence.
    But a robust case had been put forward in 2011, and the  appellant  had
    been represented by experienced counsel.

16.  With regard to the scope of the reports, as to whether the  appellant's
    problems were caused by his experiences before 2011  the  judge  quoted
    from  the  medical  evidence  and  clearly  referred  to  the  original
    credibility findings and these were not questioned with regard  to  the
    cause of the PTSD.  Mr Clarke referred to the  medical  report  at  B57
    onwards.  He relied on the authority he had put in of  JL  [2013]  UKUT
    00145 (IAC) and the requirement at paragraph 2  of  the  headnote  that
    those writing medical reports should bear in mind that when an advocate
    wished to rely on their medical report to support the credibility of an
    appellant's account they would be expected to identify  what  about  it
    that afforded support to what the appellant had said and which was  not
    dependent on what the appellant had said to the doctor.   It  was  also
    said that the more diagnosis was dependent on assuming that the account
    given by the appellant was to be believed the less likely it  was  that
    significant weight would be attached to it.  There had been no  medical
    evidence before the expert.  With reference to  traumatic  experiences,
    there  were  clearly  significant  credibility  findings  in  the  2011
    decision and it was relevant to the matters which  the  appellant  said
    had given rise to his mental health issues.

17.  It was surprising that no direct questions had  been  in  terms  as  to
    whether the appellant had mental health problems in  2011  and  whether
    there was enough to undermine those findings.  The judge noted that  as
    the claim was the same as  the  same  as  in  2011  the  findings  were
    reasoned.  He had considered the matter at paragraph 70  after  looking
    at all the evidence and it was therefore not a Mibanga case.  There was
    no previous suggestion of mental health issues.  The findings were open
    to the judge and there was no evidence to suggest mental health  issues
    in 2011 and the experts had not suggested that he had had such  issues.
    It must be questioned therefore what would warrant departure  from  the
    earlier findings and it was sustainable not to depart from  them.   The
    appellant had been able to abscond for three years and to instruct  the
    expert in good  English.   These  were  relevant  considerations.   The
    experts had accepted evidence that  had  been  found  to  be  credible.
    There was no need to go behind the imputed findings.

18.  With regard to ground 2 and the Article 15(c)  issues,  it  was  argued
    that with respect to the home area as  in  the  skeleton  argument  the
    judge had addressed this in connection with Kabul and the grounds  went
    nowhere near challenging that.  This led into ground 3, which had  been
    drafted before the second decision in AS.  In that decision the figures
    that had been disputed were not considered but also the UNHCR  Guidance
    for 2018 and it was known that AS (2) too did not accept that and found
    no Article 15(c) risk in Kabul.  Grounds 2 and 3 therefore did  not  go
    behind the judge's findings.

19.  By way of reply Ms Fitzsimmons argued that the expert  had  been  aware
    of the previous findings but had also said that  his  conclusions  were
    based on objective clinical observations and other  sources.   Read  as
    whole, he  was  not  unaware  of  the  previous  history  and  made  an
    evaluation and addressed the various key  impacts  on  the  appellant's
    life and said they did not explain why he had PTSD now.  This had to be
    engaged with by the judge.  Nor had the  judge  sufficiently  explained
    why the medical evidence was not relevant to credibility.  But  he  had
    not disputed the diagnosis and therefore the appellant would return  to
    Afghanistan with a mental health diagnosis and  this  was  relevant  to
    risk in the home area and to relocation to Kabul.  If there were a risk
    of Article 15(c) ill-treatment  in  the  home  area  the  question  was
    whether the appellant could reasonably relocate to Kabul and that was a
    different test.  There would be a material error of law if the Tribunal
    found the judge had erred with respect to the home area.   With  regard
    to the UNHCR Guidelines it was argued at the time that they were enough
    to show Article 15(c) risk in  Kabul.   The  guidelines  had  not  been
    accepted in the second decision of the Tribunal in AS but were relevant
    to Kabul including mental health issues on relocation.  The grounds  at
    paragraph 18 were broader than just saying that there  was  an  Article
    15(c) risk in Kabul and there was a question of relocation.  These were
    material errors.

20.  I reserved my decision.

21.  I consider that the main issue  of  challenge  in  this  case  is  with
    regard to the judge's findings on the medical evidence, bearing in mind
    the absence of any evidence of mental health problems of the  appellant
    at the time of the earlier appeal hearing in 2011.  The  factual  claim
    of the appellant as regards the risk on return from the Taliban remains
    the same.   The  appellant  was,  as  set  out  above,  found  to  lack
    credibility at the earlier hearing, and the argument before  the  judge
    was that the earlier findings should be departed from as the judge  had
    not had the benefit  of  psychiatric  and  country  evidence  and  that
    therefore his findings should not be followed.

22.  Dr  Burman-Roy  who  is  a  consultant  psychiatrist,  interviewed  the
    appellant on 9 February 2019.  He  stated  at  paragraph  1B  that  the
    information in the report was based on the history provided directly to
    him by the appellant together with his own observations and the  report
    did not rely on material from  any  other  source  unless  specifically
    stated.  He set out the background history and  also  referred  to  the
    sources  of  information  consulted,  which  included  the   First-tier
    Tribunal decision of 30 November 2011.  Having set out the  appellant's
    account of his childhood and family history, Dr Burman-Roy  noted  that
    the appellant stated that he had never had any treatment for his mental
    health difficulties.  He attended intermittent therapy sessions at  the
    South London Refugee Association  between  September  2017  and  August
    2018.  He referred to a number of traumatic experiences  including  the
    loss of his father and the loss of his family and his inability to find
    his family through the Red Cross and the ongoing fear of return.

23.  Dr  Burman-Roy  considered  his  presenting  symptoms  and  history  of
    presenting symptoms first with regard to PTSD and second with regard to
    depression.  He made a diagnosis of severe PTDS and severe  depression.
    He  noted  that  PTSD  and  depression  symptoms  often  co-exist.   He
    considered whether or not the appellant was  feigning  or  exaggerating
    his symptoms and concluded that he was not.  He recommended that should
    the appellant be required to give evidence the impact of his  PTSD  and
    depression should be taken into consideration and whether he should  be
    treated as  a  vulnerable  witness  in  accordance  with  the  relevant
    guidance.  He considered that it was common  for  trauma  survivors  to
    experience memory loss which can lead to recall of events  varying  and
    memories returning or changing with time.  He noted that the  appellant
    reported difficulties with memory and concentration.  He had the mental
    capacity to understand and advise and give clear instructions but might
    at times require further support and time to allow  him  to  understand
    proceedings.

24.  He had described ongoing symptoms of PTSD as  specifically  related  to
    experience of torture in Afghanistan  which  Dr  Burman-Roy  considered
    would be consistent with the course of event in PTSD  as  described  as
    above in the report.  Further matters that are  of  relevance  in  this
    regard were the experience of having to flee to the UK as a  minor  and
    separation from his family,  the  stress  of  his  current  immigration
    status and his previous detention.

25.  I take the  point  made  by  Mr  Clarke  that  this  evidence  did  not
    specifically address the question of the appellant's mental  health  in
    2011 where there was no evidence.  However, I do consider that there is
    clearly sufficient by way of evidence connected to  the  mental  health
    problems that the appellant has and  the  relevance  of  those  to  his
    credibility that the judge erred in law in concluding as  he  did  that
    the fact that the appellant's account had been rejected  and  dismissed
    by a judge of the Tribunal that in effect  that  the  medical  evidence
    could be discounted because Dr Burman-Roy and Dr Ahmad both relied upon
    the factual account given by the  appellant.   The  conclusion  of  the
    judge, that the appellant did have PTSD and depression  though  related
    to other factors totally unconnected with his expressed fear of  return
    to Afghanistan, in my view signally  failed  to  take  account  of  the
    medical evidence and as a  consequence  the  decision  requires  to  be
    remade.

26.  At the same time  there  will  need  to  be  further  consideration  of
    internal relocation including the relevant guidance in that regard  and
    also the Article 15(c) issue, which again received scant  consideration
    from the judge.  That will require a  full  rehearing  of  this  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  To that extent this appeal is allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Dated:  7 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

