
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08733/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 14th May 2021                          |On the 28th June 2021         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                    K A F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.  He was born on 14
July 1985 and claimed asylum in the United Kingdom 16 August 2016.  He is
from Fariq village, near Kirkuk.  His case was that although the area in
which he lived was initially protected by Peshmerga forces, they had left
when ISIS attacked and after that, various Shia Muslim groups including
Hashd Al Shabi ("HAS") had operated in this area, attacking the appellant
and his family for being Kurdish.  The appellant went initially to the
Kurdistan region of Iraq but was unable to live there without a sponsor.
That was in Sulaymaniyah.  He then went on to Erbil, then found an agent to
help him leave Iraq, which he did in January 2016, arriving in the United
Kingdom on 16 August 2016.  He said that he had had his nationality card,
passport and CSID with him but had lost them during the journey at sea
between Turkey and Greece.

The Secretary of State accepted that the appellant is from Iraq and of
Kurdish ethnicity but rejected the remainder of his claim, concluding that
he had not shown that the authorities were unable or unwilling to offer him
protection, that in any event he could relocate to areas within the KRI
including Sulaymaniyah, that he had not shown it would be unreasonable to
expect him to return there nor was it unduly harsh to relocate to a
different part of the KRI.

The appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his claim came in
front of First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan sitting at North Shields on 24
August 2018.  For the reasons set out in a determination promulgated on 28
November 2018, the judge finding that the appellant was a person who needs
to seek replacement of the CSID and passport [31] and that the appellant
could obtain or seek to obtain a copy or replacement of his passport from
the Iraqi Embassy in London or a consulate, finding similarly that he could
obtain a replacement CSID [33].

The judge did not accept that the appellant had lost contact with his
family in the KRI nor that he did not know the whereabouts of his family
nor did he accept that the appellant had made no meaningful attempt to
contact his family since arriving in the UK.  He concluded that it would be
practical for the appellant to travel from Baghdad to the KRI as he would
have relocation support from the UK to facilitate that journey and that he
has family support available to him in the KRI and thus he could safely
relocate there.  He found that even if the appellant was not from the KRI
he could enter, that he would have family support there and be able to
remain without risk.  He therefore dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge had
erred in his finding that the appellant would be able to obtain a
replacement CSID either from the London Embassy or from the Civil Status
Affairs Office in his home governorate of Kirkuk, failing properly to take
into account the country guidance decision AAH [2018].  Permission was
granted and the matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
sitting at North Shields on 3 May 2019.  For the reasons given in his
decision of 28 May 2019, the decision of the First-tier was set aside in
part.  A copy of that decision is attached.

Materially, in that decision, the judge said as follows:

"Notice of Decision

1.   There is an error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Buchanan;

2.   the findings made with that decision shall stand save that the issue
of being able to obtain a CSID shall be revisited at a resumed hearing in
the Upper Tribunal;

3.   the appellant shall file and serve any documents that he seeks to rely
upon fourteen days before the resumed hearing.  That should include a
skeleton argument;

4.   the respondent shall file and serve any further documents that are
relied upon seven days before the resumed hearing.  That should include a
skeleton argument;

5.   a Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required for the resumed hearing."

Owing to the need to make a transfer order and subsequently the COVID
pandemic, the matter was not relisted for hearing until it came before me
on 10 February 2021.  Unfortunately, that hearing had to be adjourned owing
to a failure to book an interpreter.

The Hearing

The hearing was scheduled to be heard by Skype for Business.  There were
significant problems in the appellant connecting to the hearing.  He was
not in Miss Brakaj's offices and despite several attempts to connect,
although he could see and hear us and we could see him, we could not hear
him.  Despite the assistance of the interpreter, we were unable to get the
video connection working.  The appellant was, however, able to join by
telephone and he proceeded to give evidence on that basis.  No objection
was raised to that although taking evidence over a telephone link from an
appellant is less than ideal.

I did canvas the possibility of adjourning the hearing again, given also
that the appellant would have to comment on photographs in the bundle which
he did not have with him.  We were, however, able to proceed through
identifying the photographs by reference to page number and the appellant
was able to comment on them. In the event, little of what the appellant
said was controversial.

The appellant confirmed that the photographs showed him initially at the
Iraqi Consulate in Manchester in May 2019, the second set were taken in
March 2020 when he went on his second visit to the consulate.

The appellant said that the consulate had said they would not be able to
help him and that they had had difficulties with the Home Office in the
past in helping Iraqis with their documentation, so they had stopped doing
so.  He said he gave them his date of birth, name and place of birth but
they would not help him and was told that in order to help him they would
need proof from him.

The appellant said he had not been in contact with family since 2018
although he had tried via a friend of him and by email to various
organisations but without any response.

In cross-examination the appellant said that he could not remember the page
reference for the entry in the family book in Iraq and that he had never
known it off by heart, it was not in use all the time.  He said that he did
have a CSID document and that he had lost his documents in travelling.  He
had tried in many ways to reach family or friends throughout Facebook and
social media, in particular through a specific website Kirkuk-Daquq, the
latter being a small town near his home village.  He said that he and his
brother had got passports in the first place and they had wanted to go to
Iran with their father to get medical treatment but they did not do so.

Miss Everett submitted that the appellant's credibility was in issue.  She
submitted that there was a difference in this case from that in SMO, given
that he had had documents in the past and would be having them replaced.
She submitted that caution should be applied in assessing whether the
appellant had forgotten the family page number, the importance of which was
stressed in SMO.  She submitted it was not surprising the consulate were
not particularly helpful, given the limited information the appellant had
provided them and that they would have needed further information.  She
submitted it was not plausible that there was nobody in Iraq who could
assist him or that he would not have ways of re-contacting, his family
having left the country.  Relying on SMO at [431], she submitted that there
is a distinction here and the appellant would be able to get the relevant
documents on return.

I gave time to Miss Brakaj to produce written submissions, given that at
this point her laptop was causing problems and she did not have access to
her files.

In summary, Miss Brakaj submits that there is no reason to doubt the
appellant's evidence that he attended the consulate in Manchester and had
been able to obtain assistance.  She submitted that this was difficult,
given that the appellant was from Kirkuk as it had moved over to the new
INID system which replaces CSID (see SMO at 383).  She submitted further
that in the June 2020 CPIN it shows (Annex 1) that consulates and embassies
are unable to issue CSID documents and could only operate a post box
service.

Miss Brakaj submits further that in order to obtain an replacement ID
document, the appellant would need to try to obtain an INID, the only
appropriate issuing body being the Kirkuk CSA Office and, as the evidence
from UNHCR shows, if has difficulties even in obtaining documents for
people who were in the camps within the governorate of Kirkuk itself.

On that basis, Miss Brakaj submitted that the appellant would be unable to
obtain a CSID either by proxy in the United Kingdom or on return to Baghdad
and, relying on paragraph 16 of SMO, if returned to Baghdad on a laissez
passer he would not be able to leave the airport or travel to Kirkuk in
order to obtain documentation and would be at risk in doing so.  (See SMO
at paragraphs 430 and 431).

Miss Brakaj submitted that there was in reality no practical difference
between somebody who had had documents in the past and who had not.  The
differentiation in SMO was whether somebody had actually retained access to
the original documentation but that is not the case here.  She submitted
that the situation has changed since SMO  as Kirkuk governorate, having
rolled out new INID machines, are no longer issuing CSID documentation and
thus whether he is in contact with his family was now no longer relevant
as, knowing the page number of his family book and the number of his CSID
would not assist as he would still need to apply for an INID, which could
not be issued without him being present in Kirkuk and cannot be issued by
proxy.

Miss Brakaj submitted that given that there was such a large displacement
of people of the same area his inability to contact family was not
incredible but considered overall was reasonably likely.

The Law

It is for the appellant to show that he has a well-founded fear of
persecution in Iraq or that he would on return be subjected to such serious
ill-treatment as would constitute ill-treatment of sufficient severity to
engage Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention; or, that he is entitled to
humanitarian protection by operation of Article 15(c) of the Qualification
Directive.

The starting point in this case is SMO and the guidance given in that case,
in particular in this case at Sections B and C:


        B.    DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)
        36.    Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR)
        will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad. The
        Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United
        Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a current or
        expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a Laissez Passer.
         37.    No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in
        possession of one of these documents.
         38.    In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq)
        and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
        Civ 1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed
        by reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of
        a current or expired Iraqi passport or a Laissez passer, if the
        Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account
        of a lack of any of those documents.
        39.    Where P is returned to Iraq on a Laissez Passer or expired
        passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of
        return by reason of not having a current passport.




        C.   CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION
        40.   The CSID is being replaced with a new biometric Iraqi National
        Identity Card - the INID.  As a general matter, it is necessary  for
        an individual to have one of these two documents in  order  to  live
        and travel within Iraq without encountering treatment or  conditions
        which are contrary to Article 3 ECHR.   Many of the  checkpoints  in
        the country are manned by Shia militia who are not controlled by the
        GOI and are unlikely to permit an individual without a  CSID  or  an
        INID  to  pass.   A  valid  Iraqi  passport  is  not  recognised  as
        acceptable proof of identity for internal travel.
        41.    A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the absence of a
        CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is not,  in  any
        event,  a  recognised  identity  document.   There  is  insufficient
        evidence to show that returnees are  issued  with  a  'certification
        letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any such document  would
        be recognised internally as acceptable proof of identity.
         42.    Notwithstanding the phased transition to  the  INID  within
        Iraq, replacement CSIDs  remain  available  through  Iraqi  Consular
        facilities.   Whether  an  individual  will  be  able  to  obtain  a
        replacement CSID whilst in the UK depends on the documents available
        and, critically, the availability of the volume and  page  reference
        of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq, which system  continues  to
        underpin the Civil Status Identity process.  Given the importance of
        that  information,  most  Iraqi  citizens  will  recall   it.   That
        information may also be obtained from family members, although it is
        necessary to consider whether such relatives are on the father's  or
        the mother's side because the registration system is patrilineal.
         43.    Once in Iraq, it remains the case that an individual is
        expected to attend their local CSA office in order to obtain a
        replacement document.  All CSA offices have now re-opened, although
        the extent to which records have been destroyed by the conflict with
        ISIL is unclear, and is likely to vary significantly depending on
        the extent and intensity of the conflict in the area in question.
        44.    An individual returnee who is not from Baghdad is not  likely
        to be able to obtain a replacement document there, and certainly not
        within a reasonable time.   Neither  the  Central  Archive  nor  the
        assistance facilities for IDPs are likely  to  render  documentation
        assistance to an undocumented returnee.
        45.    The likelihood of obtaining a replacement  identity  document
        by the use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on return to Iraq, has
        reduced due to the introduction of the INID  system.   In  order  to
        obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local CSA office  in
        person to enrol their biometrics, including  fingerprints  and  iris
        scans.  The CSA offices in which INID terminals have been  installed
        are unlikely - as a result of the phased  replacement  of  the  CSID
        system - to issue a CSID, whether to an individual in person or to a
        proxy.   The reducing number of CSA offices in which INID  terminals
        have not been installed will continue to issue CSIDs to  individuals
        and their proxies upon production of the necessary information.

I am satisfied that removal in this case is feasible as the appellant will
be able to obtain a laissez passer, given the preserved findings of the
First-tier Tribunal that he has contact with family in Iraq who would be
able to support him.  I am satisfied that he would on that basis be able to
get one or more of the documents listed in the June 2020 CPIN at 2.6.24 or
that family would be able to provide assistance of the sort referred to at
2.6.25 to enable the appellant to obtain a laissez passer. As he was
formerly resident of Kirkuk, outside the KRI, removal would be to Baghdad,
and this would be feasible.

Turning next to documentation, in this case, there is a preserved finding
that (First-tier Tribunal Decision at [31]) that A "left Iraq with a full
set of documents, including his passport, CSID, identity card and birth
certificate." It therefore follows that he needs replacements.  The judge
also concluded [32] that the appellant would be able to get a replacement
CSID from his home governorate, accepted to be Kirkuk [33].  The judge also
found that it was unreasonably harsh to expect him to relocate to Baghdad
[36] and that as he has family support in KRI, he can go there and it would
not be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.

The appellant has, I accept, now attended the Iraqi Consulate on two
occasions and has not been able to obtain documentation but whether he
provided the correct information is in dispute, as is whether the consulate
would be able, in any event, to assist in obtaining a CSID.

The appellant's circumstances are similar to those of the appellant SMO in
that decision as noted at [429] to [431]. In particular,

         431.     In any event, as we have noted, matters have moved on as
         the CSID is being phased out and replaced by the INID.  If, as
         appears to be the case, the judge in the FtT concluded that the
         appellant would be able to use a proxy to obtain a replacement CSID
         from the CSA office in Kirkuk, we cannot be sure that this
         represents the position in 2019.  It is likely, to our mind, that
         the CSA office in Kirkuk has an INID terminal and that it would not
         be willing to issue a CSID to the appellant through a proxy.  In
         the circumstances, we consider that there must be further findings
         made regarding this appellant's access to or ability to obtain a
         CSID card.  In the event that he does not have access to an
         existing CSID card and is unable to obtain a replacement whilst he
         is in the UK, we think it likely that his return to Iraq would be
         in breach of Article 3 ECHR.  As we have explained, we do not
         consider that he would be able to obtain either a CSID or an INID
         in Baghdad because he is not from that city.

I am satisfied that it would not be possible to obtain an INID card by
proxy as personal attendance is required for enrolment of fingerprints -
see paragraphs 2.6.16 to 2.6.19 of the Home Office's Country Policy and
Information Note "Iraq: Internal relocation, civil documentation and
returns" of June 2020 (June 2020 CPIN").

 The UT was not persuaded in SMO [383] that consulates would no longer be
issuing CSID cards but it accepted they could not issue INID cards.

Since then, further information has come to light. In the June 2020 CPIN,
the following is noted:

    2.6.15 Since SMO was promulgated in December 2019 further information
    regarding the issuance of CSIDs in the UK has been obtained by the Home
    Office in April 2020 [see Annex I]. When asked to describe the process
    of obtaining a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in London the Returns
    Logistics department stated:'CSID cards are being phased out and
    replaced by INID (Iraq National Identification) cards. It is not
    currently possible to apply for an INID card outside of Iraq. As a
    result, the Iraqi embassy in London are advising their nationals in the
    UK to apply instead for a 'Registration Document (1957)' which they can
    use to apply for other documents such as passports or an INID card once
    they have returned to Iraq. 'The registration document (1957) must be
    applied for on the applicant's behalf by a nominated representative in
    Iraq. In order to start the application, the individual requiring
    documentation would normally provide at least one copy of a national
    identity document [see paragraph 2.6.24 for list of national identity
    documents] and complete a power of attorney (to nominate a
    representative in Iraq) at the Iraqi embassy along with the embassy
    issued application forms. If they have no copies of identity documents
    they also would need to complete a British power of attorney validated
    by the FCO and provide parents' names, place and date of birth to their
    nominated representative in Iraq .'Once issued the nominated
    representative will send the registration document (1957) to the
    applicant in the UK. The process takes 1-2 months. 'The HO cannot apply
    for documentation other than Laissez Passers on someone's behalf but
    the embassy is willing to check to see if the individual already holds
    documents and provide copies if necessary

    2.6.16 Based on the above information, it is highly unlikely that an
    individual would be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy while
    in the UK. Instead a person would need to apply for a registration
    document (1957) and would then apply for an INID upon return to their
    local CSA office in Iraq. [emphasis added]

I find no sufficient evidence that CSID cards are being issued centrally if
the CSA office for the relevant area has moved over to INID cards.  Given
what was noted by the UT in SMO at [431], and in the absence of any
material tending to show the contrary, I find it would not be possible for
the appellant, even with the assistance of family, to obtain a replacement
CSID and he could not obtain an INID without travelling to Kirkuk which,
absent a CSID or INID would not be possible.

These findings are, however, predicated on a return to Baghdad but no
submissions have been made that this would not be the means of removal;
indeed, it is the unchallenged basis on which the First-tier Tribunal made
its decision ( see paragraph 30 thereof).

The appellant's account of the Consulate explaining that they could not
help him is to an extent consistent with this but is lacking in detail. I
do not accept, given the other negative credibility findings, that the
appellant was fully open with the Consulate about the evidence available to
him, but in any event, even had he given full details of his circumstances,
relevant volume and page reference of the Family Book, that would not, in
the light of the new evidence from the June 2020 CPIN have resulted in him
being able to obtain a replacement CSID, or to be issued with an INID.

But in any event, assuming that appellant has the ability to obtain a 1957
Registration Document through family in Iraq, which is a reasonable
assumption given the preserved finding that he has family support there
but, that will only get him as far as Baghdad.

Given the preserved findings that it would be unreasonable to expect him to
relocate to Baghdad, and the inability to obtain a CSID or INID, he cannot
relocate to the KRI.

Given also the acceptance that this would result in his situation in
Baghdad being sufficient to engage Article 3 of the Human Rights
Convention.   There is, however, insufficient material to demonstrate that
any ill treatment is on account of a convention reason.  Accordingly, I am
satisfied that the appeal falls to be dismissed on Refugee Convention
grounds but falls to be allowed on humanitarian protection and human rights
grounds.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set aside in part.

The decision is remade:

      a) Dismissing the appeal on refugee grounds

      b) Allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds

      c) Allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 22 June 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

