

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08298/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 September 2017                   |On 20 September 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     AKA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify AKA. This direction applies to, amongst  others,
       all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
       rise to Contempt of Court proceedings. I do so in order to  preserve
       the anonymity of AKA as this is a protection claim.

    2. The Respondent refused  the  application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
       protection on 25 July 2016. His appeal against this was dismissed by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Bagral ("the Judge") following  a  hearing
       on 6 January 2017.

The grant of permission


   3. Tribunal Judge Mailer granted permission to appeal (19 June  2017)  as
      it is arguable that the Judge materially erred in;
          1) failing to consider YL  v  SSHD  2014  EWCA  Civ  450  properly
             regarding the weight to be attached to the screening interview,


   2) failing to consider and understand background evidence material to his
      lack of knowledge of Christianity, and
   3) finding the account implausible  as  it  is  not  consistent,  despite
      saying if it is true then his father's behaviour is plausible.


Appellant's position

   4. Mr O'Ryan relied on his written grounds (summarised at [3] above).  He
      identified the key passage in YL was at [19] and was supported by JA v
      SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 450 at [24]. The  background  evidence  from  the
      Danish  Refugee  Council  noted  the  difficulties  those  who  sought
      information  about  Christianity  had   in   Iran.   Consistency   and
      plausibility have been conflated.


Respondent's position

   5. It was submitted in the rule 24 notice (11 July 2017) that  the  Judge
      directed herself appropriately and made findings open to her.


    6. Mrs Pettersen submitted that even if the Judge erred  regarding  the
       weight to be attached to discrepancies arising  from  the  screening
       interview,  she  gave  numerous  reasons  for  finding  against  the
       Appellant given the discrepancies regarding the chronology over  his
       broken leg, and regarding the evidence of his contact with the  girl
       he had befriended.


Judge's findings

   7. It was found as follows


          "28. While there is no evidence the Appellant has  undergone  the
          formal ritual of Baptism, he claims that he decided to  become  a
          Christian in Iran having  become  disillusioned  with  Islam  and
          after reading a section of a book about Christianity and learning
          about it through a Christian girl he befriended at the bazaar.


          29. If the Appellant's claim is true  then  his  account  of  his
          father's violent behaviour is plausible  in  a  country  such  as
          Iran. However, I consider that the  Appellant's  account  is  not
          plausible as he has  not  given  a  consistent  account  of  past
          events.


          30. The Appellant was first interviewed by the Respondent  on  29
          January 2016 - a day after his arrival. He said that he  came  to
          the UK to claim asylum so it is reasonable  to  assume  that  his
          reasons for doing so would be at the forefront of  his  mind.  He
          did not claim that  he  suffered  from  any  physical  or  mental
          impairment. When asked to briefly explain the basis of his  claim
          he stated that he had changed his religion  because  he  fell  in
          love a Christian  girl.  He  claimed  that  he  had  changed  his
          religion 2  -  3  days  before  he  left,  and  that  his  father
          threatened to kill him.


          31. While I acknowledge that this initial screening process  does
          not require applicants to advance the full basis of his claim,  I
          am entitled to take into account what the Appellant said about it
          when first  asked  to  do  so  shortly  after  his  arrival.  The
          Appellant's initial  claim  that  he  had  changed  his  religion
          because he had fallen in love  with  a  Christian  girl  did  not
          correlate to the account he gave during the substantive interview
          or in evidence.  While  the  Appellant  accepts  in  his  witness
          statement that what he said in  this  regard  was  incorrect,  he
          gives no explanation for  the  inconsistency.  He  did,  however,
          claim to have said at interview that he loved her as a friend.  I
          do not accept that. The Appellant does not claim  to  have  faced
          any difficulties with the interpreter at that interview and there
          are no reasons why his claims would not be accurately recorded. I
          am satisfied that the Appellant's explanation  is  not  true  and
          this undermines his credibility.


          32. I am satisfied that the Appellant's claim that he changed his
          religion 2 - 3 days before he left Iran  is  also  not  true.  In
          cross-examination the  Appellant  claimed  that  he  changed  his
          religion a month before he left and further claimed that (sic) is
          father found the book one to two months before he left Iran.  The
          inconsistency is obvious and it is not credible,  if  his  latter
          claims are true, that he was  able  to  remain  living  with  his
          violent father who had threatened to kill him for a period of one
          to two months without being subjected to serious harm.


          33. There was a real likelihood that  the  Appellant  would  have
          been so given his claim that his leg was broken during the course
          of a severe beating following an argument with his  father  about
          religion, but the Appellant has not been consistent relating that
          event either. It is the Appellant's claim that his leg was broken
          when he was 15 or 16 years old. In evidence he confirmed that  he
          was 16. Whether he was 15 or 16 is immaterial, but  whichever  it
          is his leg was broken in around 2010/2011.  When  interviewed  in
          2016, however, he claimed that his leg was broken "one year ago";
          which must have been in 2015. That is  not  consistent  with  his
          claim that his leg was broken into 2010/2011. I do not accept the
          explanation that he was referring to when his leg stopped hurting
          which was a year ago. That  evidence  is  not  supported  by  his
          response to question 3 when he was specifically asked if he had a
          broken leg in the past, and is further undermined by his claim at
          question  153  that  his  leg  was  broken  two  years  ago.   An
          examination of the Appellant's account thus reveals that  he  has
          proffered three timescales of when he claims his leg  was  broken
          which significantly undermines his credibility. Furthermore,  the
          Appellant claimed that he met the girl one or  two  years  before
          his leg was broken, which undermines his  claim  in  his  witness
          statement that he met her after his leg was broken.


          34. The Appellant's account of his level  of  contact  with  this
          girl is also varied. At interview he claimed that they met  about
          three times a month, sometimes even  more,  but  in  his  witness
          statement this diverged to sometimes  "twice  a  week,  sometimes
          there would be a break of maybe two months".


          35. The Appellant as asked about the book he  borrowed  from  his
          friend at interview. He claims to have  borrowed  the  book  five
          years ago  and  it  remained  in  his  possession  until  it  was
          discovered by his father either 1 or 2  months  or  2  -  3  days
          before he left Iran. I do not believe that if the  Appellant  was
          in possession of this book which helped to mould his interest  in
          Christianity that, he could not initially remember the  title  of
          the book; where he got it from; who  gave  it  to  him  and  what
          happened to it. A break in  interview  then  followed  for  about
          twenty-five minutes following which the Appellant was asked about
          the book again. In the meantime, the record shows that his memory
          had remarkably improved as he then claimed that he  obtained  the
          book from his friend five years ago.


          36. The Appellant's evidence as to how this  girl  practiced  her
          religion and his own stated intentions as to how he would  do  so
          if returned are  further  undermined  by  his  evidence.  In  his
          witness statement he claimed that as far as he was aware the girl
          and her family practised their religion at home. This changed  to
          a firm indication in re-examination that she attended  church  in
          Iran. That undermines his evidence that he was  not  aware  of  a
          church he could visit in Iran, and his evidence  to  me  that  he
          would attend church if now returned to Iran, undermines his claim
          that if he had been aware of a church in Iran he would  not  have
          attended because of the dangers of doing so. The Appellant cannot
          have it both ways and this evidence in my  view  is  inconsistent
          and nonsensical.


          37. Notwithstanding the Appellant's claim that he has  reached  a
          fundamental decision to convert to Christianity, his reasons  for
          doing  so  are  particularly  vague.  He  says  that  he   became
          interested in Christianity before he met the girl in the  bazaar.
          He states that it is a religion free of violence and hatred,  but
          when asked at interview on several occasions how he became  aware
          of Christianity  his  initial  responses  failed  to  answer  the
          question. It was only after several attempts to extract an answer
          did the Appellant vaguely claimed that he  became  interested  in
          Christianity because he had seen many Christian  people  in  Iran
          wearing crosses  and  looking  peaceful  -  see  [B12].  This  is
          fanciful to say the least.


          38. The Appellant accepts through Mr O'Ryan that his knowledge of
          the Christian faith is limited.  The  Appellant's  knowledge  was
          tested during the asylum interview where he was  asked  questions
          about Christianity. While the Appellant was able to  answer  some
          basic questions his level of  knowledge  was  not  indicative  of
          someone had been interested in the faith for several years.


          39. I have included in my consideration an assessment of the  two
          photographs taken of the Appellant  in  attendance  at  a  church
          service and a third of him standing next to a  priest,  but  they
          are of little to no probative value. While they purport  to  show
          the Appellant had been in attendance  at  a  service,  I  do  not
          accept that they are evidence of his interest in Christianity and
          neither are the copies of church notices  and  literature.  I  am
          satisfied in  the  context  of  the  evidence  overall  that  the
          photographs/church materials (which the  Appellant  cannot  read)
          have been produced solely to bolster a false claim."


Authorities quoted (my underlining)

    8. JA states in [24]


          "In the absence of a statutory provision of the kind to be  found
          in section 78 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, I  do
          not think that in proceedings of this kind the tribunal  has  the
          power to exclude relevant evidence. It  does,  however,  have  an
          obligation to consider  with  care  how  much  weight  is  to  be
          attached to it, having regard to the circumstances  in  which  it
          came  into  existence.  That  is  particularly   important   when
          considering the significance to be attached to answers  given  in
          the course of an interview and recorded only by the person asking
          questions on behalf of the Secretary of State. Such evidence  may
          be entirely reliable, but there is obviously  room  for  mistakes
          and misunderstandings, even  when  the  person  being  questioned
          speaks English fluently. The possibility of error becomes greater
          when the person being interviewed requires  the  services  of  an
          interpreter, particularly if the interpreter  is  not  physically
          present. It becomes greater still if the person being interviewed
          is vulnerable by reason of age or  infirmity.  The  written  word
          acquires a degree of certainty which  the  spoken  word  may  not
          command. The "anxious scrutiny" which all  claimants  for  asylum
          are entitled to expect begins with a careful consideration of the
          weight that should properly be attached to answers given in their
          interviews. In the present case the decision-maker would need  to
          bear in mind the age and background of the applicant, his limited
          command of English and the circumstances under which the  initial
          interview and screening interview took place."


    9. YL states at [19]


          "When a person seeks asylum in the United Kingdom he  is  usually
          made the subject of  a  'screening  interview'  (called,  perhaps
          rather confusingly a "Statement of Evidence Form -SEF  Screening-
          ). The purpose of that is to establish the general nature of  the
          claimant's case so that the Home Office official can  decide  how
          best to process it. It is concerned with the country  of  origin,
          means of travel, circumstances of arrival in the United  Kingdom,
          preferred  language  and  other  matters  that  might  help   the
          Secretary of State understand the case. Asylum seekers are  still
          expected to  tell  the  truth  and  answers  given  in  screening
          interviews can be  compared  fairly  with  answers  given  later.
          However, it has to be remembered that a  screening  interview  is
          not done to establish in detail the reasons  a  person  gives  to
          support  her  claim  for  asylum.  It  would  not   normally   be
          appropriate for the  Secretary  of  State  to  ask  supplementary
          questions or to entertain elaborate  answers  and  an  inaccurate
          summary by  an  interviewing  officer  at  that  stage  would  be
          excusable. Further the screening interview may well be  conducted
          when the asylum seeker is  tired  after  a  long  journey.  These
          things have to be considered when any inconsistencies between the
          screening interview and the later case are evaluated."


Discussion

  10. I am not satisfied that the Judge materially erred in her treatment of
      the Appellant's screening interview. She was aware  of  his  age,  his
      journey details, and the limitations of its' scope. She  was  entitled
      to place some weight on it and was entitled not  to  exclude  it.  The
      weight she attached was a matter for her. The Judge did precisely what
      she was required to do as guided by JA and YL. Even if the  Judge  did
      err regarding her consideration of the screening interview, I  am  not
      satisfied that it was material, as, if one excludes the  discrepancies
      that  arose  from  the  screening  interview,  there   were   multiple
      discrepancies within the rest of the evidence that were  not  infected
      by her consideration of the screening interview.


  11. I am not satisfied that the Judge materially erred in her treatment of
      the Danish evidence.  It  was  acknowledged  that  his  knowledge  was
      limited. The Judge was entitled to find that his  level  of  knowledge
      was not indicative of someone who had been interested in the faith for
      several  years.  That  is   particularly   so   given   the   multiple
      discrepancies highlighted in the decision regarding when he first  met
      the girl and what piqued his interest in Christianity.


  12. I am not satisfied that the Judge materially erred in saying  that  if
      the Appellant's claim is true then his account of his father's violent
      behaviour is plausible in a country such as Iran. That is not  putting
      the cart before the  horse  as  alleged.  It  is  merely  stating  the
      obvious.  The Judge has also not materially erred in saying  that  the
      account is implausible as it is not consistent as consistency is  part
      of the assessment of credibility, and that assessment feeds  into  the
      assessment of plausibility.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
19 September 2017
