
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08623/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 April 2018                     |On 30 April 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     RM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Warren, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Chapman (the judge), promulgated on 21 December  2017,  in
         which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's
         decision dated 23 August 2017 refusing his protection claim.




   Background

      2. The following is a summary of the appellant's protection claim. The
         appellant is a Kurdish national of Iran, born in January  2000.  He
         lived in a village near Piranshar Town, in north-western Iran  with
         his father, who is a farmer,  his  mother,  a  housewife,  and  his
         younger sister. The appellant also has a paternal uncle  who  lives
         in Piranshar Town. The appellant  did  not  attend  school  and  is
         illiterate. Although raised as a Muslim  he  no  longer  associates
         himself with religion, although he maintains a belief in God.  When
         he was 16 he became involved with the  Kurdistan  Free  Life  Party
         (PJAK) through Soran, a friend who lived  on  the  next  farm.  The
         Iranian authorities regard the PJAK as  a  terrorist  organisation.
         The appellant's role in the organisation was to purchase shoes  and
         food for the party and to publish and distribute leaflets.  On  one
         occasion the appellant bought 10 pairs of  shoes,  and  another  10
         pairs of shoes on another occasion some months later.

      3. The appellant would often walk to  Piranshar  Town  to  sell  dairy
         products  and  would  sometimes  stay  with  his   paternal   uncle
         overnight. Around the end of September 2016  or  the  beginning  of
         October 2016 the appellant was staying  with  his  uncle  when  his
         mother telephoned to say that Soran had been arrested and his house
         searched by the authorities. She then telephoned to  say  that  the
         authorities had been to their house because Soran had disclosed his
         involvement with the PJAK. The  appellant's  uncle  placed  him  in
         hiding in his orchard for around 3 days and arranged for  an  agent
         to take him out of the country. The appellant was taken  to  Turkey
         and then to Bulgaria, where he was fingerprinted on 29 October 2016
         and 30 December 2016, and then to France. The appellant arrived  in
         the UK on 10 March 2017 and claimed asylum the following day.

      4. The respondent accepted the appellant's age (he was 17 years  old),
         and his ethnicity and nationality. The respondent did  not  however
         accept that the appellant was involved in  the  PJAK  and  rejected
         this aspect of his account as incredible. Because the appellant had
         not spoken openly of his rejection of Islam the respondent did  not
         accept that the appellant had renounced his faith in Iran, although
         it was accepted that his refusal  to  abide  by  the  Muslim  faith
         amounted to a renunciation of it.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  considered  a
         bundle of documents containing, inter alia, two witness  statements
         from the appellant and a country expert  report  authored  by  Roya
         Kashefi, dated 7 December 2017.

      6. The judge set out a summary of the  appellant's  protection  claim,
         the reasons for the respondent's refusal of that claim,  and  noted
         the documents  before  him.  The  judge  reminded  himself  of  the
         principles set out in AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the
         Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123  concerning   child   and
         vulnerable appellants, the Practice Direction 'First-tier and Upper
         Tribunal Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive  Witnesses',  issued
         on 30 October 2008, and the joint Presidential Guidance Note  No  2
         of 2010. The judge additionally recorded the submissions  from  the
         appellant's representative in respect of UNHCR and other guidelines
         to be followed when assessing the credibility of  child  witnesses,
         and the influence that can be exerted on them by agents.

      7. The judge summarised the ill-treatment meted  out  by  the  Iranian
         authorities to those associated or perceived to be associated  with
         the PJAK. At paragraph 45 the judge referred to background evidence
         supporting the appellant's description of the manner in  which  the
         organisation operated. At paragraph 46  the  judge  considered  the
         expert country report noting that the appellant's  account  of  his
         life was said to be in keeping with available  evidence  about  the
         region in which he lived. The judge set out  an  extract  from  the
         expert report  indicating  that  the  appellant  displayed  a  good
         knowledge of the PJAK which was not readily available  or  was  not
         public  knowledge.  At  paragraph  47  the  judge  noted  that  the
         appellant's account was consistent with the background  and  expert
         evidence and, on that basis, his account was plausible.

      8.  The  judge  nevertheless  found  the  appellant's  account  to  be
         incredible. At paragraph  48  the  judge  set  out  8  reasons  for
         doubting the appellant's claim. In summary,  the  judge  found  the
         appellant's account of his involvement with the PJAK  to  be  "very
         generic", that the appellant failed to give a detailed  description
         of his activities with the organisation  or  the  reasons  for  his
         involvement, that he failed to explain how he was able to transport
         10 pairs of shoes and an amount of food without  drawing  attention
         to himself, but he did not satisfactorily explain how he  was  able
         to distribute leaflets at night without this coming to his families
         attention, that he  did  not  give  adequate  details  relating  to
         Soran's arrest, and that there was no adequate  explanation  as  to
         why the authorities did not look for him at his uncle's house.  The
         appellant's account of why he was at  his  uncle's  house  and  the
         frequency with which he went there was said to be inconsistent. The
         judge was not satisfied that the appellant's uncle would  not  have
         told him to claim asylum in the  1st  safe  country,  or  with  the
         appellant's explanation how he was able to locate  the  same  agent
         after being released from detention in Bulgaria. Finally, the judge
         held against the appellant the absence of any explanation as to how
         his poor and uneducated family was able to find the  money  to  pay
         for an agent at short notice.

      9. Having found the appellant's claim incredible, the  protection  and
         article 3 human rights appeals were dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the parties' submissions

     10. The grounds  contend  that,  despite  paying  lip  service  to  the
         relevant guidance on assessing  evidence  from  minors,  the  judge
         failed to  apply  that  guidance  when  assessing  the  appellant's
         evidence. The grounds further contend that the judge's  conclusions
         were unduly speculative, that the judge  drew  adverse  credibility
         findings in circumstances where the appellant was never notified of
         the judge's concerns, and that some of the  judge's  reasoning  was
         not supported by the evidence before him.

     11. In their oral submissions Ms Warren and Mr Clarke went through each
         of the 8 reasons identified by the judge in paragraph 48 to support
         his   adverse   credibility   findings.   I   indicated   to    the
         representatives at the end of the hearing that I was satisfied  the
         judge's decision was unsafe and that the  case  would  need  to  be
         remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided afresh.

Discussion

     12. In determining whether the judge made material legal errors in  his
         assessment of the appellant's credibility I caution myself  against
         substituting my own view of the  appellant's  evidence.  I  further
         remind myself that the judge heard oral evidence from the appellant
         and is best placed to make a credibility assessment. It is only  if
         the judge has reached material findings in  a  procedurally  unfair
         manner, or has taken account of irrelevant considerations or failed
         to accord weight to relevant factors, or reached a decision that no
         reasonable judge properly directing  himself  could  have  reached,
         that I am entitled to set aside his decision.

     13. In paragraph 48(1) the judge drew an adverse inference on the basis
         that the appellant's account of his involvement with the  PJAK  was
         "very generic" and less detailed than his account of his journey to
         the UK. The judge provides, by way of example in  paragraph  48(2),
         the unsatisfactory explanation given by the appellant as to why  he
         was persuaded to participate in PJAK activities given that it would
         put himself and his family at significant risk. The judge does  not
         actually make any reference to the appellant's evidence in  support
         of his finding. In  his  asylum  interview,  at  question  40,  the
         appellant was asked why he wanted to join the party. He  gave  four
         distinct reasons; the party "looked after nature", it looked  after
         the Kurdish people, it supported equality between  men  and  women,
         and it  did  not  want  any  borders  between  the  four  parts  of
         Kurdistan. The appellant was not asked any follow-up question about
         the risks involved in joining the PJAK  either  to  himself  or  in
         respect of his family. The appellant was later asked  how  he  felt
         when he saw and heard information transmitted on a  PJAK  satellite
         channel, and he answered, "I  felt  very  discomfortable  [sic],  I
         wanted to do anything against Iran." The appellant  later  referred
         to the oppression of the Kurds by the Iranian regime (question 64).
         In his statement dated 28 June 2017 the appellant referred  to  the
         oppression of Kurds by the Iranian government and the desire to get
         freedom for the eastern  part  of  Kurdistan  (paragraph  13),  and
         discussions about human rights, women's rights and  Kurdish  rights
         (paragraph 16). The appellant explained that this was very  new  to
         him and he wanted to get closer to these issues. The appellant  was
         never asked why he joined the party given  the  potential  risk  to
         himself and his family  in  either  his  asylum  interview  or,  it
         appears, at the appeal hearing. Nor is it apparent from the face of
         the determination that the  judge  raised  this  concern  with  the
         appellant. In HA and TD v SSHD [2010] CSIH 28 the Scottish Court of
         Session indicated, at 8, that, "As an expert body, the Tribunal  is
         entitled to reject evidence notwithstanding that the  evidence  has
         not been challenged before it. Fairness may however require  it  to
         disclose its concerns about  the  evidence  so  as  to  afford  the
         parties an opportunity to address them." I am  satisfied  that  the
         Judge acted in a procedurally unfair way by failing to disclose his
         concerns  relating  to  the  risks  flowing  from  the  appellant's
         involvement in a prescribed organisation and thereby depriving  the
         appellant of an opportunity of responding to  these  concerns.  Nor
         has the judge adequately explained what  was  unsatisfactory  about
         the explanations provided by the appellant for his  involvement  in
         the PJAK.

     14. In paragraph 48(3) the  judge  again  finds  that  the  appellant's
         description of his participation with the  PJAK  to  be  vague  and
         lacking in detail.

             "For example, he describes buying food, but does  not  explain
             what food this is or the amounts he buys it in."

     15. The appellant was never asked any questions about the food that  he
         purchased or the amounts purchased either in his  asylum  interview
         or during the appeal hearing. Nor is it apparent from the  face  of
         the determination that the judge ever made the appellant  aware  of
         these concerns. The  drawing  of  an  adverse  inference  in  these
         circumstances constitutes a procedural impropriety as the appellant
         was not given an opportunity to deal with the concerns and  it  was
         not reasonably obvious from the face of  the  papers  that  a  more
         detailed explanation was required.

     16. In the same subparagraph the judge holds against the appellant  his
         lack of explanation as to how he did not fall under suspicion  when
         purchasing 10 pairs of shoes, and the lack of explanation as to how
         he was able to transport 10 pairs of shoes and an  amount  of  food
         away from a shop. The appellant was not however  asked  to  provide
         these explanations in his asylum interview. Nor does it appear that
         he was asked for explanations in the  appeal  hearing.  It  is  not
         immediately  apparent  from  the  appellant's   witness   statement
         (paragraph 19) that the shoes were all bought at the same shop,  or
         that the shoes and the food were bought at the same  time.  If  the
         judge's concerns had been put to the appellant then it is  possible
         that a satisfactory explanation may have been provided. The failure
         to give the appellant an opportunity of responding to  the  judge's
         concerns constitutes a procedural impropriety.

     17. In paragraph 48(4) the judge finds that no satisfactory explanation
         was given by the appellant as to how he  was  able  to  escape  the
         attention of his family when leaving the house in the middle of the
         night to deliver leaflets on horseback.  This  evidence  was  given
         orally at the hearing but the judge has not recorded that  evidence
         or the explanation that was  provided  by  the  appellant.  As  was
         pointed out in the grant of permission, paragraph 48(4) appears  to
         assume that the  appellant's  family  objected  to  his  night-time
         activities for the PJAK, but there is simply  no  finding  to  that
         effect. Moreover, the grounds content that the  appellant  was  not
         asked how he managed to escape the attention  of  his  family  when
         delivering  leaflets.  There  is  nothing  on  the  face   of   the
         determination contradicting this assertion.

     18. In paragraph 48(5) the judge finds the appellant has  not  given  a
         satisfactory explanation as to when and how Soran was arrested,  or
         where he was at the time or how long Soran was detained before  the
         authorities came for him, especially given that Soran lived in  the
         farm next to his. Nor does the appellant satisfactorily explain the
         coincidence that he was at his uncle's house when  the  authorities
         came looking for him, and his account was said to  be  inconsistent
         in his explanations as to why he was at his uncle's house  and  how
         frequently he went there. It was accepted by Mr Clarke  that  there
         was no inconsistency in the appellant's evidence relating to why he
         was at his uncle's house and the frequency of  his  visits.  If  an
         inconsistency arose  during  oral  evidence  the  judge  failed  to
         identify this in his decision. In his statement, at  paragraph  22,
         the appellant explained that it was not unusual for him  walk  into
         town to sell dairy products and he would sometimes do this 3  or  4
         times a week. He would sometimes stay at his paternal uncle's  home
         because he did not want to walk  back  if  it  was  late.  On  this
         particular night the appellant stayed at his maternal uncle's  home
         because it was late and he hadn't stayed for a while. I can  detect
         no inconsistency in the evidence given by  the  appellant.  To  the
         extent that the judge has relied  on  a  claimed  inconsistency  in
         rejecting the  appellant's  credibility,  he  took  account  of  an
         irrelevant consideration.  Furthermore,  in  paragraph  23  of  his
         statement the appellant claims, based on  information  provided  to
         him by his mother, that Soren was arrested for 3  or  4  days.  The
         judge does not appear to have considered this evidence.

     19. In paragraph  48(7)  the  judge  finds  there  is  no  satisfactory
         explanation, inter alia, as to how the appellant was able to locate
         the same agent as before when released from detention in  Bulgaria.
         The appellant did however explain in his  statement,  at  paragraph
         33, that he had the agent's  mobile  number.  In  failing  to  take
         account of this evidence the judge failed  to  take  account  of  a
         relevant consideration.

     20. In paragraph 48(8) the judge finds  there  to  be  no  satisfactory
         explanation how the appellant's poor  and  uneducated  family  were
         able, at short notice, to find the money to pay an agent. Mr Clarke
         accepts however that this question was not  put  to  the  appellant
         during his asylum interview and he did not  deal  with  it  in  his
         statement. There is no indication that the appellant was asked this
         question in cross examination and there is nothing to indicate that
         the judge raised it as a point of concern. The failure of the judge
         to put this to the appellant constitutes a procedural impropriety.

     21. The cumulative effect of the above legal errors renders the judge's
         decision unsafe. It cannot be said that the judge would  inevitably
         have reached the same result if the errors were not committed.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by material errors of law.  The
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  (de  novo)  hearing
to be heard by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Chapman.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    24 April 2018
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
