
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08039/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 April 2019                         |On 29 April 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                   g i r k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Sriharan instructed by Lova Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was  born  on  3  September
    1980.  He first entered the United Kingdom on 30 September  2003  as  a
    student.  He was subsequently granted periods of  leave  as  a  student
    until 1 November 2007.  He returned to Sri Lanka in 2005 to  marry  his
    wife, returning later that year.

 3. On 24 August 2012 the appellant made a human rights  application  which
    was refused without a right of appeal.  On 3 March 2014, the  appellant
    made a further application for leave to remain based upon  his  private
    and family life.  That application was refused and certified as clearly
    unfounded on 3 July 2015.  He unsuccessfully  sought  permission  to  a
    judicial review of that decision. On 18 February  2016,  the  appellant
    claimed asylum.

 4. The basis of his claim was that he would be at risk from the Sri Lankan
    authorities as a result of being suspected  of  helping  the  LTTE,  in
    particular he claimed that he had provided accommodation to two men who
    were involved in the assassination of the Sri Lankan Foreign  Minister.
    He claimed that in August 2005 he had been arrested  and  detained  for
    about 7 days and ill-treated.  Whilst detained, he claimed that he  had
    signed a confession admitting  complicity  in  the  assassination.   He
    claimed he escaped when he was being transferred  in  a  vehicle.   His
    wife came to the UK in  September  2006  after,  he  claimed,  she  was
    detained and raped whilst after being  arrested  in  August  2005.   He
    claimed that in June/July  2016,  his  father-in-law  informed  him  by
    letter that men had come to his house looking for the appellant and had
    threatened to kill him if he did  not  tell  them  of  the  appellant's
    whereabouts.

 5. On 12 June 2018, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated  on  7  November  2018,  Judge  L  Murray   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  She  made  an  adverse  credibility
    finding and rejected the appellant's account and,  therefore,  did  not
    accept that he would be at risk on return.  The judge also  found  that
    the appellant's health problems were not such  that  his  return  would
    breach  Art  3  of  the  ECHR.   Finally,  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's removal would be  a  proportionate  interference  with  his
    private and family life in the UK and so would not breach Art 8 of  the
    ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on five
    grounds.  Principally, ground 1  averred  that  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to take into account a medical report prepared by Dr A M Mason
    (dated 20 January 2017) at the Medical Foundation.   Ground  1  averred
    that the judge had failed to take into account that report in assessing
    the appellant's credibility and also by failing to consider the risk to
    the appellant of committing suicide if returned to Sri Lanka.

 8. On 7 December 2018, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Keane)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 9. The respondent did not file a rule 24 notice.

10. The appeal came before me on  4  April  2019.   At  that  hearing,  the
    appellant was represented by Ms I Sriharan and the respondent by  Mr  C
    Howells.

The Issues

11.  Judge  Keane  granted  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  without
    specifically limiting the grant of permission.  Although,  the  reasons
    given by Judge Keane relate to that part of ground 1 which relies  upon
    the averment that the judge failed to consider Dr  Mason's  report  and
    the risk, if any, to him of committing suicide on return to Sri Lanka.

12. Ms Sriharan referred me to the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  Safi  and
    Others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC) (Lane P
    and UTJ Dawson).  She submitted that, although  Judge  Keane's  reasons
    related to only one part of ground 1, in the light of Safi his grant of
    permission should be read as not subject to any express limitation  but
    to be a grant of permission on all grounds.  In fact, Ms Sriharan  only
    relied upon ground 1.  She placed no reliance on grounds 2 - 5 and made
    no submissions in respect of them.

13. Mr Howells, having considered the decision in Safi, accepted that there
    was no express limitation in the grant of permission  and  he  accepted
    that the appellant could rely upon ground 1 generally.

14. The hearing, thereafter, proceeded on the basis that the live issue was
    whether the judge had erred in law by failing to consider  properly  Dr
    Mason's report both in assessing the  appellant's  credibility  and  by
    failing to consider whether his return to Sri Lanka would breach Art  3
    as a result of his being at risk of committing suicide.

The Submissions

15. At the core of Ms Sriharan's submissions  was  the  argument  that  the
    judge had failed properly  to  take  into  account  Dr  Mason's  report
    relating to the appellant's mental health, including  his  symptoms  of
    PTSD and suicidal ideation.  She submitted that at para  32  the  judge
    had concluded that the report was a: "detailed and well-reasoned report
    to which I must attach considerable weight  as  independent  evidence."
    Ms Sriharan submitted that, however, thereafter the judge failed to  do
    that both in assessing the appellant's credibility and in assessing any
    risk to him on return to Sri Lanka of committing suicide.  Ms  Sriharan
    properly drew my attention to para 54 where, despite Dr Mason's report,
    the appellant's (then) Counsel had not made an application to treat the
    appellant  as  a  vulnerable  witness  within  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 of  2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant guidance.

16. Ms Sriharan submitted that at para 56, the  judge  had  been  wrong  to
    state that there was:

         "Nothing in the medical report that explains  why  the  appellant's
         account would  contain  the  inconsistencies  identified  above  in
         relation to the core of his account."

17. Finally, Ms Sriharan submitted that the judge had been wrong in para 62
    of her determination when she had stated:

         "I have also not been referred to any evidence to  show  he  is  at
         risk of suicide on return nor was this argued before me."

18. In relation to these submissions, Ms Sriharan relied upon  passages  in
    Dr Mason's report at paras 97 - 104 and  at  paras  109  -  112  in  Dr
    Mason's summary.

19. Paragraphs 97 - 104 are as follows:

         "97. [The appellant] has signs and symptoms of a severe  depression
             (see Appendix E).  He has recognised indicators of  depression
             such as a loss of self esteem and feelings of uselessness  and
             unworthiness.  He has anhedonia (lack of interest or  pleasure
             in doing things), restlessness  and  sleep  disturbance.   His
             mood is low and he has had thoughts of  suicide,  particularly
             when he thinks of the possibility of  being  returned  to  Sri
             Lanka.

         98.  He is receiving medical treatment for depression from  his  GP
             whilst  awaiting  a  psychiatric  outpatient  review,  and  an
             appointment with a counsellor in his new home location.  A PHQ-
             9  questionnaire  was  used  and  gave  a   depression   score
             indicative of severe depression despite being on therapy.

         99.  [The appellant] has  signs  and  symptoms  of  post  traumatic
             stress syndrome (see Appendix D) with flashbacks, re-living of
             the trauma and he avoids cues to any triggers for  these.   He
             continues to  leave  recurrent  nightmares  of  witnessed  and
             experience trauma ("people are coming to me .... got  to  kill
             me") during which he calls out and cries; anhedonia  (loss  of
             interest and pleasure) and associated depression.

         100. [The appellant] has not previously revealed the full extent of
             his trauma and ill treatment in detention.  The long period of
             time since these occurred has been one in which he  has  tried
             to cope by avoidance; burying the thoughts and not  discussing
             his ill treatment with his GP, counsellors or his wife.   This
             is a common  coping  response  and  such  conscious,  or  sub-
             conscious, avoidance is a commonly seen feature of PTSD.

         101. Late disclosure is common in cases of sexual assault owing  to
             feelings of shame, fear, emasculation and the  expectation  of
             not being believed.  The need for  disclosure  now  has  meant
             that [the appellant] has had to surmount these  fears  and  he
             has done this despite very evidently finding it difficult  and
             distressing to discuss.

         102. [The appellant] has found  discussing  his  ill-treatment  for
             this report difficult; he has wept, shown  physical  signs  of
             fear (shaking and postural changes) and has  experienced  some
             re-traumatization with having to recount  the  events  of  ill
             treatment in detention in great detail but feels that this  is
             now required of him in order to give a  full  picture  of  his
             reasons for not wishing to return to Sri Lanka.  That  he  has
             delayed seeking asylum is explicable given that he  finds  his
             experiences very difficult to discuss,  even  with  his  wife.
             The effect of this  avoidance  and  the  associated  time  lag
             between the events and being asked to recount them  is  likely
             to result in some inaccuracies in recall.

         103. [The appellant] is separated from his extended family and home
             country; this in itself is a recognised  source  of  emotional
             distress in a migrant who has no history of ill treatment  and
             detention.  The level of distress, and the signs and  symptoms
             of mental ill  health  that  I  have  observed,  ore  elicited
             evidence  of,  from  [the  appellant]  during  six  hours   of
             assessment and interview, exceeds  that  which  I  would  have
             expected in  a  migrant  who  had  not  experienced  any  ill-
             treatment.

         104. His physical reactions of fear and distress on recounting  the
             events, or considering the likely outcome for  the  family  if
             returned to Sri Lanka, are those I  consider  to  be  entirely
             congruent with what he is describing and would be difficult to
             fabricate and consistently sustain over the  course  of  three
             sessions of interviews.  [The appellant]  has  not  sought  to
             embellish his account or to  attribute  lesions  arising  from
             other causes (L7  and  L19)  to  his  ill-treatment.   I  have
             considered the  possibility  of  fabrication  as  required  by
             Istanbul Protocol paragraph 105(f) but do not  consider  there
             to be any false allegation in this case."

    Then at paras 109 - 112:

         "109.    [The appellant] has signs and symptoms of depression  (See
             appendix E)  for  which  he  has  been  receiving,  and  still
             requires, ongoing medical treatment and counselling.   He  has
             recognised indicators of depression such as a  loss  of  self-
             esteem and feeling of uselessness and  unworthiness.   He  has
             anhedonia, restlessness and sleep disturbance.

         110. He has had suicidal  ideation  previously  and  has  recurrent
             thoughts of self-harm when he thinks  of  the  possibility  of
             being returned to Sri Lanka.  If he and his family are  denied
             asylum in the UK, then an urgent reassessment of  his  suicide
             risk would be advisable.

         111. Late disclosure is  common  in  cases  of  sexual  assault  in
             detention,  owing  to  feelings  of  shame,  fear,   and   the
             expectation of not being believed.  Late disclosure of  sexual
             assault is not suggestive of fabrication.  During six hours of
             interview with [the appellant] there has been no  evidence  to
             suggest false allegation.

         112. [The appellant]  has  signs  and  symptoms  of  post-traumatic
             stress syndrome (see Appendix D) which include flashbacks, re-
             living of the trauma and recurrent nightmares."

20. Mr Howells submitted that the judge had considered  Dr  Mason's  report
    which was dated 21 months before the hearing on 15  October  2018.   He
    submitted  that  the  appellant  had  not  mentioned  in  his   witness
    statements that he suffered from suicidal ideation and in a letter from
    his GP dated 18 July 2018 (at page 93  of  the  bundle)  there  was  no
    reference to suicidal ideation.  Mr Howells  submitted  there  was,  in
    fact, no recent evidence  of  a  risk  of  self-harm  or  suicide.   He
    submitted that the judge could not be criticised for not  dealing  with
    an issue which had not been pursued before her by the appellant and  in
    the light of the fact that the expert report dated back to January 2017
    and there  was  no  more  recent  reference  in  the  evidence  to  the
    appellant's risk of suicide or self-harm.

Discusssion

21. I deal first with the issue of the risk, if any, to  the  appellant  of
    committing suicide on return to Sri Lanka.

22. As Ms Sriharan pointed out, in the country  guidance  case  of  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319  (IAC),
    the Upper Tribunal, identified the limited availability of  psychiatric
    help in Sri Lanka for those who were at risk of suicide (see especially
    [454] -  [457]).   Consequently,  where  a  real  risk  of  suicide  is
    identified, the circumstances in Sri Lanka create a very real  argument
    as to whether or not the return of that individual would breach Article
    3 of the ECHR.  Indeed, one of the appellants  in  GJ  and  Others  was
    successful under Article 3 on that very basis (see [456]).

23. It is not immediately apparent why the judge was not directed to  those
    parts of Dr Mason's report which  raised  the  issue  of  risk  to  the
    appellant of committing suicide on return to Sri Lanka.  In para 97, Dr
    Mason states his "mood is low and  he  has  had  thoughts  of  suicide,
    particularly when he thinks of the possibility of being returned to Sri
    Lanka."  Then, in her summary at para 110 she states:

         "He has had suicidal ideation previously and has recurrent thoughts
         of self-harm when he thinks of the possibility of being returned to
         Sri Lanka.  If he and his family are denied asylum in the UK,  then
         an urgent re-assessment of his suicide risk would be advisable."

24. Whilst the judge may well have "not been referred to  any  evidence  to
    show [the appellant] is at risk of suicide on return" (at [62]  of  her
    determination), there was at  least  some  evidence  relevant  to  that
    issue.  Whilst Mr Howells submits that the judge cannot  be  criticised
    if she was not referred to it and a claim based upon  risk  of  suicide
    was not argued before her, there was evidence which on a Robinson basis
    should have been considered by her.  Of course, what weight  should  be
    given to that evidence will, no doubt, be affected by the fact that the
    report predated the  hearing  by  some  21  months  and  there  was  no
    subsequent reference to suicidal ideation in the  appellant's  evidence
    or GP evidence.  However, the judge herself remarked at para 32 that Dr
    Mason's report was "detailed and well-reasoned" and was  one  to  which
    she "must attach considerable weight as independent evidence".  In  the
    light of that, I am unable to conclude that she would have  given  this
    evidence no weight or no weight of such significance as to be the basis
    for an arguable claim under Art 3, particularly in  the  light  of  the
    background evidence relating to Sri Lanka set out in GJ and  Others  to
    which I have already referred.

25. In those circumstances, I accept  Ms  Sriharan's  submission  that  the
    judge erred in law by failing properly to consider the risk, if any, to
    the appellant of committing suicide on return to Sri Lanka such  as  to
    engage Art 3 of the ECHR.

26. As regards the judge's adverse  credibility  finding,  the  judge  gave
    detailed reasons at paras 33  onwards  why  she  did  not  believe  his
    account and, in the course of those reasons,  identified  a  number  of
    inconsistencies in his evidence.  Having prefaced  that  assessment  by
    reference to Dr Mason's report and at para  32  concluding  she  should
    attach "considerable weight" to it, the judge returned at paras 54 - 56
    to the issue of whether  that  report,  and  what  is  said  about  the
    appellant's mental health, could explain any  of  the  inconsistencies.
    The judge said this:

         "54. [Counsel for the appellant], when asked by me,  said  that  he
             did not want to make an application to treat the Appellant  as
             a vulnerable witness.  However,  the  Appellant  is  receiving
             treatment for depression and the medical  report  states  that
             she has signs and symptoms of a severe  depression  (paragraph
             97) and signs of PTSD.  There is also a letter dated  18  July
             2018 at page 93 of his bundle which states that  he  is  being
             supported by Mental Health Support Service for PTSD and severe
             depression.  I have considered whether the Appellant's  mental
             condition could have affected his evidence such to explain the
             discrepancies.  In the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No  2
             of 2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  Appellant
             guidance paragraph 14 - 15 provides:

                  "14.  Consider  the  evidence,   allowing   for   possible
                      different degrees of understanding by  witnesses  and
                      Appellant compared to those are  not  vulnerable,  in
                      the context of evidence from others  associated  with
                      the Appellant and the background evidence before you.
                       Where there were clear  discrepancies  in  the  oral
                      evidence, consider  the  extent  to  which  the  age,
                      vulnerability or sensitivity of the  witness  was  an
                      element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.

                  15.  The decision should record whether the  Tribunal  has
                      concluded the Appellant (or a witness)  is  a  child,
                      vulnerable or  sensitive,  the  effect  the  Tribunal
                      considered  the  identified  vulnerability   had   in
                      assessing the evidence before it and thus whether the
                      Tribunal was  satisfied  whether  the  Appellant  had
                      established his or her case to the relevant  standard
                      of proof.  In asylum appeals, weight should be  given
                      to  objective  indications  of   risk   rather   than
                      necessarily to a state of mind".

         55.  In AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 the  Court  of
             Appeal declined to provide a checklist of  issues  for  judges
             and practitioners but reiterated the  principles  to  consider
             (see  [30]  -  [35]  in   particular)   and   warned   against
             overelaborate interpretation of the Guidance note.

         56.  At paragraph 101 of the medical report Dr Mason states that it
             is common in cases of sexual  assault  owing  to  feelings  of
             shame, fear, emasculation and the  expectation  not  of  being
             believed that late disclosure takes place.  However, there  is
             nothing  in  the  medical  report  that   explains   why   the
             Appellant's  account   would   contain   the   inconsistencies
             identified above in relation to the core of his account."

27. Then at para 61 the judge said this:

         "I have assessed his claim holistically.  I have found his evidence
         inconsistent and implausible in relation to the core of his account
         for  the  reasons  given  above.   I  do  not   find   that   these
         inconsistencies can be explained by the fact that he was  a  victim
         of trauma or the effluxion of time."

28. The difficulty, as I see it, with this reasoning is that Dr Mason  does
    provide supporting evidence as to why the Appellant may not have  given
    a consistent account or may not have disclosed certain matters earlier.



29. At para 99, Dr Mason  identifies  that  the  appellant  has  signs  and
    symptoms of PTSD.

30. At para 100, Dr Mason,  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  failure  to
    disclose earlier the full extent of his  trauma  and  ill-treatment  in
    detention, notes that this is symptomatic of coping "by avoidance"  and
    states that:

         "This is a common coping  response  and  such  conscious,  or  sub-
         conscious, avoidance is a commonly seen feature of PTSD."

31. At para 101 Dr Mason refers to it being common for  there  to  be  late
    disclosure in cases of sexual assault owing to feelings of shame, fear,
    emasculation and the expectation of not being believed.

32.  At  para  102,  Dr  Mason  described  the  appellant's  symptoms  when
    recounting  the  events  of  ill-treatment  and  again  refers  to  the
    association "of avoidance" and that the effect of:

         "This avoidance and the associated time lag between the events  and
         being  asked  to  recount  them  is  likely  to  result   in   some
         inaccuracies in recall."

33. At para 103, Dr Mason refers to the level of distress and  symptoms  of
    mental ill-health exceeding that which would have been expected  by  an
    individual "who had not experienced any ill-treatment".

34. At para 104, consistent with the Istanbul Protocol, Dr Mason notes that
    she considers the possibility of  fabrication  and  does  not  consider
    "there to be any false allegation in this case".

35. In her summary section, in particular at paras  109  -  112,  Dr  Mason
    again identifies the  appellant's  mental  health  and  other  symptoms
    consistent  with  PTSD  and  again  identifies  the   impact   of   his
    circumstances on the integrity of his evidence.

36. In my judgment, the judge failed to grapple with this evidence and  her
    reasons, in para 56 of the determination for finding  unpersuasive  the
    expert report to which she considered "considerable weight"  should  be
    given, were not adequate to justify her conclusion that  the  integrity
    of the appellant's evidence was not materially affected by  his  mental
    health.

37. For these reasons, therefore, I also accept  Ms  Sriharan's  submission
    that the judge  erred  in  law  in  reaching  her  adverse  credibility
    finding.

38. For these reasons, ground 1 is made out.  Mr Howells accepted that,  in
    those circumstances, the judge's  decision  should  be  set  aside  and
    remade de novo.

Decision

39. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.  That  decision  is  set
    aside.

40. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge L Murray.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              23, April 2019





















