
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08790/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 June 2017                           |On 26 June 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                     SKH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                  Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, of Counsel, instructed by Caveat
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity

1.    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order. The order remains
    appropriate as the Appellant is a minor and this is a protection claim.





Introduction/Background

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S Kaler  (hereafter  "the  Judge")  dismissing  the
    appeal of SKH against a decision made on  13  July  2016  refusing  his
    asylum claim. The Judge, however, did  allow  the  appeal  contrary  to
    Article 3 of the ECHR. There is no cross-appeal against that  decision.



3.    The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1 January 2000. He  arrived
    in the UK on 17 October 2007 and claimed asylum on arrival.  He  is  of
    Kurdish ethnicity and is a Sunni Muslim from Makhmour  -  a  city  that
    lies between Mosul and Kirkuk.

4.    The basis of the Appellant's claim was: (i) that he  feared  ISIS  who
    kidnapped his brother and (ii) that he would be a victim of  a  revenge
    killing because his family were embroiled in a blood feud.  Whilst  the
    Respondent did not dispute that the Appellant had a fear of  ISIS,  she
    rejected his claim that he would be a victim of a blood  feud.  It  was
    the Respondent's view that, in any event, the  Appellant  could  safely
    return to Kurdistan or Baghdad.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.    The Judge's  findings  of  fact  can  be  found  at  [19]-[29]  &  her
    conclusions at [30]-[32] of her Decision. The Judge did not accept  the
    Appellant's account that he would be the victim of a revenge killing at
    the hands of his uncles. The Judge  concluded  however,  that  (i)  the
    Appellant was at risk of persecution in his home area on account of his
    Kurdish ethnicity; (ii)  he  could  not  be  expected  to  relocate  to
    Kurdistan; (iii) he would not face persecution for a Convention  reason
    in Baghdad, but would be at risk of being  subjected  to  ill-treatment
    contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR - the Appellant would not be able  to
    obtain documentation, he is an ethnic Kurd,  cannot  speak  Arabic  and
    would be without support - and (iv) the Appellant qualifies  for  leave
    to remain on humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

Permission to Appeal

6.    The central premise  of  the  Appellant's  challenge  of  the  Judge's
    decision was that given her findings she should have allowed the appeal
    under the Refugee Convention. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 5 May 2017.

Rule 24 Response

7.    The Respondent in her Rule 24 Response did not oppose the  appeal  and
    invited the Tribunal to consider whether the Appellant's appeal  should
    be allowed on asylum grounds.


Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

8.    At the hearing before me, Mr Wilding on behalf of the  Respondent  did
    not oppose the appeal. He sensibly conceded that the decision should be
    remade allowing the appeal on asylum grounds. I agreed with that course
    and indicated that a written decision  would  follow  to  that  effect,
    which I now give.

9.    In light of the concession made by the  Respondent  I  can  deal  with
    this appeal relatively swiftly.

10.   There is no challenge to the Judge's finding that there is an  Article
    3 risk  in  Baghdad.   The  Judge  however  plainly  erred  in  law  in
    dismissing the appeal under the Refugee  Convention.  In  finding  that
    there was a real risk of persecution in the Appellant's  home  area  on
    account of his ethnicity, and that, it was unduly harsh to  expect  him
    to relocate to Baghdad, there was only one answer to  the  question  of
    whether the Appellant was entitled to be recognised as  a  refugee  and
    that was a resounding - yes. Given the Judge's findings, the fact  that
    there was no risk of persecution in Baghdad for a Convention reason was
    irrelevant to the question of whether the Appellant is a  refugee.  The
    Judge thus materially erred in law in dismissing the appeal  on  asylum
    grounds. The Appellant is a refugee.

Decision

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  under  the
Refugee Convention is set aside as it erred in law. I substitute a  Decision
allowing the appeal under the Refugee Convention.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                             Date:  21 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral



