
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08763/2017
     PA/08765/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2018                           |On 3 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    T. H.
                                    e. b.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Elder Rahimi
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants are mother and son. Both are nationals of Iran who entered
the UK unlawfully, and made a protection claim on 25 March 2017 at an
airport upon arrival. Their applications were refused on 25 August 2017,
and their appeals against that refusal came before the First-tier Tribunal
at North Shields on 26 October 2017, when they were heard by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Cope. The appeals were dismissed on asylum and human rights
grounds, in a decision promulgated on 2 January 2018.

The Appellants' application for permission to appeal the decision was
initially refused by the First tier Tribunal, but permission was granted by
decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 18 September 2018 on the same
grounds. The Appellants' challenge does not extend to the dismissal of
their human rights appeal on Article 8 grounds.

There has been no application to adduce further evidence pursuant to Rule
15(2A) and there has been no response to the grant of permission by way of
Rule 24 Notice by the Respondent. Thus the matter comes before me.

Before me Ms Cleghorn abandoned the complaints raised in paragraphs 13 and
15 of the grounds; leaving twelve complaints. Eleven of those were
complaints about individual passages within the Judge's decision, arguing
that the Judge had failed to look at the evidence holistically, had left
material evidence out of account, or, had failed to give adequate reasons
for the adverse credibility findings that led to his rejection of their
account of their experiences in Iran as a fiction; MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA
Civ 1958.

The twelfth complaint is however of a quite different character. Although
it could have been better drafted, it is a complaint about the approach
taken by the Judge to the evidence from Pastor Nichols of the Dunston
Family Church, on behalf of himself, and the members of his congregation
[27]. Pastor Nichols offered both evidence of primary fact in relation to
(i) the regular attendance of the Appellants at their Church since they
were housed in the North East by the Respondent, (ii) their attitudes and
behaviours whilst participating in the congregation, and, (iii) their
baptism. He also offered opinion evidence as to whether they were in truth
genuine believers in, and followers of, the Christian faith. Upon due
reflection it is a complaint that has two limbs. First that the Judge
failed to recognise that the evidence of primary fact was unchallenged.
Second that the Judge failed to treat the opinion evidence of Pastor
Nichols as that offered by someone who should be treated by the Tribunal as
an expert in his field. Thus a complaint that the Judge failed to give to
Pastor Nichols' evidence the weight that it deserved.

The unchallenged evidence before the Judge was that the Appellants claimed
asylum at immigration control having disembarked from a flight, and thus at
the first possible opportunity. Their claim from the outset was that they
wished to fully embrace the Christian faith, and that they felt unable to
worship in the Christian faith in Iran in safety. The current country
guidance in relation to Iran, and thus the Respondent's stance at the
hearing, was that a genuine apostate does indeed face a real risk of harm
in Iran amounting to persecution for a Convention reason.

Although there may have been confusion over the precise date upon which
this event had occurred, it was not disputed before the Judge that the
Appellants had both been baptised by Pastor Nichols at Dunston during
September 2017. Nor was it disputed that he had baptised them whilst
holding the genuine belief that they had genuinely embraced Christ and were
sincere in their conversion from Islam. Nor was it disputed that they had
regularly attended, and participated in the services, held at the Dunston
Family Church.

Thus the question for the Judge that lay at the core of both appeals was
whether the Appellants were telling the truth when they had declared
themselves to be genuine followers of the Christian faith, or, whether they
had from the outset sought to deceive their congregation (and the
Respondent) as to the true nature of their religious faith.

Since it had not then been promulgated, the Judge did not have the benefit
of the guidance to be found in TF and MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58, upon the
proper approach to evidence of the sort that Pastor Nichols gave to the
Tribunal. In my judgement the Judge would have been unlikely to express
himself as he did in paragraphs 119-127 of his decision, if he had enjoyed
the benefit of that guidance. It is very difficult to identify any adverse
consequence for the general reliability of Pastor Nichols' evidence
(whether factual or opinion) that followed from an innocent clerical
mistake in the mis-dating of the baptism certificates by a week. (It was
not suggested that there was anything other than an innocent clerical
mistake in this respect). The correct date of the event was a matter of no
consequence in these appeals, since it was not disputed that those baptisms
had occurred on either 17th or 24th September 2017, and nothing turned upon
whether the baptisms had occurred on one date or the other. Certainly such
a clerical slip would not, of itself, justify the Judge's conclusion that
he could not "place anything but minimal weight" on either Pastor Nichols'
evidence of fact, or, his opinion evidence as an expert [127].

The Judge had, in my judgement correctly, expressed concerns about the
approach taken by the interviewing officer, and the decisionmaker, to the
extent that they had tried to assess whether the Appellants were genuinely
followers of the Christian faith by pursuing an examination of their
knowledge of the Bible [34]. As he identified, the problem with such an
approach is that there is no objective standard for biblical knowledge
before a candidate may be accepted for baptism. Nor does knowledge of the
Bible equate to either belief in, or, acceptance of Christ. Many who
genuinely profess to believe in, and follow, Christ have never read the
whole Bible and will never do so. Moreover for those whose ability to
learn, or whose exposure to Christianity, in their country of origin may be
limited by the situation within that country, it is not always realistic to
expect detailed knowledge either upon the occasion of their arrival in the
UK, or, within a few months of it. In this case the Appellants were
interviewed within four months of entry to the UK, and of course in
developing their knowledge whilst in the UK they had to cope with a
language barrier since Pastor Nichols had no Farsi, and English was not
their first language. What then was left upon which to base a decision that
Pastor Nicholls had been the subject of a deception?

Pastor Nichols told the Judge that he had taken the view that attendance
upon the usual seven week pre-baptismal course would neither be
appropriate, nor effective, since he could not be sure an interpreter would
be available for the entirety of such a course. Instead he booked an
interpreter, and then used him to speak to the Appellants for about three
hours on one occasion, in order to satisfy himself that they had both
understood and accepted what he considered to be the key points that would
have been covered by the pre-baptismal course. Thus his evidence was that
he had thereby satisfied himself that the Appellants' conversion was sound
and sincere. On the face of it, this was nothing more than a pragmatic
response to the difficulties that Pastor Nichols understood he would face
if he sought to put the Appellants through the usual pre-baptismal course.
Since it was not disputed that the Pastor had undertaken this exercise, nor
that that he had as a result genuinely formed the view that the Appellants'
conversion was sound and sincere, nor that he was entitled to do so, I am
unable to identify in the decision any reason offered by the Judge for his
conclusion that it was an opinion upon which he could not "place anything
but minimal weight" [127].

It is clear from the decision, when read as a whole, that the Judge reached
the conclusion that the Appellants had created a fictitious account of
their experiences in Iran. Whether or not he was entitled to do so, that
did not, of itself, answer the question that lay at the heart of the
appeal; were the Appellants telling the truth when they had throughout
declared themselves to be genuine followers of the Christian faith, or, had
they sought to deceive Pastor Nichols and his congregation from the outset
as to their true nature of their religious faith?

There were a number of indications that the Appellants held a genuine
interest in Christianity before they arrived in the UK. They had
immediately declared that as the basis for their protection claim, and they
had made that claim at the first available opportunity. They had
immediately found a local Church to attend, once housed by the Respondent,
and they had continued regular attendance to the date of the hearing of
their appeals. Since the Judge's decision does not record otherwise, I
infer that cross-examination had failed to disclose any inability on their
part to explain why they had been attracted to the Christian faith, or had
embraced it. As set out above, they had satisfied Pastor Nichols that their
faith was genuine and sincere, and he had accepted them as candidates for
baptism on that basis. There is no suggestion in the Judge's decision that
he concluded Pastor Nichols was inexperienced, or otherwise unable to make
that assessment. Thereafter the Appellants had done nothing to indicate to
him, or his congregation, that they had been deceived.

In the circumstances I am satisfied that the Judge's approach to the
evidence does disclose a material error of law. That begs the question of
whether the appeals should be remitted for a full rehearing, or, whether it
is possible to simply set aside the decisions and remake them without
hearing evidence. Neither party has sought to introduce new or further
evidence in the remaking of the decision, and as set out above I am not
satisfied that it was ever disputed before the Judge that Pastor Nichols
genuinely formed the opinions he described, or, that he was entitled to do
so. I note that it was the Judge himself who considered the points taken by
the Respondent in the course of reaching his decision that the Appellants
had not undertaken a genuine conversion, were without substance. In the
circumstances, even if the Judge's decision that the Appellants had not
told the truth about their experiences in Iran should stand, I am satisfied
that it would still be inevitable upon any remittal that the appeals should
succeed. Thus a remittal would serve no practical purpose. Once it is
recognised that the Appellants are genuinely members of the Christian
faith, which is in my judgement the only rational finding open to the
Tribunal upon the unchallenged evidence of Pastor Nichols, then the
Respondent for his part accepts that the appeals must succeed. In the
circumstances it is unnecessary for me to deal with the eleven other
challenges raised to the Judge's findings.

I therefore set aside the decision of Judge Cope upon the asylum appeals,
and remake the decision upon the asylum appeals, so as to allow them.





    DECISION


    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  2
    January 2018 did involve the making of an error of  law  that  requires
    the decision upon the asylum appeals to be set aside and remade.


    The appeals are allowed on asylum grounds.






    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008



    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
    direction applies  both  to  the  Appellants  and  to  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.




Signed                              Date 26 November 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
[pic]
