
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08460/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th September 2017                        |On 27th September 2017        |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa, Counsel, instructed by Solicitors Inn
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

There will be an anonymity direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I Howard to dismiss his asylum claim.  The basis of
    the Appellant's claim had been that he is gay and that thereby he would
    be at risk from his family and others if he was to be returned  to  his
    home country  of  Pakistan.   The  judge  had  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was gay and he thereby rejected the Appellant's appeal.   The
    judge had correctly identified that the Supreme Court's decision in  HJ
    (Iran) & Others v Secretary of State [2010]  UKSC  31  was  of  crucial
    consideration.

2.   However, as identified by Judge Chohan of the First-tier Tribunal  when
    he granted permission, the judge needed  to  deal  with  why  important
    evidence on behalf of the Appellant was being rejected.   Judge  Chohan
    had said at paragraph 3 of his decision in part as follows:

         "It does seem, particularly at para. 32,  that  inadequate  reasons
         have been given as to why the  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
         father had not discovered the homosexuality and why the Appellant's
         lawyer's letter was dismissed without any reasons."


3.   Mr Mustafa, Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, has  taken  me  through
    the decision and he says the main issue is that there  were  inadequate
    reasons from the judge and there needed to be clear findings as to  why
    specific evidence was rejected.

4.   Mr Walker  in  his  submissions  helpfully  said  that  although  Judge
    Howard's decision was brief in its findings he had properly  considered
    at paragraph 27 that they were matters which were  open  to  the  judge
    such as the position in respect of the Appellant's claimed partner  was
    uncertain because he himself had an asylum claim which had  yet  to  be
    fully concluded.  Ultimately the evidence had been  considered  as  was
    required.

5.   It was submitted that  there  was  consideration  at  paragraph  32  in
    relation to the shame that the Appellant would  bring  on  his  family.
    Indeed, Mr Walker said there were many other adverse points  which  the
    judge could have found against the Appellant such as why  was  it  that
    the Appellant's father would write letters in English to him when their
    first language was Urdu  but  ultimately  the  judge  concluded,  quite
    properly, it was submitted, that there was  enough  to  enable  him  to
    decide that the Appellant could  not  be  accepted  to  be  a  credible
    witness.  The judge did not find  the  lawyer's  letter  reliable.   HJ
    (Iran) was referred to and the case fell at the first  step.   Although
    there was brevity in the judge's finding,  he  came  to  a  sustainable
    decision.

6.   As Mr Mustafa in reply said that the difficulty here with  the  brevity
    was that this was a protection claim.  The judge needed to set out  why
    it was that the Appellant and  his  documents  were  not  found  to  be
    credible.  There was a lack of reasoning.  It was  a  misdirection  and
    the error was a material one.

7.   When looking at the judge's decision, in particular  paragraph  32,  as
    Judge Chohan said, the judge did not find the lawyer's letter to  be  a
    reliable document. However, saying merely, as the judge did,  that  the
    lawyer would not have been engaged  to  write  such  a  letter,  in  my
    judgment, was not sufficient in the circumstances  of  this  protection
    claim.

8.   Similarly, as for the gathering  of  information  for  the  Appellant's
    father by the boys, which is referred to briefly in  paragraph  32  and
    which the judge also said he did not accept, the  reasoning  there  was
    also  inadequate.   The  judge  said  of  that,  "I  do  not  find  the
    Appellant's account of these boys gathering information for his  father
    at all credible.  I do not accept that his father  has  learnt  of  the
    Appellant's sexuality from them."  In my judgment, it is reasonable for
    the Appellant to ask why that finding was made and for  there  to  have
    been adequate reasoning for such a finding.

9.   When looked at cumulatively in my judgment, those aspects of  the  case
    are such that they do undermine the decision as a  whole  and  although
    brevity is to be commended, in this case the  decision  is  simply  too
    brief in terms of the reasoning and, indeed, I go so far as to say that
    the decision is lacking in  reasoning  in  respect  of  the  vital  and
    important aspects.

10.  As a consequence, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  There will have to be a rehearing on all issues.  None  of  the
    current findings shall stand.  That rehearing will take place at Hatton
    Cross. I am told that an interpreter in Urdu will be required.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is  set
aside.
There shall be a rehearing on all issues at the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                                  Date: 8 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

