





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/08314/2016
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House               |       Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 2 October 2017                  |                                       |
|                                    |On: 19 October 2017                    |
|                                    |                                       |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Y R
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Bundock, counsel (instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant".

   2. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  claimant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of their family. This  direction
      applies both to the claimant and to the secretary of state. Failure to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   contempt   of   court
      proceedings.

   3. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge  Devittie  allowing  the  claimant's  asylum
      appeal in a decision promulgated on 31 March 2017.

   4. On  7  August  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pickup  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal. He stated that  the  decision
      failed to specifically address any of the credibility issues raised by
      the secretary of state, dismissing them collectively as insufficiently
      cogent as to undermine the core of the appellant's evidence.  Nor  did
      the decision address s.8 issues at all. It was also arguable that  the
      secretary of state was deprived of a fair consideration of the reasons
      for refusal.

   5. Ms Isherwood submitted that the Judge failed to give adequate  reasons
      on material matters. The Judge failed to grapple in any  specific  way
      with the various credibility points raised by the secretary  of  state
      in her decision letter, which were made at the hearing.

   6. At [8(ii)] the Judge stated that he  had  considered  the  credibility
      points that the secretary of state had raised against the claimant. He
      did  not  however  consider  that  they  are  sufficiently  cogent  to
      undermine the core of the claimant's evidence.

   7. She submitted that the Judge  then  dismissed  the  legitimate  points
      raised in the reasons for refusal letter in  a  "general  and  cursory
      fashion." She referred to the claimant's assertion  that  his  brother
      was politically active but  when  questioned  knew  virtually  nothing
      about those activities as outlined  at  page  7  of  the  reasons  for
      refusal. The secretary of state noted there that the claimant said  he
      was suspected of supporting PJAK as his brother is politically  active
      within this party. He was asked to provide more information about  his
      brother's involvement in the party and stated that he only  knew  that
      he is working with Habz - (Interview record Q94). Given that  this  is
      the core aspect of his claim,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  him  to
      provide a detailed account in  this  regard.  His  failure  to  do  so
      undermined his claim.

   8. She submitted that there had  been  no  proper  engagement  with  this
      material consideration which went to the heart of the claimant's case.

   9. Further, the secretary of state had also asserted  that  the  claimant
      failed to make a timely claim and that  his  credibility  was  damaged
      under s.8(6) of the 2004 Act. No account was taken of that either.

  10. Nor did the Judge make any finding regarding the claimant's failure to
      claim asylum in a safe third country even though it is clear that  the
      claimant passed through several countries before arriving in the UK.

  11. Despite recounting some of the evidence and the background  materials,
      the actual findings and reasoning on matters of  dispute  between  the
      parties by the Judge was inadequate.

  12. She referred to the asylum interview at B13,  Q30.  The  claimant  was
      asked what he feared would happen to him were he to return to Iran. He
      stated that he does not know what would happen to him but he  is  sure
      and feels that his life would be in danger.

  13. Ms Isherwood submitted that in the reasons for refusal  the  secretary
      of state set out the basis upon which it was  not  accepted  that  the
      claimant was accused of supporting the PJAK party. The Judge  did  not
      deal with the secretary's contention  but  'simply  stated'  that  the
      claimant's account is consistent with country background evidence.

  14. He then 'simply stated' that having considered the credibility  points
      that the secretary of state raised against the claimant,  he  did  not
      consider that they are sufficiently cogent to undermine  the  core  of
      his evidence;  he had given a broadly  consistent  account  throughout
      the asylum process and at the hearing; he was cross examined  at  some
      length.  The Judge was satisfied that he remained consistent and  gave
      a coherent, plausible and unblemished  account  of  the  circumstances
      that compelled him to flee the country - at [8(i)].

  15. On behalf of the claimant, Mr  Bundock,  who  did  not  represent  the
      claimant at the First-tier Tribunal, submitted that there was no error
      of law. This appeal amounts to a reasons challenge.

  16. He submitted that there were sufficient reasons for the key  findings.
      The Upper Tribunal should not assume that the First-tier Judge has not
      considered a point. Further, the reasons  must  be  'adequate  to  the
      context'. There the facts are crucial.

  17. He referred to the structure of the determination. The Judge  set  out
      in some detail the secretary of state's case  at  [3],  including  the
      reasons for refusal which included  the  claimant's  explanations  and
      assertions.

  18. At [8] the Judge was satisfied upon a consideration of the evidence as
      a whole including the claimant's witness statement and oral  evidence,
      that the claimant had established that  "his  evidence  is  reasonably
      likely to be true."

  19. He stated that he has  reached  this  conclusion  "for  the  following
      reasons" which he then proceeded to set out at paragraphs [8  i]:  The
      claimant's account is consistent with the country background evidence.
      It is accepted that he is from the northern Kurdish  region  of  Iran.
      There has been renewed  conflict  between  the  Iranian  Revolutionary
      Guard and Kurdish separatist groups in northern Iran. He referred to a
      recent news report concerning massive protests  against  human  rights
      abuses in May 2016. There was also a substantial body  of  documentary
      evidence concerning the current situation in the northern province  of
      Iran and in particular the claimant's home area.

  20. He stated at [8 ii] that he has considered the credibility points that
      the secretary of  state  raised  against  the  claimant.  He  did  not
      consider that they are sufficiently cogent to undermine  the  core  of
      the claimant's evidence. It was clear to him  that  the  claimant  has
      given a broadly consistent account throughout the asylum  process  and
      at the hearing. The claimant was cross-examined at some length and  he
      was satisfied  that  the  claimant  remained  consistent  and  gave  a
      coherent, plausible  and  unblemished  account  of  the  circumstances
      compelling him to flee his country.

  21. Mr Bundock accordingly submitted that the  Judge  has  given  adequate
      reasons for finding that the claimant's evidence is reasonably  likely
      to be true [8(ii)].

  22. With regard to the s.8 point he submitted that the secretary of  state
      made a mistake in the refusal letter. There she stated that he  failed
      to make a claim for asylum on arrival in the UK. He knowingly remained
      and worked in the UK illegally. He was arrested on 27 January 2016  by
      the Highways  Agency.  He  only  claimed  asylum  after  he  had  been
      arrested.

  23. However, as the claimant made it clear at paragraph 18 of  his  appeal
      statement, he had only just got out of a lorry after arriving  in  the
      UK when he encountered the police. He then immediately claimed asylum.
      He had not worked in the UK. The secretary of state has  confused  him
      with someone else.

  24. In the immigration history set  out  by  the  secretary  of  state  at
      paragraph 6 of the reasons for refusal the secretary of state asserted
      that the claimant claimed to have left  Iran  7-8  days  before  being
      encountered by the Highways Agency on 27  January  2016.  It  is  also
      confirmed that he claimed asylum on 27 January 2016.

  25. His initial contact and asylum registration form  shows  that  he  was
      interviewed on 27 January 2016. There he stated at paragraph 3.3  that
      he left Iran 7-8 days ago. He was taken by lorry to Turkey where  they
      stopped on two occasions at night. He does not know  what  country  it
      was. Then he arrived in the UK.

  26. Mr Bundock submitted that the  reasons  were  sufficient  when  having
      regard to the specific context in the reasons for refusal.

  27. He referred to the aspects of the  appellant's  case  which  were  not
      accepted in the reasons for refusal from  paragraph  20  onwards.  The
      claimant did identify how the Etelat were aware  that  he  helped  his
      brother treat his wounds. He gave various reasons when interviewed  as
      to why he became aware of this. It might have been because  his  phone
      was tapped, or that they were tracing his phone or that they had  been
      to the village.

  28. With regard to paragraph 23 of the reasons  for  refusal,  Mr  Bundock
      submitted that his answer to question 58 of the  interview  could  not
      undermine his credibility.  Nor  can  the  explanation  given  by  the
      appellant to  question  57  damage  his  credibility  as  asserted  in
      paragraph 24.

  29. He submitted that paragraph 26 of the reasons  for  refusal  is  "pure
      nonsense." The claimant had given an explanation as to why helping his
      brother made him a suspect of supporting PJAK. He had stated  that  he
      had helped his brother cross the border.

  30. In response, Ms Isherwood submitted that  there  was  nothing  in  the
      background evidence produced about phone tapping. Nor  was  there  any
      reasoning within the determination about this.

      Assessment

  31. The First-tier Judge has given a very  short  decision  consisting  of
      nine paragraphs over five pages. He set out the secretary  of  state's
      case at paragraph [3]. He has  identified  the  secretary  of  state's
      contention in the reasons why it was not accepted  that  the  claimant
      was accused of supporting PJAK.

  32. He has also had regard to the claimant's evidence. He noted  that  the
      claimant had been cross-examined. At [5] he set  out  in  some  detail
      what that the claimant stated in oral  evidence  about  his  brother's
      involvement in the PJAK for about six years. He had  not  shared  with
      him any information regarding  the  details  of  his  activities.  His
      brother had told his friend that he was joining them. It was only when
      he was asked to assist his brother that he realised he  was  with  the
      PJAK. His brother had not told him about  his  involvement  as  people
      keep such matters a secret. He does not know why his brother's  friend
      told him about his brother's  involvement  when  his  brother  himself
      would not have wanted him to know about it.

  33. After his brother received his injury he went to a nearby village  and
      asked his father's friend to contact his family. It was then that  the
      claimant was contacted. His father's friend came to the house and told
      him that his brother needed his help. When he went to his brother,  he
      helped him bandage his wounds and he explained how  he  had  sustained
      them.

  34. It took him about two hours to attend to those  wounds.  He  left  his
      brother as soon as he had 'connected with'  his  colleagues.  He  then
      went to his uncle's who asked him if he had been working with the PJAK
      with his brother. He said that the authorities had  visited  his  home
      because they wanted to  inquire  if  he  was  collaborating  with  his
      brother.

  35. The basis of the claimant's claim was that he was  compelled  to  flee
      Iran when the authorities came looking for him after he  had  assisted
      his brother who had been injured.

  36. The claimant has dealt with  the  credibility  points  raised  by  the
      secretary of state in his  appeal  statement.   As  noted,  the  Judge
      referred to the claimant's responses  to  the  points  raised  in  the
      refusal letter.

  37. The secretary of state in her grounds contended that the claimant  had
      asserted that his brother was politically active but  when  questioned
      about this he knew virtually nothing about the activities as  referred
      to in the reasons for refusal.  The secretary of state submitted  that
      there was simply no proper engagement with this material consideration
      that went to the heart of his case.

  38. However, the claimant had dealt with that in his appeal  statement  at
      paragraph 13. There he stated that  his  brother  did  not  share  any
      information with him about his PJAK activities. He had no wish to  get
      involved with them. He helped O because the latter is his brother  and
      not because he is a PJAK activist. He would have been put in danger to
      have information about his PJAK activities.

  39. The Judge had proper regard at [4(iii)]to  the  claimant's  assertions
      set out in his witness statement namely,  that  his  brother  had  not
      shared with him any information regarding his activities in the  PJAK.
      His brother directed him  to  go  to  a  particular  point  where  his
      colleagues collected him. He would not have been  able  to  cross  the
      border without his assistance. He had completed 15 months of  military
      service and had no alternative but to  abscond  when  the  authorities
      identified him as anti-regime activist.

  40. In his assessment the Judge identified the basis of his claim at  [6].
      He had regard to the country guidance case  of  SSH  and  HR  (Illegal
      Exit: Failed Asylum Seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC).

  41. There the Tribunal found that a  person  against  whom  there  was  no
      adverse interest could return to Iran safely even if they had left the
      country illegally. The Tribunal stated that it was not suggested  that
      an individual faces risk on return on the sole basis of being Kurdish.



  42. The Tribunal went on to find that it was  however  agreed  that  being
      Kurdish was relevant to  how  a  returnee  would  be  treated  by  the
      authorities. There was reference  to  the  operational  guidance  note
      which referred to the government disproportionately targeting minority
      groups, including Kurds, for arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention and
      physical abuse. No examples had been  provided  of  ill  treatment  of
      returnees with no relevant adverse interest factors other  than  their
      Kurdish ethnicity. However, the Tribunal accepted that it might be  an
      exacerbating factor for a returnee otherwise of interest.

  43. The Judge had regard at [8(i)] to the background country evidence.  He
      considered the credibility points raised finding that the claimant had
      given a broadly consistent  account  throughout  and  had  been  cross
      examined at length and he remained consistent  and  gave  a  coherent,
      plausible and unblemished account of the circumstances compelling  him
      to flee Iran.

  44. I find that the Judge has had in mind the secretary of state's reasons
      for refusing the claimant's application for asylum. Those matters  had
      been addressed by the claimant in his interview, his appeal  statement
      and during his oral evidence. Although a short decision, the Judge has
      given a reasoned assessment of the claimant's  account.  His  findings
      were available on the evidence presented.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. The decision  shall  accordingly
      stand.


      Anonymity direction continued.














      Signed                             Date 16 October 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









