
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:   PA/08101/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |                                     |
|On 25 June 2020                      |On 09 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     I B
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONFIRMED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   Decision made under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
                                 Rules 2008

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal French ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 4 November 2019 by
    which the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent  to
    refuse to grant her international protection was dismissed.

 2. By a decision sent to the parties on 6 March 2020 Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Keane granted permission to appeal on all grounds.

'Rule 34'

 3. This decision is made without a hearing under rule 34 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules').

 4. In light of the present need to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed at rule  2(1)  of  the
    2008 Rules, and also at rule  2(2)-(4),  I  indicated  by  a  Note  and
    Directions sent to the parties on 6 May 2020 my provisional  view  that
    it would be appropriate to determine the following questions without  a
    hearing:

      i) Whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved
         the making of an error of law, and if so

     ii) Whether the decision should be set aside.

 5. In reaching my provisional view I was mindful as to  the  circumstances
    when an oral hearing is to be held in order to comply with  the  common
    law duty of fairness and also as to when a decision  may  appropriately
    be made consequent to a paper consideration: Osborn v. The Parole Board
    [2013] UKSC 61; [2014] AC 1115.

 6. I detailed at para. 3 of the Note and Directions:

         "I observe the grounds of appeal. They are  discursive  in  nature,
         but I note the clear distillation of the challenge  by  JFtT  Keane
         when granting permission to appeal on 3 March 2020. I am  therefore
         satisfied that the issues arising in this matter are clear  between
         the parties. The attention of the parties is drawn to the  guidance
         of the Court of Appeal in R (SG (Iraq)) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940; [2013] 1 WLR 41,  at  [43]
         to [50] and also R (on the application of  Qader)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2011] EWHC 1765 (Admin), at  [34]  -
         [35]. As to the approach to be taken to the evidence of an  expert,
         the attention of the parties is drawn to the judgment of Lord  Reed
         and Lord Hodge in Kennedy v Cordia (Services) Ltd  [2016]  UKSC  6;
         [2016] 1 WLR 597, at [38] - [61]."

 7.  The  respondent  consented  to  the  proposed  approach  as   to   the
    consideration of this hearing.

 8. The Tribunal has received no communication from the  appellant's  legal
    representatives, Tann Law Solicitors, as to the  appellant's  position.
    The appellant's  solicitors  have  not  filed  written  submissions.  I
    observe that the Note and Directions was sent to  two  email  addresses
    belonging to the appellant's solicitors held on file, one of  which  is
    detailed on the firm's website. The  firm  presently  confirms  by  its
    website that it is monitoring emails during the Covid-19 pandemic. I am
    therefore satisfied that the Note  and  Directions  were  appropriately
    served upon the appellant's solicitors.

 9. I am grateful to Mr. T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer, for his very
    helpful rule  24  response,  dated  29  May  2020.  Consequent  to  the
    respondent accepting that the  Judge  materially  erred  in  law  I  am
    content that it is just and appropriate to proceed under rule 34 in the
    absence of submissions from the appellant.

Anonymity

10. The Judge issued an anonymity direction. No application was made by the
    representatives to set aside this  direction  and  I  confirm  that  it
    remains in place.

11. The direction is confirmed at the conclusion of this decision.

Background

12. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia and is presently aged  36.  She
    states that she is of Oromo ethnicity. She is  married  and  has  three
    children, one of whom is now an adult and the youngest is aged 15.

13. She details that she has a family history of involvement with the Oromo
    Liberation Front ('OLF'), with her  parents  having  been  detained  as
    supporters of the movement in the early  1990s.  She  understands  that
    they were killed in detention. The appellant asserts that she commenced
    supporting the OLF in 2012, contributing money and  being  involved  in
    recruitment. She asserts that she was arrested in May 2014 and  accused
    of using her restaurant business as cover for her political activities.
    She states that she was ill-treated in detention  and  forced  to  sign
    documents in a language  that  she  did  not  understand  before  being
    released. She details that she was arrested on  a  second  occasion  in
    November 2014 when the authorities raided an OLF cell meeting. She  was
    detained for 10 days and ill-treated, resulting in a  confession  being
    extracted as to her political activities. She  was  released  following
    payment of a bribe.

14. The appellant asserts that she left Ethiopia on 15  November  2014  and
    travelled to the United Kingdom via Sudan, Turkey,  Greece,  Macedonia,
    Serbia, Hungary and France. She states that she arrived in this country
    clandestinely on 4 March 2016 and  claimed  asylum  upon  arrival.  The
    respondent refused the application for international  protection  by  a
    decision dated 9 September 2019.

Hearing Before the FtT

15. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Birmingham  on  29  October
    2019. The appellant attended and was represented.  The  Judge  did  not
    find the appellant to be a credible witness.

16. I observe that in undertaking his task, the Judge was not aided in  his
    efforts by the  filing  of  an  unwieldy  and  significantly  unhelpful
    skeleton argument drafted by the appellant's solicitors that ran to  20
    pages and covered 76 paragraphs. It appears  that  the  author  of  the
    document failed to recall that the purpose of a skeleton argument is to
    assist the Tribunal by setting out  as  concisely  as  practicable  the
    arguments upon which a party intends  to  rely.  Rather,  the  document
    reads as a series of thoughts drafted in a prolix manner,  for  example
    at para 29:

         "29. ... It is contended that the respondent use of the said phrase
             was to diminish and downplay the role of the appellant  so  as
             to justify  her  erroneous  findings  and  decision.  Her  use
             thereof also clearly illustrates that this respondent has  not
             undertaken the necessary investigations which it is expected a
             competent authority charged  with  making  decisions  in  such
             serious cases is obligated to carry out so as  to  make  sound
             decisions (pp 21-51; 89-248 of appellant's bundle)."

17. It is unclear how the point addressed in para. 29 was meant  to  aid  a
    judge in his or her considerations as to whether a well-founded risk of
    persecution existed at the date of hearing, nor as to which of the  189
    pages referred to within the appellant's bundle  was  relevant  to  the
    issue.

Grounds of Appeal

18. The grounds of appeal were drafted by the  applicant's  solicitors  and
    run to 24 paragraphs over 7 pages. As observed above, the  grounds  are
    discursive in nature, but three grounds are identified:

      i) The FtT erred by failing to consider relevant evidence

     ii) The FtT erred by failing to 'appropriately' consider country expert
         evidence

    iii) The FtT failed to give  any  adequate  reason  for  departing  from
         binding Country Guidance

19. In granting permission to appeal JFtT  Keane  was  able  to  succinctly
    detail the grounds being advanced, and reasoned:

         "The grounds disclosed arguable errors of law  but  for  which  the
         outcome of the appeal might have been different.

         First,  the  judge  arguably  failed  to  carry  out  that   global
         assessment of the issue of credibility which was intrinsic  to  his
         task. Although the judge frequently referred  to  the  respondent's
         bundle he did not refer or did not adequately  refer  to  the  many
         documents comprised within the appellant's bundle of documents  and
         indeed  to  the  further  representations  which  the   appellant's
         representatives caused to be placed  before  the  respondent  after
         [her] asylum interview.

         Second,  the  judge  arguably   had   regard   to   an   irrelevant
         consideration when suggesting at paragraph 12 of his decision  that
         the expert credentials of Dr Berri were undermined by the fact that
         Dr Berri had not lived in Ethiopia since 1996. It was arguably more
         pertinent for the judge to  consider  whether  Dr  Berri  possessed
         sufficient knowledge, qualifications or credentials  which  enabled
         him to pass expert opinion upon conditions prevailing in Ethiopia.

         Third, it was incumbent upon the judge to apply the proposition for
         which the country guidance decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MB
         (OLF and MTA - risk)  Ethiopia  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00030  stood  as
         authority. The judge arguably made only passing  reference  to  the
         decision and did not apply the proposition for which  the  decision
         stood as authority.

         All the grounds are arguable. The  application  for  permission  is
         granted."

Decision on Error of Law

20. By way of his rule 24 response, Mr.  Lindsay  succinctly  confirmed  on
    behalf of the respondent:

         "2.   The  respondent  accepts  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge French promulgated on 4 November 2019  contains
             material errors of law.

         3.   In particular  it  is  accepted  that  the  approach  to  both
             credibility  and  country  guidance  case  law  is  erroneous,
             amounting to material misdirection.

         4.   The Secretary of  State  agrees  that  the  FTT  determination
             should be set aside with no findings preserved."

21. It may have been reasonable for the Judge to conclude on  the  evidence
    before him that the appellant was not a  credible  witness  because  of
    inconsistencies or lack of relevant detail. It was also open to him  to
    accept the appellant as a credible witness. However,  when  undertaking
    such assessment, he was required to observe that the  appellant  relied
    upon an expert report from Dr Berisisa  Berri,  a  business  management
    professional who asserts that he enjoys a  long-term  involvement  with
    the OLF. Dr Berri detailed his curriculum vitae over  3  pages  of  his
    report. His evidence is supportive of the appellant's asserted  history
    of political involvement, and so required careful consideration.

22. It is well-established that the evidence of an expert witness is not to
    be rejected lightly: Karanakaran v. Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2000] Imm AR 271. It was incumbent upon the Judge to assess
    Dr Berri's qualifications and expertise. If not satisfied that he is an
    expert  on  the  issue  before  the  Tribunal,  adequate  reasons  were
    required. If the Judge were so  satisfied,  then  he  was  required  to
    assess the nature and context of the expert evidence presented.

23. The clearest statement of the basis on which a court or tribunal should
    permit expert testimony in a case is found in  the  judgment  of  Chief
    Justice King in the South Australian case of R  v  Bonython  (1984)  38
    SASR 45, 46 in which he set out a test with several  limbs.  The  first
    may be summarised as 'does the court need expert evidence to  reach  an
    informed conclusion?' The Judge was therefore required to  consider  as
    to whether the issue or issues upon which Dr. Berri was  instructed  to
    opine are ones that require expert evidence. The  second  limb  may  be
    summarised as 'is there a reliable body of specialist knowledge?' It is
    whether the subject matter of the opinion  forms  part  of  a  body  of
    knowledge or experience which is sufficiently organised  or  recognised
    to be accepted as a reliable body of knowledge or experience, a special
    acquaintance with which by the witness would render his or her  opinion
    of assistance to the court. The third limb can simply be identified  as
    whether the witness  is  impartial  in  his  or  her  presentation  and
    assessment of the  evidence.  This  may  be  relevant  in  this  matter
    consequent to Mr. Berri's stated long-term involvement  with  the  OLF.
    The final limb may be summarised  as  'is  the  particular  witness  an
    expert in that field?' A judge is to  be  mindful  that  an  expert  is
    generally expected to be a person with extensive knowledge  or  ability
    based on research, experience, or occupation and in a  particular  area
    of study.

24. The approach adopted in Bonython was approved by the Supreme  Court  in
    Kennedy v Cordia (Services) Ltd [2016] UKSC 6; [2016]  1  WLR  597,  at
    para. 43, where Lord Reed and Lord  Hodge  (on  behalf  of  the  Court)
    considered the evidence of skilled witnesses in  civil  proceedings  at
    paras. 38 to 61. The approach adopted to civil proceedings appears, for
    the purpose of this appeal, to be consistent with the  approach  to  be
    adopted in Tribunal proceedings. It was held that there  are  threshold
    questions as to the admissibility of expert evidence, para. 39, and  at
    para. 41 it is noted that  'an  expert  in  the  social  and  political
    conditions in a foreign country who gives evidence  to  an  immigration
    judge also gives skilled evidence of fact.'  The  Judge  was  therefore
    required to assess as to whether a witness, in this instance Dr. Berri,
    purporting to be  an  'expert'  providing  skilled  evidence  of  fact,
    actually possesses the necessary knowledge and  experience:  para.  44.
    The possession of such knowledge and experience was  addressed  by  the
    Supreme Court at para. 50:

         "50. The skilled witness must demonstrate to the court that  he  or
             she has relevant  knowledge  and  experience  to  give  either
             factual evidence, which is not based exclusively  on  personal
             observation or  sensation,  or  opinion  evidence.  Where  the
             skilled witness establishes such knowledge and experience,  he
             or  she  can  draw  on  the  general  body  of  knowledge  and
             understanding of the relevant expertise: Myers  v.  The  Queen
             [2015] 3 WLR 1145, para. 63."

25. A Presidential panel in MH (review; slip rule; church  witnesses)  Iran
    [2020] UKUT 00125 (IAC) confirmed at paras. 38-39:

         "38. At [43]-[44] of Kennedy v  Cordia  (Services)  LLP  (Scotland)
             [2016] UKSC 6; [2016] 1 WLR 597, the Supreme Court approved  a
             section of the South  Australian  decision  in  R  v  Bonython
             (1984)  38  SASR  45,  from  which  it  distilled   four   key
             considerations which  governed  the  admissibility  of  expert
             evidence (which in Scots law is known as "skilled  evidence").



               i) whether the proposed  skilled  evidence  will  assist  the
                  court in its task;

              ii) whether  the  witness  has  the  necessary  knowledge  and
                  experience;

             iii)  whether  the  witness  is  impartial  in   his   or   her
                  presentation and assessment of the evidence; and

              iv)  whether  there  is  a  reliable  body  of  knowledge   or
                  experience to underpin the expert's evidence."

         39.  As we have already stated, no question of admissibility arises
             in the IAC but these criteria  are  nevertheless  relevant  in
             deciding whether evidence is  properly  described  as  'expert
             evidence'."

26. Unfortunately, the Judge undertook no assessment as to whether Dr Berri
    was an expert for the purposes of the issue before him.  Instead  there
    is a cursory observation as to Dr Berri's personal history and a simple
    reference to his report, and no more, over 5 lines in para.  4  of  the
    decision. Such approach is  inconsistent  to  that  identified  by  the
    Supreme Court in Kennedy v. Cordia (Services)  LLP  and  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Karanakaran and establishes a material error of law.

27. I observe at this juncture that Dr Berri does  not  expressly  identify
    his understanding as to his duties and obligations to the  Tribunal  as
    identified by Cresswell J in The Ikarian Reefer [1993] 2  Lloyd's  Rep.
    68. Nor is a copy  of  his  letter  of  instruction  filed  within  the
    appellant's bundle. These are matters that another judge  may  wish  to
    consider, as well as whether he has sufficient  expertise  to  aid  the
    Tribunal.

28. As to ground 3, the Judge did not accept any of the appellant's  stated
    history and so was not required to consider the decision in MB (OLF and
    MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030 as it was not accepted  that
    she was (i) a member of the OLF, (ii) a  sympathiser  of  the  OLF,  or
    (iii) perceived by the Ethiopian authorities to be a sympathiser of the
    OLF. However, at para. 11 the Judge detailed that he would consider the
    appeal in the alternative, on the basis that the appellant was required
    to leave Ethiopia  in  2014  because  of  her  history  of  arrest  and
    detention. The Judge  was  then  required  to  expressly  consider  the
    country guidance decision in MB, which is favourable to the  appellant,
    and to be mindful that the decision remains  authoritative  unless  and
    until it is set aside on appeal or replaced  by  a  subsequent  country
    guidance determination: R (on the application of Qader) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] EWHC 1765 (Admin), at [34] - [35].
    He was therefore required to  identify  strong  grounds,  supported  by
    cogent evidence, to justify not doing so: R (SG (Iraq)) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940; [2013] 1 WLR 41,  at
    [43] to [50]. Even though the country guidance relates to circumstances
    arising in Ethiopia well over a decade ago  the  requirement  that  the
    Judge consider whether to follow such guidance  was  confirmed  by  the
    courts  in  Qader  and  SG  (Iraq).  The  failure  to  undertake   such
    consideration, or even to expressly consider  MB,  in  the  alternative
    assessment was a material error of law.

29. In such circumstances, several  material  errors  of  law  having  been
    identified, there is no requirement to consider ground 1.

Remaking the Decision

30. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice  Statement  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the  disposal  of
    appeals in this Tribunal and I am satisfied that the nature  or  extent
    of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary  in  order  for  the
    decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
    overriding objective  in  rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 4
    November 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

32. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before any Judge other  than  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    French.

33. No findings of fact are preserved.



Directions

34. It is expected that the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  issue  appropriate
    directions. However, to aid the Judge who is to hear this appeal,  this
    Tribunal makes the following direction:

      1. No later than 14 days before the listed hearing of this appeal  the
         appellant is to file and serve a skeleton argument  running  to  no
         more than 5 pages, clearly identifying the issues relied  upon  and
         identifying relevant individual pages within the appellant's bundle
         concerned with such issues.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

35. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs  otherwise  no  report  of
    these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 25 June 2020


