
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08801/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2019                              |On 07 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     BFM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, counsel instructed pro bono
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Haria, promulgated on 3 January 2019. Permission to appeal was  granted
    by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 20 March 2019.

Anonymity

 2. In view of the fact that this is a protection matter and the sponsor is
    vulnerable, a direction is set out below.

Background

 3. The appellant applied for asylum following her  arrest  on  5  February
    2016. Hitherto, her leave to remain expired on 3 August 2015  when  she
    became appeal rights exhausted. The basis of her claim was that she was
    forced to marry in Pakistan and that her husband  was  emotionally  and
    physically abusive towards her. After arriving in the  United  Kingdom,
    the appellant commenced an intimate relationship with a woman and as  a
    result she fears for her life at the hands of her family if returned to
    Pakistan.

 4. In the decision letter dated 5 August 2016, the respondent rejected the
    appellant's claim of a same-sex relationship owing  to  inconsistencies
    in her account of her sexuality.

 5. The appellant appealed. Her appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge MB Hussain in a decision promulgated  on  9  January  2017.  That
    decision was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on 8 June 2017 and
    the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant,  her
    claimed partner RC and other witnesses. Counsel for the appellant asked
    that she be treated as a vulnerable  witness  owing  to  mental  health
    issues and specific adjustments  were  sought.  Adjustments  were  also
    sought for RC owing to her health  and  disability  issues.  The  judge
    considered that an  anonymity  direction  was  appropriate.  The  judge
    concluded that the appellant's account lacked credibility and  that  it
    was a fabrication designed to  enable  her  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal argued that the judge found that the  appellant's
    claimed partner provided  credible  evidence  which  was  difficult  to
    reconcile with the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  not
    credible.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the following basis

         "The judge does appear  to  have  made  contradictory  findings  at
         Paragraph 52 onwards in relation to (RC). Either she  was  credible
         or she was not. "

The hearing

 9. Both representatives agreed that  the  determination  was  confused  in
    respect of the assessment of credibility and risk, to the  extent  that
    any error was material and that it required a fresh hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision on error of law

10. The appellant's protection and human rights cases concern her sexuality
    and claimed relationship with a woman. The female partner  in  question
    was found to be wholly credible by the judge, yet her evidence went  to
    the genuineness of the relationship with the  appellant.  By  contrast,
    the judge found the appellant's  evidence  to  lack  credibility  in  a
    significant number of respects including the  relationship.  Given  the
    respondent's support for the appellant's grounds of appeal and the fact
    that this apparent inconsistency remains unresolved I am satisfied that
    there is a material error of law such that the  decision  must  be  set
    aside and remade. None of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    are to stand.

11. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of her asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  her  of   such
    consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of one day by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judges Haria and MB Hussain.

Mr Paramjorthy has been representing the appellant pro-bono for a number  of
years. The listing clerk is directed to liaise with counsel's clerk  on  [~]
to ascertain Mr Paramjorthy's availability.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 01 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


