
[pic]
IAC-AH-LR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08447/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3rd July 2017                      |On 11th July 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                  Mr S H I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Harris instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision made by the Respondent on 31st July 2016 to refuse
    his application for asylum.  First-tier Tribunal Judge James  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal.  The Appellant now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal
    with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brunnen  on  16th
    May 2016.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  grounds,  which
    contend that there is a lack of care in the preparation of the  judge's
    decision, that the judge failed to take account of  material  evidence,
    that the judge incorrectly relied on a lack of corroboration and failed
    to take into account the Appellant's explanation for his  lack  of  sur
    place activity, are arguable.

The Background

 3. The Appellant claims that he worked as  a  freelance  writer  whilst  a
    student and started a blog in 2010. He  claims  that  the  content  was
    political and that he criticised KDP policies. He says  that  he  wrote
    articles for various media and newspaper outlets.  He  claims  that  in
    2015 he received threats from the KDP by letter  and  text  threatening
    that he would be killed  and  warning  him  to  stop  his  journalistic
    activities. He says that his home was visited by suspected KDP officers
    in December 2015 and that he then sold his vehicle  and  left  home  12
    days later. He left via Sulemaniya using his own passport  and  had  no
    problems leaving through the airport.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that a number of the documents
    submitted by the Appellant were not reliable. The judge concluded  that
    the cumulative effect of the  concerns  she  had  in  relation  to  the
    evidence submitted led her to conclude that the Appellant had failed to
    submit satisfactory evidence to establish that his account is true. The
    judge found that the Appellant's entire account was not credible.

Error of law

 5. At paragraph 29 of her decision  the  judge  referred  to  an  internet
    search. Ms Harris submitted that it is not clear whether this reference
    was taken directly from the reasons for refusal letter or  whether  the
    judge undertook her own internet research. At paragraph 29 judge  said;
    "The Respondent raised the fact that although a card entitled  Standard
    institution for Media was held by the  Appellant,  that  there  was  no
    evidence of this organisation when an Internet search was  undertaken".
    This does not indicate that the judge undertook any  internet  research
    in relation to this issue; it is simply  rehearsing  and  acknowledging
    the fact that the Respondent was unable to find any  evidence  of  this
    organisation when an internet search was undertaken.

 6. Ms Harris submitted that the judge further erred at paragraph 29 in her
    treatment of the letter from Mr Massoud Abdul Khaliq  of  the  Standard
    Institute for Media.   The  judge  firstly  noted  that  the  Appellant
    submitted a faxed photocopy of a document with the word  'Standard'  on
    it dated 23rd March 2017.  The judge noted that this document was faxed
    less than 32 hours prior to the hearing and was not properly served  on
    the Tribunal or the Presenting Officer and was served in breach of  the
    directions.  Ms Harris submitted that the judge could have  granted  an
    adjournment for the Presenting Officer to deal with this issue but  had
    failed to do so.  However this is not a material  issue  as  the  judge
    went on to consider the actual document.

 7. The judge noted that the original  document  was  not  before  her  and
    considered that this affected the weight to be given to  the  document.
    It is complained in the Grounds of Appeal that  this  document  was  e-
    mailed therefore there was no original. However the judge was aware  of
    this as she also  considered  the  issue  at  paragraph  39  where  she
    recorded the Appellant's oral evidence and noted "No e-mail sending the
    letter from the Standard to the  Appellant  was  adduced  in  evidence.
    Thus the source of this letter remains of concern".

 8. The judge further noted that the translation provided  leaves  some  of
    the contents of the original document out of the  translation  such  as
    the logo.  The judge noted that the contents  of  the  letter  are  "so
    highly generic without reference to a single date  of  the  Appellant's
    claimed activities, or articles, or publication  dates,  or  titles  of
    such articles, or the date of closure  of  the  organisation,  that  it
    fails to support the Appellant's claim".  It is also noted  the  letter
    writer did not provide an address and that the website address was  not
    translated.

 9. Ms Harris submitted that the judge erroneously said  that  the  website
    address given on the untranslated version was apparently in Arabic  and
    Ms Harris submitted that the document is in Kurdish Sorani and that the
    fact that the judge referred to it as Arabic was  further  evidence  of
    the complaint  that  the  judge  did  not  fully  appreciate  that  the
    Appellant's issue and fear was in relation to the KDP and not the Iraqi
    authorities.  However I do not accept that reference to Arabic reflects
    this at all.  It is clearly the case that the judge  misunderstood  the
    language but that does not evidence any misunderstanding of the case in
    light of the entirety of the decision.

10. Ms Harris submitted that this letter is not generic as it confirms  the
    Appellant's name and the fact that he has fled Iraq.  She accepted that
    it does not detail every article he has ever written but submitted that
    it does not need to.

11. In his submission Mr Kandola submitted that it was open to the judge to
    take adverse inferences from the fact that  the  letter  was  submitted
    late.  In his submission it was open to the judge to conclude that  the
    letter was generic as it  does  not  refer  to  very  specific  matters
    relating to the Appellant.

12. In my view the judge made clear a number of concerns about  the  letter
    from Standard. It is clear that these concerns about the e-mail and the
    circumstances in which it was submitted to the Tribunal led  the  judge
    to conclude that the document was not  reliable.  This  conclusion  was
    open to the judge on the basis of her findings.

13. At paragraph 30 the judge considered evidence of text messages said  to
    have been sent to the Appellant. She highlighted a number  of  concerns
    about the text messages which rendered them  unreliable  including  the
    fact that no telephone bill was submitted to confirm that the number is
    linked to the Appellant and that the contents of some of the texts  had
    not been translated. The judge also referred to  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence in relation to these texts at paragraph  39  noting  that  the
    Appellant;

         "... gave a garbled narrative that he had lost his mobile phone but
         then contacted a friend from Iraq to obtain the previous texts  but
         again no witness statement from this alleged friend is produced  to
         confirm that the Appellant forwarded these  texts  to  his  friends
         whilst he was in Iraq as claimed, although  easily  undertaken  and
         accessible.  Upon the  representatives  reviewing  the  Appellant's
         mobile phone he now had in his possession, it  was  confirmed  that
         the year of receipt of these messages were not identifiable and the
         messages were sent directly from a [HK], although  his  whereabouts
         could not be ascertain (sic) via the texts alone".

14. Ms Harris submitted that the judge's conclusions at paragraph 30 failed
    to take account of the fact that it is more likely that  the  Appellant
    had a pay as you go phone and failed to take account of the  fact  that
    the Appellant's name is in the translation of the text message at  page
    27 of the Appellant's additional bundle.  She submitted  that  this  is
    sufficient to show that these text messages were in fact  connected  to
    the  Appellant.   Mr  Kandola  submitted  that  the  judge  made  valid
    criticisms of the text messages which were open to her.  I  agree  that
    reading the contents of paragraphs 30 and 39 it was open to  the  judge
    to conclude that  the  evidence  submitted  in  relation  to  the  text
    messages was unreliable.

15. At paragraph 30 the judge also dealt with a number of  copies  of  what
    were claimed to be TV programme screenshots.  The judge noted that  the
    pages before her were simply black because they were poorly copied  and
    that there were no originals or decipherable copies and that no DVDs or
    CDs were submitted.  At paragraph 8 of the grounds it  is  argued  that
    there was no need to provide  a  DVD  copy  of  the  programme  as  the
    screenshots are self-explanatory as the Appellant was  identifiable  as
    involved in a television  discussion  programme.   Ms  Harris  did  not
    develop this argument before me and Mr Kandola submitted  that  it  was
    open to the judge in light of the poor quality of  the  screenshots  to
    conclude as she did.  I  agree  that  the  copies  of  the  screenshots
    submitted are extremely dark and there is no translated link for  these
    therefore it was open to the judge to conclude as she did.

16. At paragraph 31 the judge noted that, despite his claim to be wanted by
    the KDP and authorities of the regime in Iraq, the Appellant's national
    identity card was issued on 21st July 2012 during  the  adverse  events
    complained  of.  The  judge  considered  that   this,   together   with
    registering the sale of his vehicle with the local government and using
    his own passport to leave Iraq, is an indication that  he  was  not  of
    adverse interest by the regime or  authorities.   Ms  Harris  submitted
    that this is a material error as the problems started in  2015  as  set
    out in the Appellant's interviews and witness statement and that  there
    was a real concern that the judge fundamentally misunderstood the basis
    of the Appellant's claim.  On the other hand Mr Kandola submitted  that
    the Appellant's case was that as early as 2011 his  Facebook  page  was
    being hacked.  He referred to paragraph 7 of the decision in which  the
    judge set out a number of matters  raised  by  the  Respondent  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter.  Ms Harris submitted that this  was  wrong,
    that in fact the Appellant had never claimed that his Facebook  account
    was hacked by the KDP and that he had  consistently  claimed  that  his
    problems began in 2013.

17. However I note that the Appellant said at paragraph 3  of  his  witness
    statement that he had written articles critical of the  ruling  parties
    in the Kurdish region "for years".  At  paragraph  15  of  his  witness
    statement the  Appellant  said  that  he  had  never  stated  that  the
    authorities hacked his Facebook in 2011, he does not know who hacked it
    but he said that he was identified from his Facebook posts and that the
    authorities in Iraq have spies operating everywhere.  However in answer
    to question 33 in his asylum interview the Appellant said that he might
    have been observed and monitored in 2011 when he changed  his  Facebook
    account.  I further note that  there  is  no  challenge  to  the  other
    findings in relation  to  the  sale  of  his  vehicle  with  the  local
    government and using his own passport to leave Iraq being an indication
    that he was not of interest to the authorities. On the  basis  of  this
    evidence  the  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  these  matters
    indicated that the  Appellant  was  not  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities.

18. At paragraph 32 of the decision the judge referred to the fact that the
    Appellant provided seven URL addresses during interview.  At  paragraph
    20 of the decision the judge noted that  neither  legal  representative
    had checked the website addresses listed  on  the  web  shot  printouts
    provided by the Appellant and that they had both confirmed that it  was
    acceptable for the judge to check those website  addresses  to  confirm
    that the articles were indeed on  the  internet.   The  judge  said  at
    paragraph 32 that she checked these websites but was  redirected  to  a
    list of articles in English and  not  the  article  already  originally
    found and that the Appellant's representatives had  failed  to  provide
    any translations of these pages.  The judge noted at paragraph 39  that
    the Appellant said that  he  inserted  the  website  addresses  on  the
    untranslated articles and failed to take a screenshot of the web  pages
    with the relevant website addresses and that no  reason  for  this  was
    given.  At paragraph 33 the judge talked about  a  number  of  articles
    claimed to have been written  by  the  Appellant  and  notes  that  the
    website address provided does not marry up with the one claimed  to  be
    the source of the article produced. The judge concluded that  this  was
    an unreliable document and did not accept that the translation provided
    links to the original website document as suggested.   The  judge  made
    the same conclusion at paragraph 34 in relation to further articles.

19. Ms Harris submitted that she herself had searched the internet with the
    web addresses given and had been taken to the  home  page  because  the
    individual articles are no longer there. She submitted that  the  judge
    failed to take this into account and failed  to  consider  whether  the
    articles had been there before.

20. Mr Kandola submitted that the judge was given permission by the parties
    to look at the website addresses as given and the assertion that  links
    disappear after a period of time is something that cannot be proved  as
    evidenced by the fact that Ms  Harris'  search  had  led  to  different
    evidence to that before the judge.  He  submitted  that  the  Appellant
    would have to show in an objectively verifiable way the judge had  made
    a mistake of fact in relation to this issue. He submitted that,  having
    permitted the judge to embark upon her own research, it is not fair  to
    now complain about her conclusions.

21. I agree with Mr Kandola's submissions on this issue. It is  clear  from
    paragraph 20 that the representatives had not  themselves  checked  the
    website addresses provided by the Appellant.  The judge was  unable  to
    find the same articles as those presented to her.  Further, it  appears
    from the judge's note of the Appellant's oral  evidence  that  he  said
    that he put website addresses on untranslated articles  and  failed  to
    take a screenshot of the web pages of the  relevant  website  addresses
    [39].  In these circumstances and in the absence of evidence as to what
    exactly the judge would have found on conducting her  research  as  set
    out at paragraphs 32, 33 and 34, the Appellant has not established that
    the judge made any mistake of fact in relation to the  outcome  of  her
    internet research conducted after the hearing.

22. Ms Harris submitted that the judge made an error  at  paragraph  40  in
    concluding that the Appellant's sur place activities were minimal.  She
    submitted that, even if they were, this would not be  a  matter  to  go
    against the Appellant as he had not put  a  case  based  on  sur  place
    activities.  I do not accept that submission.  I note  that  the  judge
    said that that the Appellant's sur place activities failed  to  reflect
    any firm political opinions  let  alone  support  his  views  to  be  a
    politician or a journalist and concluded at paragraph 40;  "It  is  the
    dearth  of  evidence  before  (sic)  that  is  of   material   concern,
    considering the Appellant claims to be a journalist and  politician  or
    to have political views which are anathema to the regime in Iraq or the
    KDP".  This was a conclusion open to the judge on the  evidence  before
    her.

23. Ms Harris submitted that the judge set out the reasons put  forward  by
    the Respondent for refusing the asylum claim  including  reasons  which
    were no longer relevant to the Appellant's  case.   However  I  do  not
    accept that the judge is open to  criticism  on  this  basis.  She  was
    clearly entitled to set out the reasons for refusal letter as  long  as
    she acknowledged that that is what  she  has  done.  The  set  out  the
    matters raised in the reasons for refusal letter in  bullet  points  at
    paragraph 24 and concluded at  paragraph  25  "In  summary  it  is  not
    accepted that the Appellant  was  a  journalist  in  Iraq  or  that  he
    published political articles, or that he was sought by the KDP in  Iraq
    or was of adverse interest to the authorities".  It is very clear  that
    the judge was referring to the reasons for refusal letter and  was  not
    adopting these reasons as her own.

24. At paragraph 25 as in other places throughout the decision it is  clear
    that the judge clearly understood the nature of the case put forward by
    the Appellant contrary to the assertion in the Grounds of Appeal.

25. For the reasons set out above I  do  not  accept  the  submissions  put
    forward on behalf of the Appellant that the judge erred in her approach
    to the documentary evidence.  The judge reached conclusions open to her
    on the basis of all of the  evidence.   I  do  not  accept  Ms  Harris'
    submission that there is an impression of lack of anxious scrutiny. The
    judge considered all of the evidence before her and reached conclusions
    on those.  I accept Mr Kandola's submission that complaints made by the
    Appellant in this case are simply a disagreement with  the  conclusions
    reached by the judge.

26. In these circumstances I reach the conclusion that there is no material
    error of law in this decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an error of law.

The decision of the first tier Tribunal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date: 7th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 7th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

