
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08579/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined Without a Hearing at Field House|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 July 2020                            |On 31 July 2020                 |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     R S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be  punished  as  a  contempt  of  court.  The  appellant  is
entitled to anonymity because she is an asylum seeker and her appeal  rights
are not yet exhausted. The identity of  an  asylum  seeker  must  always  be
anonymised lest a decision to refuse protection is overturned  or  publicity
creates a risk on return that would not otherwise exist.

This is an appeal by a citizen of Albania, born in August  1989,  against  a
decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
decision of the Secretary of State refusing her asylum or any other kind  of
international protection.

The short point is that an  earlier  appeal  on  similar  grounds  has  been
dismissed but the appellant now has a report from  an  expert  psychiatrist.
This was considered by the First-tier Tribunal and permission to appeal  was
given on grounds  alleging,  in  outline,  that  the  judge  misapplied  the
decision in Devaseelan v.  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department,
[2002] UKIAT 000702 and/or gave inappropriate weight to the opinion  of  the
psychiatrist.

Permission to appeal was granted by a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   On  29
April 2020 special directions were sent out by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce
suggesting  that  the  appeal  was  suitable  for  determination  without  a
hearing.  As is well-known, the decision was made  at  a  time  of  national
lockdown caused by the Covid-19 pandemic and extreme demands have been  made
on  Tribunal's  resources.  A  balance  has  to  be   struck   between   the
desirability of an oral hearing, and the need  for  expedition.   The  Rules
emphasise the importance of expedition subject  to  many  qualifications  to
ensure fairness and they do not provide that an appellant is entitled to  an
oral hearing.

Judge Bruce's  directions,  appropriately,  were  sent  to  the  parties  by
electronic mail and the records show that they were sent out at 12:32 on  29
April 2020.  At 13:40  on  the  same  day  the  appellant's  representatives
responded with a further copy of the grounds.  The grounds  sent  appear  to
be exactly the same as those upon which permission was  granted  although  I
have been careful to rely on them as the most recently supplied rather  than
those supporting  the  original  application  in  case  there  is  a  subtle
difference that I have missed.  There would be no reason to have sent  these
grounds except in response to the directions given by the  Tribunal  on  the
same day and I can only assume that the appellant wishes to rely  on  those.
There was no indication that the appellant agreed to, or had any  views  on,
disposal without a hearing.

The Secretary of State responded later but with a Rule 24  notice  dated  15
May 2020.  Again it made no representations  about  the  need  for  an  oral
hearing.

Clearly, in the absence of such representations I cannot take notice of  the
views of the parties because none had been expressed.  It  is  clear  to  me
that both parties have been able to express their case  clearly  in  written
form and I am  satisfied  that  considering  the  case  and  determining  it
without a hearing rather than delaying it for an excessive  period  of  time
or, possibly, delaying other cases to make room for this one,  is  the  best
way to dispose of the appeal.

I will consider the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  below  in  some  detail
because that is necessary to consider the grounds but I set out  below  here
paragraph 38 of the  Decision  and  Reasons  which  in  my  judgment  is  of
considerable importance  and  it  seems  to  have  been  overlooked  in  the
representations and grounds.  The judge said:

  "Even if the appellant feels  unable  to  return  to  her  home  area  MK
  (lesbians) Albania CG [2009] UKAIT 00036 the Tribunal held that it cannot
  be said that without more there is a  real  risk  that  a  woman  without
  family support in Albania would suffer destitution amounting  to  inhuman
  or degrading treatment resulting in a breach of her rights under  Article
  3 of the ECHR or persecution, that each case must be  determined  on  its
  own facts.  As I  have  already  indicated  I  do  not  accept  that  the
  appellant has no family support."

The judge began her analysis by identifying the decision  being  a  decision
of 21 August 2019 and setting out appropriate  standard  self-directions  on
the law.

The judge noted that the  appellant  claimed  to  have  entered  the  United
Kingdom without permission in 2015.  She claimed asylum in  2017  which  was
refused in October 2017.  She appealed but  the  appeal  was  dismissed  and
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused.  Her  appeal  rights
were exhausted on 7 December 2018 and she  made  further  submissions  on  1
February 2019.  They were not considered but still further submissions  were
made on 1 July 2019 leading to the decision complained of.

The biggest and most important additional material was the expert report  of
a consultant forensic psychiatrist, Dr Chandra Ghosh dated 11 May 2019.

Dr Ghosh has now retired from her work as a consultant psychiatrist  in  the
National Health Service but she holds a diploma  in  psychological  medicine
from the Conjoined Board London attained in 1973 and  is  a  Member  of  the
Royal College  of  Psychiatrists  and  has  been  since  1975.   She  has  a
particular interest in the psychiatric needs of women in need of  protection
and post-traumatic stress disorder.

Dr Ghosh set out the appellant's personal history as she had  given  it.   I
can see nothing in the report that indicates that Dr Ghosh  knew  that  this
story had been disbelieved by either the Secretary of State  or  an  earlier
Tribunal. This is concerning.   Whatever  the  requirements  of  a  Practice
Direction might be it is hard to understand why a solicitor  instructing  an
expert on matters such as this would  not  want  to  draw  to  the  expert's
attention that the story had  been  disbelieved  and  it  is  concerning  to
wonder why, if this had been drawn  to  the  attention  of  the  expert,  no
comment was made on it at any stage.  The papers do not include full  copies
of the correspondence that was sent by the solicitors to the  expert.   That
is not necessarily material.  The information would in the  ordinary  course
of events be privileged but given the way  this  case  has  gone  it  is  an
omission that I regard as surprising.  That is not the same as  saying  that
it is relevant.

Be that as it may Dr Ghosh made clear that there was "considerable  evidence
in the General Practitioner's report that [the appellant]  has  deteriorated
slowly, particularly in relation to anxiety and depression."

The appellant was described as "coping, with no suicidal  thoughts"  in  the
earlier records but by October 2017 the Home Office sent  a  letter  to  the
General  Practitioner  saying  that  the  appellant   had   been   overheard
expressing suicidal ideas.

Dr Ghosh then refers to a "very serious incident" in October 2018.

A report dated 5 October 2018 shows  that  the  appellant  was  taken  to  a
hospital Accident and Emergency Department by the police because,  according
to Dr Ghosh, she was found "wandering the streets, complaining  of  headache
and suicidal thoughts."

Dr Ghosh was concerned that the Liaison Psychiatrist did not  appear  to  be
concerned about suicidal thoughts at the time of omission.

Nevertheless Dr Ghosh found the appellant "very easy to interview" and  this
was in part because  of  the  command  of  the  English  language  that  the
appellant had achieved.  Dr  Ghosh  found  that  the  appellant  "does  have
features of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder".  Dr Ghosh explained that "Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder is established as a diagnosis  if  the  individual
has been exposed to a trauma which was life threatening."

It is important to note, as did  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  that  Dr
Ghosh does not say that this appellant suffers  from  Post-Traumatic  Stress
Disorder but she does have a major depressive disorder.  She  concluded  her
report by saying that  she  believed  the  appellant  "needs  to  engage  in
psychological counselling in a safe environment with a  Therapist  that  she
trusts, if she is going to regain any kind of  mental  stability.   This  is
imperative if the risks to her health and safety is to be reduced."

Dr Ghosh said that the appellant:

  "Fulfils the diagnostic criteria  for  Somatisation  Disorder  associated
  with a Major Depressive Disorder with some signs and  symptoms  of  Post-
  Traumatic Stress Disorder.  It  is  my  opinion  that  this  is  entirely
  consistent in relation to the kind of early childhood abuse  and  neglect
  that she describes."

I now look more carefully at the decision in the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
judge began, appropriately, by reminding herself of the Practice  Directions
of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
Upper Tribunal at 10.1. This requires representative to  inform  experts  of
the reasons for a decision being refused.  Whether or not that was  done  is
immaterial.  What matters for present purposes is that it was not  reflected
in the expert's opinion.  Whilst Dr Ghosh's evidence that the  symptoms  she
noted in the appellant are plainly consistent with the explanation she  gave
in paragraph 35(c) of her Decision and  Reasons  the  judge  noted  that  Dr
Ghosh "has not however explored other reasons for this presentation."   This
may well be because Dr Ghosh had no  reason  to  think  other  reasons  were
being offered.  I do not know but the judge was clearly  entitled  to  find,
as she did, that the additional evidence does little  if  anything  to  cast
doubt on the findings already made.  There is simply no  basis  for  finding
that because the expert accepts  that  the  given  explanation  could  be  a
proper explanation it is somehow evidence that the given explanation is  the
proper explanation.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  expert  report  added  nothing
and the existing findings stood and, in her judgement, it followed that  the
appeal should still be dismissed.

As I have indicated, paragraph 38 of the Decision and Reasons  is  important
because the judge also made it plain that in her judgment even  if  she  was
wrong there was nothing before her to persuade her that the appellant  could
not return to Albania.  Generally, it cannot be said that  a  single  female
without family support would be destitute in Albania.

Neither  was  there  any  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   that
appropriate treatment was not  available.   If,  sadly,  the  appellant  was
returned and did herself harm that would not be the fault of the  government
or the United Kingdom but of the deficiencies in the health service  of  the
state of nationality.  However I make it plain that  there  is  no  evidence
the  judge  found  persuasive  that  appropriate  treatment  would  not   be
available.

I consider now how this decision is challenged.

Paragraph 1 makes it plain that the challenge is to the allegedly  incorrect
application of Devaseelan but the details are  not  particularised  in  that
paragraph.

Paragraph  2  recognises  that  Devaseelan  determines   that   a   previous
determination is the starting point but not necessarily a finishing point.

Paragraph 3 deals with Dr Ghosh's report but, I find,  somewhat  missed  the
point.  Dr Ghosh's report gives  no  reason  to  depart  from  the  previous
findings.  Dr Ghosh's report gives  considerable  detailed  explanation  for
the symptoms of mental illness  and  clear  evidence  that  the  appellant's
explanation given to Dr Ghosh could explain the symptoms.  That  is  as  far
as it goes and as indicated above that is not very far.   Certainly,  it  is
not right to say the judge should have departed from the previous findings.

Paragraph 4 criticises the judge for her approach  to  Dr  Ghosh's  evidence
about the criticisms of the Liaison Psychiatrist.  I see no  material  error
here.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
mentally ill.   It  adds  nothing  to  analyse  how  the  judge  might  have
interpreted the evidence differently.  The conclusion was the same.

Paragraph 5 again deals with the evidence that  the  appellant  is  ill  but
that is not an issue.

Paragraph 6 says that the judge makes "no  assessment  in  relation  to  the
findings by Dr Ghosh" but I do not agree.  The judge is  clear  that  mental
illness has not been shown to be  a  reason  why  the  appellant  cannot  be
returned to Albania.

Paragraph 7 complains that the judge does not engage with the decision in  J
v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629.  But I do not follow this  point.   It  was  the
appellant's task to show that she could not be returned  safely  to  Albania
and she did not do that.  Her credibility is not the point here.  There  was
no evidence about available treatment in Albania.  It would not  necessarily
have assisted the appellant if such evidence  had  been  available  but  the
evidential foundation had not been laid to run the argument.

I just do not agree if there is any material error established.

I have read the  Secretary  of  State's  Rule  24  notice.   I  mean  it  no
disrespect but find it adds nothing to points that were not already  obvious
to me.

Cases of this kind are always concerning because  there  is  clear  evidence
that the appellant is a damaged woman but, as the judge explained,  even  if
she cannot have the support from her family or other people in  Albania  she
has not shown an entitlement to international protection.

It follows therefore that I find no material error of law and I dismiss  the
appellant's appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 July 2020                   |









