
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08236/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 4 December 2018                   |On 15 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     BZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Alam, instructed by The Law Partnership
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Abone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the
    First tier Tribunal C Burns dated  28  September  2017  dismissing  her
    appeal against the respondent's decision of 11 August 2017 refusing her
    protection claim.

2     The appellant is a national of Iraq, from Central and  Southern  Iraq,
    and is of Kurdish origin.  She appears to have been  born  in  Baghdad,
    but spent the majority of her life in Kifri, in the  northern  part  of
    Diyala governorate. The appellant was said to have left Iraq on 27 July
    2016 and entered the UK on 12 December 2016, having  transited  through
    Turkey, Greece and travelling on a number of lorries to the UK.

3     The appellant's claim for protection  was  that  her  family  in  Iraq
    disapproved of her marriage to JMA, a British national of Iraqi origin,
    and that as a result, the appellant feared serious harm at her family's
    hands because her actions had offended against the family's honour. The
    appellant and JMA are said to have married in Iraq on 24 April 2012. It
    is relevant to note that JMA  himself  entered  the  UK  on  or  around
    January 2005 and claimed asylum on the  basis  that  he  had  formed  a
    relationship with the appellant, but that her family  disapproved,  and
    had threatened him. JMA himself was from Baghdad, but had relatives  in
    Kifri, where it is said that they had met.  JMA's own  application  for
    asylum was refused, and an a decision of Immigration Judge  Hall  dated
    24 May 2005, his account was disbelieved. JMA  was  eventually  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK through  the  legacy  scheme,  and
    subsequently obtained British citizenship through naturalisation.

4     In her own application asylum,  the  appellant  had  stated  that  her
    family continued to disapprove of her relationship with JMA,  but  that
    her oldest brother, who lived in the USA, had  on  an  occasion  whilst
    present in Iraq, consented to the marriage between  the  appellant  and
    JMA. The marriage had thus taken place on 24 April  2012.  However,  it
    was the appellant's case that when that brother had  departed  for  the
    USA again, the appellant's two other brothers remained disapproving  of
    the appellant's relationship with JMA. It was apparent,  however,  that
    JMA had returned to Iraq to visit  the  appellant  in  Kifri  on  three
    occasions after their marriage.

5     In the  decision  of  11  August  2017  the  respondent  rejected  the
    appellant's claim that she was in a relationship with JMA at  all,  and
    rejected her claim for protection.

6     On appeal before Judge Burns, the judge made the  following  findings,
    in summary:

    (i)    the appellant's claim as to  her  fear  of  honour  killing  ran
          counter to general (country) information [32];

    (ii)   some of her statements were not coherent or plausible [32];  the
          appellant's general credibility had not  been  established;  there
          were many inconsistencies in  her  account  and  considering  them
          cumulatively, her credibility was so damaged that  the  judge  did
          not accept that she had proved her claim  to  the  lower  standard
          [34];

    (iii)  there  was  a  lack  of  background  evidence  that  a  marriage
          agreeable to both families could give rise to  an  honour  killing
          [35];

    (iv)   the  appellant's  family,  had,  in  effect,  consented  to  the
          marriage [36-38];

    (v)    the fact that neither the appellant nor JMA, on  his  visits  to
          Kifri,  had  been  physically  harmed  by  her  family,  was   not
          consistent with the appellant's  fear of being subjected to honour
          crime [38];

    (vi)   there were inconsistencies in the  appellant's  account  as  to:
          when and where she had met JMA; the fact that she had  married  in
          2012, whereas she had made an application for entry clearance  for
          the purpose of marriage in 2015; the  number  of  times  that  the
          appellant saw JMA again in Iraq after the marriage; her family not
          allowing her to go out, whereas she had stated that she had  lived
          with her husband on the occasions when he returned  to  Iraq;  her
          being locked in the house, whereas she had also  stated  that  she
          worked in a sweet shop (all at [41]);

    (vii)  it was not plausible that the appellant  feared  being  made  to
          marry another man, whereas her family knew that she was married to
          JMA and she had refused to get a divorce [43];

    (viii) although the appellant had  stated  that  the  family  had  been
          unable to take her to court to secure a divorce  because  she  had
          run away in 2016, that did not explain what had  happened  in  the
          four-year period between 2012 and 2016 [44];

    (ix)   notwithstanding the above findings, the judge accepted that  the
          appellant and JMA were in a relationship and  had  been  for  some
          considerable time; the appellant had become pregnant by JMA in the
          United Kingdom, but which sadly resulted in the stillbirth [49];

    (x)    the appellant's family may not always have approved of JMA,  and
          there may well have been some concerns as to his  absence  in  the
          United Kingdom and  the  appellant's  inability  to  obtain  entry
          clearance to join him; however, this was 'very far  removed'  from
          the appellant's claims that her  family  threatened  to  kill  her
          [50];

    (xi)   the appellant  will  be  returned  to  Baghdad  [53];  this  was
          feasible because the appellant has a passport [54];

    (xii)  Kifri, in Diyala, was a place where there  was  a  risk  to  the
          appellant under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  [55-
          57];

    (xiii) the appellant had a passport, a  marriage  certificate  and  her
          brother's ID card which would help her verify her identity [59];

    (xiv)  the appellant would be able to obtain a replacement  CSID  card,
          but there may well be a delay [59];

    (xv)   the appellant spoke Arabic [60];

    (xvi)  the appellant was is likely to have family members  in  Baghdad;
          in her oral evidence she confirmed that she  would  visit  Baghdad
          with her husband to visit his family; she said that  she  did  not
          know whether he still had family there, but her evidence had  been
          generally unreliable; it was likely that  her  husband  still  has
          some family in Baghdad [61];

    (xvii) it was unlikely that the appellant would be  a  lone  female  in
          Baghdad; there was her husband's family; her husband could  return
          to Baghdad with her if he chose to do  so;  the  appellant  has  a
          maternal uncle who helped her escape from Iraq; the judge did  not
          accept that the appellant was estranged from her own  family;  her
          husband's family would be able to accommodate her,  or  her  wider
          family could sponsor her to find accommodation [62];

    (xviii)      the appellant would expect to be offered support from  her
          family and her in-laws; should would be able to  seek  employment;
          she has worked previously in a sweet shop [63];

    (xix)  it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant  to  relocate  to
          Baghdad; there will be a delay in her obtaining a replacement CSID
          card but the judge expected that the appellant would have both the
          support of her family  and  her  in-laws  and  possibly  financial
          assistance from the respondent in the interim [64];

    (xx)   in relation  to  Article  8  ECHR,  the  judge  noted  that  the
          appellant had been married to JMA since April 2012;  he  had  been
          living in the UK but visited her in Iraq on three occasions;  they
          had been together in the UK since December 2016, which was a  very
          short period (prior to the hearing in September 2017) [68];

    (xxi)  there were no very significant obstacles to her integrating into
          Iraq [69];

    (xxii) any interference with the appellant's private  family  life  was
          proportionate [74-78].

    The appeal was thus dismissed.

7     The appellant applied for permission to appeal,  which  was  initially
    refused on 22 November 2017. The renewed grounds of  appeal  argue,  in
    summary, as follows:

    (i)    the judge was 'wrong' to make the finding at paragraph 47  (that
          the appellant had not given a credible account of threats from her
          family to harm her or JMA, or to marry her  to  an  unknown  third
          party against her will), as 'clearly this is common in cases  such
          as this' (Grounds, para 5);

    (ii)   the judge's finding in respect of  the  appellant's   return  to
          Iraq is 'wrong'; the judge had misdirected herself in  respect  of
          current country guidance on Iraq; the appellant is a  female,  who
          if returned would be vulnerable and there was  no  assurance  that
          she would be able to do the things as described  at  paragraph  59
          decision  (in  summary,  that  she  would  be  able  to  obtain  a
          replacement CSID card) (Grounds, para 6);

    (iii)  there were exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case;  a
          reference was made to paragraph 77 of the determination (in  which
          the judge considered the appellant having suffered the loss of her
          child, who was stillborn); it was  said  that  the  appellant  was
          still in contact with the hospital and had  been  invited  for  an
          appointment, representing evidence regarding her mental health and
          general health after the loss of her child.

8     Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  is
    in a decision dated 29 January 2018 on the following basis:

         "1.      It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal's finding that
         the  country  background  evidence   is   inconsistent   with   the
         appellant's claim that she fears  an  honour  killing  because  she
         married against her family wishes, is unsupported by  the  evidence
         and/or irrational.

         2. It is arguable that the First tier Tribunal has speculated  that
         the appellant would not be a lone female without a CSID in Baghdad,
         and those findings are arguably unsupported by any evidence."

9     The respondent  provided  a  Rule  24  response  dated  8  March  2018
    resisting the appellant's appeal.

10    I heard submissions from Mr Alam for the appellant, and Mrs Abone  for
    the Respondent.

    Discussion

11    Mr Alam pointed out is that the judge made various references  to  the
    Home Office's CPIN 'Iraq: Kurdish 'honour' crimes'  at  [27]-[28].  The
    judge had then remarked: "In general the Kurdish authorities  are  able
    but unwilling to provide effective protection  (3.1.3).  However,  this
    appellant is not from the IKR but from Kefre in Diyala." Mr Alam argued
    that the judge had thus erroneously held that the  country  information
    referred to was not applicable to the appellant's case at all.

12    I find no merit in that argument. The CPIN referred to deals with  the
    phenomenon of honour crimes amongst  the  Kurdish  population  in  Iraq
    generally, not only in the IKR. The judge was clearly  aware  of  where
    the appellant came from; there was nothing inappropriate in  the  judge
    observing that the appellant was not in fact from the IKR.  Insofar  as
    the appellant argues that the judge proceeded under a  misunderstanding
    that honour crimes did not  occur  within  the  Kurdish  population  in
    Diyala province, such an argument is not made out.

13    Where the judge finds at [35] that there  was  a  lack  of  background
    evidence that a marriage agreeable to both families could give rise  to
    honour killing, the point being made by the judge was that honour crime
    tended to arise where a woman had entered into a marriage  without  her
    family's consent. However, on the judge's findings made  at  [36]-[38],
    the family had in fact consented to the marriage,  and  that  this  was
    simply not a case where the issue of honour crime arose. The judge  was
    entitled, I find, to observe that when JMA had visited the appellant in
    Kifri on a number of occasions after the marriage 2012, he had not come
    to any harm. It is not argued in the grounds, or  in  oral  submissions
    before me, that the judge failed to take into account relevant evidence
    as to any harm experienced by the appellant or JMA between 2012 - 2016.



14    Therefore, with respect to the terms in  which  permission  to  appeal
    was granted, I find that the judge did not misdirect herself as to  the
    nature of honour crimes in Iraq; rather, the judge  held  that  consent
    had in fact been given by the appellant's family to the  marriage,  and
    even if there was some disapproval of JMA [50], the judge did  not  err
    in law in finding that the appellant's family  had  not  threatened  to
    kill her.

15    As regards the appellant's second Ground, which is, in  summary,  that
    there was no 'assurance' that the appellant will be able  to  obtain  a
    CSID card on returned to Iraq, or, as per the grant  of  permission  to
    appeal, that the judge's finding that the appellant would not be a lone
    female without a CSID card in Baghdad was arguably unsupported  by  any
    evidence, I find no material error of law in the judge's approach.

16    The burden was on the appellant to establish her case.  The  appellant
    was  already  in  possession  of  a  significant  item  of  documentary
    evidence, being a passport. The judge considered the various  means  by
    which the appellant may obtain assistance on return to Iraq in order to
    obtain a CSID card. The judge was entitled to find that  the  appellant
    had previously visited members of JMA's family in Baghdad. Although the
    appellant had stated that she  was  not  aware  if  such  persons  were
    present in Baghdad any longer, given the adverse  credibility  findings
    of the judge on the  appellant's  evidence  generally,  the  judge  was
    entitled at [61] to place little weight on such assertions, and to find
    that it was likely that JMA still had some family there. The judge also
    found that the appellant was not estranged from her own  family.  There
    is no successful challenge  against  those  findings.  The  judge  also
    referred to the appellant's language abilities. It seems to me that the
    judge took into account relevant considerations as to whether  internal
    relocation to Baghdad would be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh,  as  per
    para 15 of the head note in AA Iraq v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944,  and  I
    find no error in the judge's approach.

17    In relation to the appellant's ground of appeal relating to Article  8
    ECHR, the grounds of appeal refer  to  a  letter  at  page  11  of  the
    appellant's bundle.  This is a letter addressed to both  the  appellant
    and JMA, dated 12 April 2017, providing them with the  details  of  the
    availability of drop-in, informal support, once a month  in  the  Faith
    Centre of the hospital where the appellant gave birth to her child.   I
    should also mention, although Mr Alam did not bring my attention to it,
    the document on page 12 of the bundle, being a letter dated  22  August
    2017,  offering  the  appellant  an  appointment  with   a   consultant
    obstetrician and gynaecologist. However, the appellant did not state in
    her witness evidence that she was receiving any particular  medical  or
    counselling treatment in the United Kingdom. The judge referred to  the
    fact that the appellant's experience must have been difficult for  her,
    but I find that there is nothing in the document  referred  to  in  the
    grounds of appeal which  was  relevant  in  any  material  way  to  the
    assessment of whether the appellant's removal from the  United  Kingdom
    would be in breach of any Article of the EC HR, in  particular  whether
    removal would  amount  to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  her
    private life.

18    I find that there was no material error  of  law  within  the  judge's
    decision.

    Decision

    The decision did not involve the making of any material error of law.

    I do not set aside the judge's decision.

    I dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Signed:     Date: 12.2.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns a protection claim. Unless  and until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies both to the appellants  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed:     Date: 12.2.19
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

