
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08276/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2018                    |On 18 January 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                      N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     To preserve the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal,
    I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of any  information
    regarding the proceedings which would be likely to lead members of  the
    public to identify the appellant.

    2.     This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Miles  promulgated  on  4  October  2017,  which
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

    3.     The Appellant was born on [ ] 1988 and is a national  of  India.
    On 14 August 2017  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

    4.     The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Miles ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 7  November
    2017 Resident Judge Zucker gave permission to appeal stating

         "2.      Insofar as the  grounds  seek  to  challenge  the  Judge's
         finding that internal  relocation  is  not  a  viable  option,  the
         grounds are very weak. India is a vast country and given  the  lack
         of evidence from the appellant [see para 10.14} and the evidence of
         the lack of interest in the appellant's family by  the  appellant's
         husband in the year preceding the appeal, together  with  the  fact
         that the evidence pointed to difficulty in the police  locating  an
         individual  in  the  state  in  which  a  particular  police  force
         operates, let alone another state, permission  to  appeal  on  this
         ground is refused.

         3. It is arguable however that the judge materially  erred  in  not
         addressing article 8 ECHR, especially since the same was raised  in
         the grounds. Whether there is merit in this ground may well depend,
         in the first instance, on whether the points were taken before  the
         Judge. The hearing at first instance is not a dress  rehearsal  for
         any onward appeal."

The Hearing

    5.     The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor was she  represented
    at the appeal. I am satisfied that due notice of the appeal was  served
    upon the Appellant and her representatives. A member of tribunal  staff
    contacted the appellant's representative, who  (in  response)  faxed  a
    letter apologising for not coming to the hearing  and  asking  for  the
    case "... To be dealt  with  without  hearing  [on  paper]....".  I  am
    therefore satisfied that having been served notice of the  hearing  and
    not attended it is in the interests of  justice  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in the Appellant's absence as I am entitled to do by virtue  of
    paragraph 38 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    6.     Ms Everett for the respondent moved the  grounds  of  appeal.  I
    told Ms Everett that I had read  the  Judge's  record  of  proceedings,
    which indicates that no  submissions  were  made  for  the  appellant's
    driving at article 8 ECHR, but that  at  the  hearing  the  appellant's
    representative adopted the terms of the skeleton argument  which  makes
    specific reference to article 8 family  life  and  section  55  of  the
    Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

    7.     Ms Everett  invited  me  to  look  at  the  appellant's  witness
    statement which was adopted as the appellant's evidence in  chief.  She
    told me that the witness statement does not offer any detailed evidence
    about article 8 family or private life. She told me that the  case  had
    been pled as if article 8 was entirely dependent  upon  the  protection
    claim. She told me that the decision does not contain an error of  law,
    and that even if there is an error of law it is not  material  because,
    on the evidence placed before the Judge, the case could not succeed  on
    article 8 ECHR grounds.

Analysis

    8.     The Judge's record of proceedings  indicates  that  no  separate
    submission  was  made  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds.  The  record   of
    proceedings tells me that  the  appellant  adopted  the  terms  of  her
    witness statement as her evidence in chief, she was then cross examined
    with a focus on sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation.  No
    questions were asked in re-examination.

    9.     The only manner in  which  article  8  ECHR  was  pled  for  the
    appellant was in the appellant's representative adoption of  the  terms
    of the skeleton argument. The  skeleton  argument  makes  reference  to
    article 8 of the 1950 convention under the heading "applicable law". In
    paragraphs 26,  27,  28  of  the  skeleton  argument  a  more  detailed
    submission is put forward.

    10.    The appellant's evidence is contained in her  witness  statement
    dated 26  September  2017.  The  witness  statement  provides  evidence
    relevant to the protection claim only. The witness  statement  mentions
    that the appellant has a child who is now 5 years of age, but the focus
    is entirely on the protection claim.

    11.    In Sarkar v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 195, the Court of Appeal indicated that,  although  Article  8
    and section 55 were  mentioned  in  the  Notice  of  Appeal,  where  no
    evidence had been adduced or submissions  made  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to support a  claim under Article 8 of the ECHR, it  could  be
    treated as abandoned.  The Court of Appeal said that even if  that  was
    wrong where there was evidential basis for the First tier  Tribunal  to
    find in  the  appellant's  favour  in  those  circumstances  the  Upper
    Tribunal could  not  be  said  to  have  erred  in  refusing  to  allow
    permission to appeal on that ground. Additionally, when  re-making  the
    decision following the grant of permission to appeal  on  an  unrelated
    ground, section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act
    2007 did not require  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  carry  out  a  complete
    rehearing of the original appeal.

    12.    In BM (Iran) [2015] EWCA Civ 491 the Appellant sought  to  argue
    that the FTTJ failed to  take  into  account  the  Respondent's  policy
    against removal to Iran in the Article 8 exercise. The Court of  Appeal
    held that the First-tier could not be said to  have  erred  in  law  by
    failing to have regard to a point that was not raised before it. It was
    not an obvious point and there was nothing in the case law to alert the
    First-tier to it, let alone support it. No  evidential  foundation  had
    been laid down for it and the material before the  First-tier  did  not
    even contain the policy on which the argument was based

    13.    It is hard to find a focus on article 8 ECHR grounds  of  appeal
    in the appellant's evidence, but the  skeleton  argument  devotes  more
    than a page to the article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal, which should  have
    been addressed by the judge. That is an error of law. Section 55 of the
    Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 create a statutory duty on
    the Judge to consider the best interests of the appellant's  five-year-
    old child. It is not obvious  from  the  decision  that  the  appellant
    article 8 ECHR claim has been considered. That is a material  error  of
    law.

    14.    Because the decision is tainted by material error of law  I  set
    it aside. There is no criticism of the Judge's findings in relation  to
    the protection claim, permission  to  appeal  on  that  aspect  of  the
    appellant's case  has  not  been  granted.  The  Judge's  findings  and
    conclusions in relation to the asylum claim and articles 2 and  3  ECHR
    are preserved. Because those findings are preserved, and because I have
    the appellant's witness statement together  with  the  Judge's  legible
    record of proceedings I can substitute my own decision.

My Findings

    15.    The Judge's findings in relation to  the  protection  claim  are
    preserved. Those findings can only lead me to the conclusion  that  the
    appellant's claim must be dismissed  on  asylum  grounds;  it  must  be
    dismissed on article 2 and 3 ECHR grounds and it must be  dismissed  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

    16.    What is outstanding as article 8 ECHR appeal. The only  evidence
    offered  is  that  the  appellant  has  a  five-year-old   child.   The
    appellant's evidence is that her child cannot return to  India  because
    of the risk that she faces there. The appellant's protection claim  has
    been refused. It has been judicially determined that  the  is  no  real
    risk to the appellant in India. As there is no risk to the appellant in
    India, there is no substance in her claim that there is a risk  to  her
    child.

    17.    The appellant is the primary carer for her child.  There  is  no
    evidence placed before me to indicate  that  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of  either  appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
    immigration rules. Because of the lack of evidence,  I  cannot  make  a
    finding that the appellant succeeds on  article  8  grounds  under  the
    immigration rules.

    18.    In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60  it  was  made  clear
    that (even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord
    Reed at paragraphs  47  to  50  endorsed  the  structured  approach  to
    proportionality (to be found in Razgar) and said "what has  now  become
    the established  method  of  analysis  can  therefore  continue  to  be
    followed..."

    19.    I have to determine the following separate questions:

         (i)      Does family life, private  life,  home  or  correspondence
         exist within the meaning of Article 8

         (ii)     If so, has the right to respect for this  been  interfered
         with

         (iii)    If so, was the interference in accordance with the law

         (iv)     If so, was the interference  in  pursuit  of  one  of  the
         legitimate aims set out in Article 8(2); and

         (v)      If so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit of
         the legitimate aim?

    20.    Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells us that  immigration  control
    is in the public interest. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260  (IAC)
    the Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right  to  a
    grant of leave to remain from either s117B (2)  or  (3),  whatever  the
    degree of his fluency in English, or  the  strength  of  his  financial
    resources. In Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)
    it was held that the public interest in firm immigration control is not
    diluted by the consideration that  a  person  pursuing  a  claim  under
    Article 8 ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the  state  or
    is self-sufficient  or  is  likely  to  remain  so  indefinitely.   The
    significance of these factors is that where they are  not  present  the
    public interest is fortified.

    21.    I am mindful of Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009, and the case of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011]  UKSC
    4.  In Zoumbas v SSHD UKSC it was held that there was no "irrationality
    in the conclusion that it was in the children's best  interests  to  go
    with their parents to the Republic of Congo. No  doubt  it  would  have
    been possible to have stated that, other things being equal, it was  in
    the best interests of the children that they and their  parents  stayed
    in the United Kingdom so that they could obtain such benefits as health
    care and education which the decision-maker recognised might  be  of  a
    higher standard than would be available in the  Congo.  ...  They  were
    part of a close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of an
    age when their emotional needs could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
    immediate family unit. Such integration as  had  occurred  into  United
    Kingdom society would have been predominantly in the  context  of  that
    family unit. Most significantly, the decision-maker concluded that they
    could be removed to the Republic of Congo in the care of their  parents
    without serious detriment to their well-being".

    22.    I  remind  myself  of  the  cases  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals), [2013] UKUT  00197  and
    PW [2015] CSIH 36

    23.    Family life exists between the appellant and her young child but
    the respondent's decision is not a disproportionate breach of the right
    to respect for family life because it is not the respondent's intention
    to separate the appellant from her child. Her child will be returned to
    India with the appellant. It is in the interests of the child to remain
    with the appellant. The interests of the appellant's child are properly
    served by the respondent's decision.

    24.    After considering all of the evidence I still  know  nothing  of
    the appellant's home, her habits and activities of  daily  living,  her
    significant friendships,  any  integration  into  UK  society,  or  any
    contribution to her local community. There is no reliable  evidence  of
    the component parts of private life within the meaning of article 8  of
    the 1950 convention before me. The appellant fails  to  establish  that
    she has created article 8 private life within the UK.

    25.    New routines will have to be established for each member of this
    family, but the appellant's daughter is so  young  that  her  focus  is
    entirely on her parents.  In Makhlouf (Appellant) v SSSHD  [2016]  UKSC
    59 Lady Hale said "that children must be recognised  as  rights-holders
    in their own right and not just as adjuncts to other  people's  rights.
    But that does not mean that their rights are inevitably a  passport  to
    another person's rights".

    26.    In the light of the above conclusions, I find that the  Decision
    appealed against would not cause the United Kingdom to be in breach  of
    the law or its obligations under the 1950 Convention.

CONCLUSION

    27.    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 4 October
    2017 is tainted by a material error of law. I set it aside.

    28.    I substitute my own decision.

    29.    The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

    30.    The appeal is dismissed on Humanitarian Protection grounds.

    31.    The appeal is dismissed on articles 2, 3 & 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed      Paul Doyle Date 12 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

