
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08812/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 22nd February 2018                 |On 6th March 2018                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                    [a n]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Mailer promulgated on 30 October 2017, in which the Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse her  application  for  asylum  dated  24
    August 2017 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on [ ] 1973,  who  claims
    to  have  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  September   2015   and
    subsequently claimed asylum on 1 March 2017.  The basis  of  her  claim
    was twofold, first, that she had been in a relationship with a  married
    man who was part of the security  services  in  Zimbabwe  and  who  had
    beaten her up and threatened her when she ended their relationship; and
    secondly, that her half-brother was  a  well-known  political  activist
    against the current regime in Zimbabwe.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 24 August 2017 on  the  basis
    that it was not accepted that there was  a  credible  claim  on  either
    basis, in particular, there was a lack of supporting evidence which was
    reasonable to expect and overall the Appellant would not be at risk  on
    return to Zimbabwe.

 4. Judge Mailer dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  30
    October 2017 on all grounds, concluding  that  there  was  no  risk  on
    return to Zimbabwe and no arguable Article 8 claim.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on two grounds.  First, that findings  were  made
    which were irrational and failed to take  into  account  objective  and
    witness evidence.  In particular, although Judge Mailer  accepted  that
    the Appellant had suffered domestic violence, he found that  there  was
    no reason to support the authorities would not  investigate  and  offer
    protection in the future.  However, the following was  not  taken  into
    account - the Appellant had reported previous abuse to the  police  and
    no action was taken; there was objective evidence showing  problems  of
    gender-based violence in Zimbabwe and the  Appellant's  former  partner
    worked within the security services.  Secondly,  when  making  findings
    about risk for the Appellant due  to  her  half-brother,  Judge  Mailer
    failed to take into account the evidence of his experiences in Zimbabwe
    prior to 2011; that the Appellant had been questioned about him by  her
    former partner; that there were articles critical of the current regime
    written by the Appellant's half-brother and finally that  there  was  a
    failure to apply EM & Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]  UKUT  98
    (IAC).

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Murray on all grounds.

Findings and reasons

 1. At the hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer accepted  on  behalf
    of the Respondent that there had been material errors  of  law  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal such that the decision should be set aside and  the
    appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo  hearing.   I
    agree for the reasons given in summary below.

 2. Having set out the detailed facts and history of the Appellant's claim,
    Judge Mailer concluded as follows in relation to the Appellant's  claim
    to be at risk because of her brother:

         "112.    With regard to her claim based on the  perception  arising
         from Mr [C]'s political publications, I note that he left  Zimbabwe
         in about 2011.  There is  however  no  evidence  that  he  had  any
         problems with the authorities prior to that.  In  fact  he  visited
         Zimbabwe in 2015 for a few weeks.  On that occasion he  experienced
         no problems.

         113. It is contended in the skeleton argument produced by ICN  that
         whilst it is true that her half-brother visited Zimbabwe  in  2015,
         he travelled under  the  protection  of  a  New  Zealand  passport.
         However, to assume from that he "could not be touched" as a  result
         of having a New Zealand passport, is speculative.

         114. Nor did the appellant ever claim  that  the  authorities  ever
         approached her regarding her brother's activities between 2011 when
         her brother left, and 2015 when he returned for about two weeks."

 3. I find that in reaching these conclusions, Judge Mailer has  materially
    erred in failing to consider evidence about the  Appellant's  brother's
    experience prior to 2011; that she was asked questions about him by her
    partner and failed to consider  his  level  of  criticism  against  the
    current regime.  In failing  to  do  so,  unsustainable  findings  were
    reached on the evidence before him which amount to an error of law.

 4. Judge Mailer's conclusions on the other part of the  Appellant's  claim
    were as follows:

         "119.    In the circumstances there is no evidence  that  Mr  Saidi
         has sought to continue any relationship with the appellant or  that
         he wishes to remain a part of her life.  Her last physical  contact
         with him was in or about September 2015 shortly before she came  to
         the UK.  She has not maintained any contact  with  him  since  they
         communicated in October 2015.

         120. Nor has there been any attempt by him  to  contact  her.   She
         claimed that she fears him because he is 'above the police'.  There
         is no reason to suppose that the  authorities  would  not  properly
         investigate any threat that he would make against  her  should  she
         return.

         121. Moreover, the appellant expressly stated that  she  is  not  a
         political person.

         122. Having regard to the evidence as  a  whole  I  find  that  the
         appellant has not shown that she faces a real risk  of  persecution
         based on either of the grounds she relied on.  ..."

 5. I find that in concluding in paragraph 120 that there was no reason  to
    suppose the authorities would not properly investigate  any  threat  to
    the Appellant from her former partner, Judge Mailer  erred  in  law  by
    failing to take into account material evidence  about  the  Appellant's
    past experiences, her former partner's position nor background  country
    evidence about the lack of protection or enforcement in  situations  of
    gender-based  violence.    Again   this   makes   the   findings   made
    unsustainable on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. In conclusion, the making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved material errors of law and as such  it  is  necessary  to  set
    aside the decision and remit it for a de novo hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Hatton  Cross  hearing
centre) to be heard by  any  Judge  except  Judge  Mailer,  for  a  de  novo
hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]             Date     28th February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
