
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08361/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 May 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     f h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Stewart, Katani & Co Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Miss O'Bryan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  Designated
    Judge Murray promulgated on  7  December  2018  dismissing  her  appeal
    against a decision of the respondent made on 17 June 2018 to refuse her
    claim for asylum to remove her to China.  The appellant's case is  that
    she is at risk of persecution on return to  China  on  account  of  her
    religion.  She converted in February  2014  but  on  10  February  2015
    whilst holding a house church in her home,  she  was  arrested  by  the
    police when it was raided and subsequently detained.  On  release,  her
    parents made arrangements for her to leave China.  She arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 2 May 2015 and claimed asylum on 6 October 2016.  She
    has a child born 21 December  2016  who  is  a  Chinese  national;  her
    partner is also an asylum seeker.

 2. The appellant's religion is claimed to be "Jehovah"  religion  although
    it is unclear from her interview records (she  was  interviewed  on  21
    February 2017 and again on 25 October 2017) whether she was saying  she
    is a Jehovah's witness or not; it also appears that she  was  prior  to
    that a member of Hu Han Pai.

 3. The Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant was a follower
    of the Jehovah religion as claimed nor that she had previously  been  a
    follower of the Hu Han Pai religion.  In addition, the  respondent  was
    not satisfied that the appellant was at risk on account of having had a
    child outside of wedlock.

 4. The appellant  gave  evidence  before  the  Tribunal.   The  respondent
    submitted that the appellant was  not  a  credible  witness  given  the
    inconsistencies in her account having at various times claimed to  have
    been  a  Jehovah's  Witness  and  that  the  translation  of  the  Holy
    Scriptures had been provided to her was the version used by  the  Watch
    Tower and Jehovah's Witnesses [21].  It was noted also that she  cannot
    explain the difference between the Jehovah's and the Hu Han Pai or  the
    difference between Jehovah's and other Christian beliefs and could  not
    explain  key  points   of   her   religion   [23].    The   appellant's
    representative  submitted  that  her  account  was  credible  and  that
    consideration should have been given to the psychological report by  Dr
    Morrison stating that the  appellant  has  issues  with  her  cognitive
    function and has a low level of intelligence; that the  appellant  will
    have problems on return; and, is very  forgetful  and  found  questions
    hard to understand.  It was submitted this should be taken into account
    when deciding whether the appellant is a vulnerable adult [34].

 5. The judge recorded that she had considered all of the evidence on file,
    some of which she may not have  specifically  referred  to  [39].   She
    found that there were a number  of  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
    account and that if she did have a religion it was  that  of  Jehovah's
    Witness [40] but that she was neither a member of the Jehovah  religion
    or Jehovah's Witnesses [41] nor was she satisfied that she was a member
    of Hu Han Pai given that her questions about that religion contradicted
    each other [41].

 6. The judge also stated:-

         "I have noted the psychological report by  Dr  Morrison  from  Alba
         Psychology which states that the appellant has significant deficits
         in her cognitive functioning which is likely to be related to a low
         intelligence compared to individuals in the normal population.  The
         doctor concludes that this could have a significant effect  on  her
         ability to function independently and  participate  in  the  asylum
         process.  However she came to the  United  Kingdom,  she  made  her
         claim, she answered  the  questions  in  court,  she  answered  the
         questions about interviews and I find  that  she  has  had  a  fair
         hearing and is able to fend for herself.  I find that the  problems
         with her answers are because she is not told the truth.  She states
         that she wants to openly express her religion but she is unable  to
         say what the  beliefs  of  her  religion  are  and  the  background
         evidence  indicates  that  the  Christian  religion  is   practiced
         throughout China and even if she worships and has  churches  it  is
         unlikely that she will be persecuted."

 7. The judge then went on to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in her assessment of credibility in:-

      i) reaching an adverse credibility  finding  prior  to  assessing  the
         psychological report, thereby failing to assess the evidence in the
         round;

     ii) failing properly to apply  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note
         No.2: Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant  Guidance  in
         that the FtT's findings are not supported by the evidence  and  the
         judge had misinterpreted  the  guidance  as  to  how  a  vulnerable
         individual is to be identified;

    iii) failing to give adequate reasons for  rejecting  the  psychological
         report and in effect usurping its effect without any or  sufficient
         evidential foundation.

 9. On 18 March 2019 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rimington  granted  permission
    stating

         "It is arguable that  the  judge  reached  an  adverse  credibility
         finding (40) prior to addressing the psychological report (42)  and
         contrary to Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  It is also arguable  that
         the judge failed to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2
         in light of the consultant psychological report identifying she had
         'significant deficits in her cognitive functioning'."

10. The respondent's directions  were  made  by  the  appellant's  previous
    representatives who  gave  no  indication  that  there  was  any  issue
    regarding possible vulnerability.  The matter was later adjourned  once
    the appellant had instructed  her  current  representatives  and  on  9
    October 2018 they wrote to  the  Tribunal  requesting  a  further  Case
    Management Review.  There is no indication in that letter or  otherwise
    any submission that the applicant should be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
    witness.  This is somewhat surprising given that the report is dated  6
    August 2018.

11. In that context it is important to note that in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD
    [2018] 4 WLR 78 the Court held:

         "21. It is submitted on behalf of the  appellant  that  the  agreed
         basis  for  allowing  the  appeal  on  the  merits  reflects   core
         principles  of  asylum  law  and  practice  which  have  particular
         importance in claims from children  and  other  vulnerable  persons
         namely:

             a.   given the gravity of the consequences of a  decision  on
             asylum and the accepted inherent difficulties in  establishing
             the facts of the claim as well as future  risks,  there  is  a
             lower standard of proof, expressed as 'a  reasonable  chance',
             'substantial grounds for thinking' or 'a serious possibility';



             b.   while an assessment of  personal  credibility  may  be  a
             critical aspect of some claims, particularly in the absence of
             independent supporting evidence, it is not an end in itself or
             a substitute for the application of the criteria  for  refugee
             status which must be holistically assessed;

             c.   the findings of medical experts must be treated  as  part
             of the holistic assessment: they are not to be treated  as an
             'add-on' and rejected as a result of an  adverse  credibility
             assessment or finding made prior to and without regard to  the
             medical evidence;

             d.   expert medical evidence  can  be  critical  in  providing
             explanation  for  difficulties  in  giving  a   coherent   and
             consistent account of past  events  and  for  identifying  any
             relevant safeguards required to meet vulnerabilities that  can
             lead  to  disadvantage  in  the  determination  process, for
             example, in the ability to give oral testimony and under  what
             conditions (see  the  Guidance  Note  below  and  JL  (medical
             reports - credibility) (China) [2013] UKUT  00145  (IAC),  at
             [26] to [27]);

             e.   an appellant's account  of  his  or  her  fears  and  the
             assessment of an appellant's credibility must also  be  judged
             in the  context  of  the  known  objective  circumstances  and
             practices of the state in question and a failure to do so  can
             constitute an error of law; and

             f.   in making asylum  decisions,  the  highest  standards  of
             procedural fairness are required.

         22.  Although I agree  with  these  submissions  I  would  like  to
         emphasise that these principles are not an exhaustive or  immutable
         checklist. That said, the principles were not applied properly  or
         at all in the determination of this appellant's  claim  for  asylum
         either by the FtT or the UT. I recognise that this marks a  failure
         of the system to provide sufficient and adequate protection in  the
         asylum process for the particular requirements, needs and interests
         arising out of the disadvantages that the appellant has as a highly
         vulnerable child.  There is a consensus that  the  critical  errors
         arose from the focus on the credibility of the appellant's  account
         and the failure to properly have regard to the  objective  evidence
         and to give it priority  over  the  ability  of  the  appellant  to
         provide oral testimony."

12. It is evident the judge made no findings as to  whether  the  appellant
    was a vulnerable adult or not.  Similarly, it is unclear why  what  the
    judge made of  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  difficulty  in
    cognition and in recalling things.  The latter goes to the core of  the
    finding that  the  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's  account  across
    different interviews were indicative that she was not telling the truth
    and thus to her credibility.  This failure makes  the  findings  unsafe
    and accordingly, I am satisfied this amounts to  a  material  error  of
    law.  Given that as a result none of the findings  of  fact  are  safe,
    then the case  will  need  to  be  remade  in  its  entirety.   In  the
    circumstances, it is appropriate to remit the matter to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it to  be  determined
    afresh on all issues.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 10 June 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul






