
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08086/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd September 2020               |On 28th October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     FK
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  As
the appeal raises matters regarding a claim for international protection,
it is appropriate for an anonymity direction to be made.  Unless and until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


Remote Hearing


   1. The hearing before me on 22nd September 2020 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  The
      appellant joined the hearing remotely. I sat at the Birmingham Civil
      Justice Centre and the hearing room and building were open to the
      public. The hearing was publicly listed, and I was addressed by the
      representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been, if the
      parties had attended the hearing together.  I was satisfied: that this
      constituted a hearing in open court; that the open justice principle
      has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar
      as there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is
      justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was
      in the interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding
      objective to proceed with a remote hearing because of the present need
      to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid
      delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter
      is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the
      importance of the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and
      the anticipated costs and resources of the parties.  At the end of the
      hearing I was satisfied that both parties had been able to participate
      fully in the proceedings.


The Background


   2. The appellant's against the respondent's decision of 1st August 2019
      to refuse the appellant's claim for asylum and humanitarian protection
      was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes for reasons set out
      in a decision promulgated on 13th November 2019.


   3. The background to the appellant's claim for international protection
      is summarised at paragraph [8] of the decision of Judge Parkes.  The
      appellant and his partner attended the hearing of the appeal and gave
      evidence. The oral evidence of the appellant is summarised at
      paragraphs [13] to [18] of the decision and the oral evidence of his
      partner is summarised at paragraph [19].  The judge's findings and
      conclusions are set out at paragraphs [20] to [39] of the decision.
      The judge found the appellant's account is not credible and he did not
      accept the appellant was of any interest to the Taliban or that the
      appellant was detained as he claimed.


   4. At paragraph [34] of his decision Judge Parkes found the appellant
      would not be at risk upon return to his home area, or in the
      alternative, he can relocate to Kabul.  Judge Parkes rejected the
      claim that the situation is such that Kabul is not a safe alternative
      if the appellant does not wish to return to his home area.


   5. The human rights claim on Article 8 grounds is addressed by Judge
      Parkes at paragraphs [37] to [39] of his decision. He found that the
      appellant cannot meet the requirements for leave to remain as a
      partner set out in Appendix FM of the immigration rules and there are
      no insurmountable obstacles to the family life of the appellant and
      his partner continuing in Afghanistan. Judge Parkes found the removal
      of the appellant would not be disproportionate and dismissed the
      appeal on all grounds.


   6. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal. First, Judge Parkes
      failed to apply the correct standard of proof. Second, the decision is
      vitiated by procedural unfairness by improperly taking judicial notice
      of issues regarding the financing of routes for asylum seekers to the
      UK.  Third, there are insufficient reasons given for the finding, at
      paragraph [36], that Kabul is a safe alternative for the purpose of
      internal relocation. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper
      Tribunal Judge Coker on 21st February 2020.  She observed:


         "2.  It is arguable the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in the
         manner in which finance was considered and the impact that had on
         the appellant's credibility. It is arguably unclear on what basis
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered he had knowledge of the
         method of finance used or why in any event, that impacted upon the
         credibility of the appellant's account.


         3.   The submission regarding incorrect standard of proof is weak,
         but I grant permission on all grounds."


   7. I deal with each of the grounds in the order they were taken by Mr
      Holt in his submissions before me.  Mr Holt acknowledges that the
      second ground is the strongest of the three grounds.  The focus of his
      submissions was upon that ground.


   8. Mr Holt submits that reading paragraphs [23] and [31] of the decision
      of Judge Parkes, one would be forgiven for thinking that the questions
      of funding and the arrangements that were made by the appellant's
      father for the appellant and his brother to flee Afghanistan, were
      matters that were raised by the respondent or formed some part of the
      examination of the evidence before the Tribunal. That is a false
      impression.  He submits none of that was in issue prior to the
      hearing.  He submits Judge Parkes appears to have used his personal
      knowledge, without identifying the source of the information relied
      upon, and that has impacted upon his assessment of the credibility of
      the appellant in a manner that is procedurally unfair.  The claim has
      been refused for a reason that in part, the appellant cannot
      challenge. Paragraphs [23] and [31] form part of the consideration of
      the claim by Judge Parkes and the findings and conclusions reached.
      The way those paragraphs appear in the decision, Mr Holt submits,
      demonstrate they clearly formed a real part of the judge's decision
      making and the adverse credibility finding made, was therefore made in
      part upon matters that the appellant has not had any opportunity to
      address.


   9. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Howells accepts that Judge Parkes does
      not identify in paragraphs [23] and [31], what it was that he relied
      upon when he was considering the arrangements that had been made for
      the appellant and his brother to travel from Afghanistan to the UK. Mr
      Howells referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in EU
      Afghanistan & Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 32, in which Sir Stanley
      Burnton said:


         "10. Lastly, I should mention a point made by the Secretary of
         State which I consider to have substance. Unaccompanied children
         who arrive in this country from Afghanistan have done so as a
         result of someone, presumably their families, paying for their fare
         and/or for a so-called agent to arrange their journey to this
         country. The costs incurred by the family will have been
         considerable, relative to the wealth of the average Afghan family.
         The motivation for their incurring that cost may be that their
         child faces risk if he or she remains with them in Afghanistan, or
         it may simply be that they believe that their child will have a
         better life in this country. Either way, they are unlikely to be
         happy to cooperate with an agent of the Secretary of State for the
         return of their child to Afghanistan, which would mean the waste of
         their investment in his or her journey here."


  10. Mr Howells submits that at paragraphs [23] and [31], Judge Parkes was
      considering the costs incurred, which will have been considerable,
      relative to the wealth of the average Afghan family, and how here, the
      appellant's father was able to fund the journey of the appellant and
      his brother to the UK.  He accepts this was not raised in the
      respondent's decision or at the hearing before the FtT.


  11. Mr Howells submits any error is not material because the judge made a
      number of adverse credibility findings that were open to the judge.
      At paragraphs [22] and [24], the Judge sets out his concerns regarding
      the appellant's failure to pursue his claim for asylum after he first
      contacted the Home Office in 2015.   At paragraph [25], Judge Parkes
      was surprised that there had been no approach to the family after the
      Taliban had taken over the area and the appellant's father had fled.
      At paragraphs [26] and [27] Judge Parkes noted the inconsistencies in
      the evidence of the appellant regarding the events leading to his
      abduction and at paragraph [28] the judge noted the inconsistencies in
      the account provided by the appellant during interview and what is set
      out in a Rule 35 report that was before the FtT.


  12. Although I have some sympathy with the submission made by Mr Howells
      that Judge Parkes appears to have had a number of concerns about the
      account of events relied upon by the appellant and his evidence, I
      cannot in the end, be satisfied that Judge Parkes would have reached
      the same decision had he not had regard to issues concerning the
      financing of routes for asylum seekers to the UK, in his assessment of
      credibility.  Judge Parkes did not make individual findings in
      relation to the various facets that were at the heart of the claim
      advanced by the appellant.


  13. Judge Parkes made a global finding at paragraph [33] that he did not
      find the appellant's account to be credible. The extent to which that
      overall adverse credibility finding was reached by reliance upon the
      concerns set out at paragraphs [23] and [31] of the decision is
      unclear.  In all the circumstances, I accept, as Mr Holt submits, that
      the first ground of appeal is not simply a disagreement with a finding
      that was open to the Judge.  At paragraphs [23] and [31] of his
      decision Judge Parkes states that it is not clear how the appellant's
      father would have been able to raise the sums needed to transport his
      sons to the UK at short notice.  If it was "not clear", but relevant
      to the assessment of the appellant's credibility, in my judgement the
      appellant should have been afforded an opportunity to answer that
      concern. It was, as Mr Howells properly accepts, not a matter that had
      been raised either in the respondent's decision or at the hearing of
      the appeal.


  14. The obiter remarks made by Sir Stanley Burnton in EU Afghanistan &
      Others v SSHD refer to the considerable costs incurred by families
      relative to the wealth of the average Afghan, but the observations
      were, in my judgment, made in the context that having incurred the
      considerable costs, the family are unlikely to be happy to cooperate
      with an agent of the Secretary of State for the return of their child
      to Afghanistan, which would mean the waste of their investment.
      Although Judge Parkes might well have had concerns about how the
      appellant's father was able to raise the considerable funds required,
      the simple point is that the appellant should have been afforded an
      opportunity to provide an explanation. There may have been no
      explanation or the explanation may well, in the end have been
      rejected, but the appellant was entitled to be afforded that
      opportunity, before an adverse credibility finding was made that in
      part at least, appears to have been based on that concern.


  15. As I am satisfied that there is a material error of law in the
      decision of Judge Parkes such that it must be set aside, I can address
      the two remaining grounds, both of which I reject, very briefly.


  16. I reject the claim that Judge Parkes did not apply the correct
      standard of proof.  As Mr Holt acknowledges, Judge Parkes cited the
      correct standard of proof in paragraph [3] of his decision.  In
      assessing the credibility of the appellant and the claim advanced by
      him, the judge was required to consider a number of factors.  They
      include, whether the account given by the appellant was of sufficient
      detail, whether the account is internally consistent and consistent
      with any relevant specific and general country information, and
      whether the account is plausible.  In my judgement, at paragraph [29]
      of his decision, Judge Parkes was entitled to note that the
      appellant's account of being taken by the Taliban in place of his
      father to obtain information would not, by itself, be surprising in
      the context described, but what is surprising is that it took the
      Taliban so long to get round to taking the appellant in an effort to
      find out where his father was.  In considering the credibility of the
      appellant's account, Judge Parkes was in my judgement entitled to
      express his surprise when considering whether the appellant's account
      is consistent with general country information and whether that
      account is plausible.  Having correctly directed himself as to the
      standard of proof, there is nothing in the language adopted by the
      Judge to establish that he failed to apply the correct standard of
      proof.


  17. Finally, insofar as internal relocation to Kabul is concerned, it is
      to be noted that at paragraph [34], Judge Parkes found that the
      appellant is not of interest to the Taliban and his not at risk in his
      home area. The appellant can return to his home area and so the
      question of 'internal relocation' did not arise. In any event, in
      considering whether the appellant could relocate to Kabul, at
      paragraphs [35] and [36] of his decision Judge Parkes clearly had in
      mind the submission made on behalf of the appellant that the situation
      in Kabul has deteriorated to the extent that it could not be
      considered to be a safe place for relocation.  It was in my judgement
      open to Judge Parkes to conclude, as he did at paragraph [36], that on
      the evidence and current case law he was not prepared to say that the
      situation is such that Kabul is not a safe alternative.


  18. Although there is no merit in the first and third grounds of appeal,
      for the reasons set out above I am satisfied that the decision of
      Judge Parkes is vitiated by a material error of law for the reasons I
      have set out above and the decision must be set aside.  It follows
      that I allow the appeal.


  19. As to disposal, the assessment of a claim for asylum such as this is
      always a highly fact sensitive task, and the appellant is entitled to
      have his claim and his credibility properly considered by the FtT.  In
      all the circumstances, I have decided that it is appropriate to remit
      this appeal back to the FtT for hearing afresh with no findings
      preserved, having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's
      Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  The nature and extent of
      any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.





Notice of Decision


  20. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge Parkes promulgated
      on 13th November 2019 is set aside, and I remit the matter for re-
      hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings
      preserved.


  21. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.

Signed   V. Mandalia                Date: 22nd October 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

