
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08353/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 November 2018                   |On 26 November 2018                |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                  G. A. S.
                      (Anonymity order previously made)

                                                               Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:     Mr. A. Pipe of counsel instructed by Baileys
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of  Pakistan.  He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 24 February 2012 as a Tier 4 (General) Student and his leave
    was subsequently extended in  this  capacity  until  17  October  2014.
    However, his leave was curtailed on 29 January 2014, so as to expire on
    30 March 2014. He applied for further leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student on 7 May 2014 but his application was refused  on  19
    June 2014 and he did not have a right to appeal this decision.

2.   On 18 November  2015,  he  was  served  with  notice  that  he  was  an
    overstayer and from 4 February 2016 he was treated as an absconder.  He
    then applied for asylum on 13 December  2017,  on  the  basis  that  he
    feared persecution in Pakistan as a gay man.

3.   His application was refused on 21 June 2018  and  he  appealed.  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Graham  dismissed  his  appeal  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 4 September 2018. The  Appellant  sought  permission  to
    appeal and First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria granted  him  permission  to
    appeal on 25 September 2018.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office Presenting  Officer  made
    oral submissions and I have taken these into account when  reaching  my
    decision below. At the hearing counsel decided not to rely on the fifth
    ground of appeal on the basis that the statement made in  paragraph  49
    of the decision could be read two ways.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   Section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states that:


         "A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where-


         (a) the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection claim
         made by P".


6.   The Respondent  accepts  that  LGBT  persons  in  Pakistan  do  form  a
    particular social group for the purposes of the Refugee Convention  and
    that, if the Appellant is found to be a gay man, he would be at risk of
    death or serious harm if he were to be removed to Pakistan.

7.   The case of Karanakaran v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2000] EWCA Civ 11 confirmed that, when determining the credibility  of
    an account provided by an asylum seeker, the correct  approach  was  to
    consider all the  evidence  in  the  round,  according  it  appropriate
    weight, before reaching a holistic decision on  the  totality  of  that
    evidence. In paragraph 32 of  his  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge stated that she had looked at the matter in the  round.  However,
    when considering individual pieces of  evidence,  she  did  not  remind
    herself that asylum-seekers faced a considerable evidential burden when
    trying to establish their cases.

8.   Her approach to some individual pieces of  evidence  was  also  flawed.
    For example, in paragraph 34 of her  decision,  she  found  that  James
    Barrett was not an expert witness. However, Dr Barrett is a  consultant
    psychiatrist employed at a prominent mental health facility. The  first
    two pages of his report, at page 41 of the Appellant's Bundle, provided
    all of the information to be  expected  from  an  expert  witness.  The
    Respondent submitted that the report provided by Dr.  Barrett  did  not
    depend on his professional  expertise.  However,  at  page  47  of  the
    Appellant's Bundle, he explained that "distinguishing gender  dysphoria
    from homosexuality is part and parcel of my job and  something  I  have
    been undertaking for around thirty years".

9.   On page 46 of the Appellant's Bundle  Dr  Barrett  also  described  the
    information he  had  obtained  from  contacting  Mr.  Palmer,  the  co-
    ordinator of the LGBT Group in Manchester and the fact that he  did  so
    indicated that he had not merely listened to the account given  by  the
    Appellant  before  reaching  a  final  decision  as   to   his   sexual
    orientation.   (See JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013]  UKUT
    00145 (IAC))

10.  The Respondent submitted that Dr Barrett's opinion was also  undermined
    by the fact that he had not read the refusal letter or  considered  the
    possibility that the Appellant's account of his relationship with Bilal
    might have been fabricated after meeting gay men at the Voices for  All
    meetings. However, at page 47 of the  Appellant's  Bundle,  Dr  Barrett
    explained  that  he  had  experience  of   people   trying   to   feign
    homosexuality for immigration purposes and gave examples  of  how  they
    usually tried to prove that they were gay. He then contrasted this with
    the descriptions given by the Appellant of his relationships, which led
    him to believe that he was not just pretending to be a gay man

11.  In paragraph 37 of her decision, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also
    found that the delay by the Appellant in claiming  asylum  damaged  his
    credibility. In my view, the fact that  the  Supreme  Court  recognised
    that a person's homosexuality may mean he was a member of a  particular
    social group in 2010 was not necessarily a factor known  or  understood
    outside legal circles.  Therefore, the First-tier Tribunal Judge should
    have considered whether it was plausible that the Appellant only became
    aware of this once he was in touch with a group which was aware of  the
    right to asylum that had been recognised in courts and tribunals. As  a
    consequence, the reasoning given by the Judge was inadequate.

12.  In paragraph 46 of her decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also
    found that the legal notice said to show that his father  had  formally
    disowned him was unreliable. She based this on the fact  that  she  had
    already found the Appellant's account to be unreliable. In the light of
    Karanakaran the Judge should have considered what weight  to  give  the
    notice  before  reaching  a  holistic  decision  in  relation  to   the
    Appellant's credibility.

13.  Finally, the Judge gave little or no weight to the letter  from  Voices
    for All, dated 11 June 2018, and a significant number of  emails  which
    indicated that the Appellant was playing an active role in this  group.
    She erred by not doing so as it was all evidence that should have  been
    part of a holistic assessment of the Appellant's credibility.

14.  For these reasons I find that the decision made by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Graham contained errors of law and must be set aside.

Decision

(1)  The appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Graham or First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 19 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch



