
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08190/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 February 2020                  |On 14 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     BHH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1990 and is a male citizen of Iraq. He is  of
    Kurdish ethnicity. He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State  dated  8  July  2019  refusing  his
    application for international protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a
    decision promulgated on 20 November 2019,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claims that, in October 2017, he and his family had  left
    Kirkuk after the province had been attacked by the PMU. He went to live
    in his birth village (Chamchamal) where he began a relationship with  a
    woman who became pregnant by  him.  The  appellant  claims  that,  upon
    discovering the pregnancy, his girlfriend's family have killed her  and
    insisted that the appellant's family kill the appellant. To avoid harm,
    the appellant claims to have fled Iraq. He claims to continue  to  fear
    his girlfriend's family.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal. First, the appellant asserts that  the
    judge made a mistake of fact. At [16], judge noted that  the  appellant
    claimed to have begun his relationship with his girlfriend on  the  day
    after Kirkuk had been attacked (16 October 2017). The judge wrote,  'if
    the appellants family fled Kirkuk as a result of  the  invasion  on  15
    October 2017, he met this girl within 24 hours and in the aftermath  of
    the chaos that would have  ensued,  was  not  impossible,  I  gave  the
    timings provided by the appellant negative weight.' (sic) The appellant
    states that Kirkuk Province has a whole was not attacked and  conquered
    within one day that he had fled to a different  part  of  the  province
    where he met his girlfriend.  The  appellant  asserts  that  the  judge
    should not have given 'negative weight' to what  was  a  plausible  and
    consistent account.

 4. The judge has made a number of findings, in addition to that  at  [16],
    which led her to disbelieve the truth of the appellant's  account.  Her
    detailed findings are set out at [20-23].  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant changed his account about when he had entered a  relationship
    with his girlfriend, giving different evidence under  cross-examination
    from that provided at the asylum interview. At  [23],  the  judge  gave
    cogent and sound reasons for  rejecting  the  submission  made  on  the
    appellant's behalf that he was naive and unaware of the consequences of
    entering into a sexual relationship which could lead  to  his  becoming
    the subject of a blood feud.  At  [24],  the  judge  has  given  cogent
    reasons for rejecting the chronology  of  the  appellant  account.  The
    appellant claimed to have had  one  sexual  encounter  with  the  woman
    concerned in January 2018 and to have last seen her on 5 July 2018.  He
    claims that the woman's family discovered that she was expecting a baby
    on 14 July 2018, by which time she would have been six months pregnant.
    It was open to the judge to find that it  was  not  credible  that  the
    woman's family would have not discovered her  pregnancy  until  such  a
    late stage.

 5. I acknowledge that the judge's criticism of the appellant's account  of
    the beginning of his relationship may be unsound; on the  face  of  it,
    there appears to be no reason why the appellant  could  not  started  a
    relationship in a  village  in  Kirkuk  Province  notwithstanding  that
    another part of the same province had been  attacked  on  the  previous
    day. There is no evidence to suggest that the entirety of the  province
    had been overwhelmed in the single day. However, I have to consider the
    materiality of the  error.  The  other  sound  findings  which  I  have
    detailed at [4] are, my opinion, wholly untainted by the judge's  error
    as regards the  date  on  which  the  relationship  commenced.  Indeed,
    regarding that latter finding, the judge herrself acknowledges that  it
    was 'not impossible' that the relationship had commenced  on  the  date
    given by the appellant. The other negative  credibility  findings  have
    not been challenged and I consider that they go  to  the  core  of  the
    appellant's account and  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  the
    credibility of that account undermined by the inconsistencies which she
    has detailed. It is my firm finding that this is not a case in which  a
    single  error  of  fact  finding  by  the  judge  vitiates  her  entire
    credibility analysis.

 6. The second ground concerns the location of the appellant's home area of
    Iraq. The judge appears to have assumed that the appellant is from  the
    IKR (Independent Kurdish Region). The appellant asserts that he is  not
    and this is family are registered in Kirkuk, which is  not  within  the
    IKR.

 7. Mr McVeety, who appeared for the Secretary of State, submitted that the
    judge's finding that the appellant remains in contact with  his  family
    in Iraq and with whom he  remains  on  good  terms  renders  the  exact
    location of the  appellant's  home  area  irrelevant;  the  appellant's
    family has possession of the appellant's identity documents  and  would
    be in a position not only to send those documents to him in the  United
    Kingdom prior to his departure to Iraq but would also be in a  position
    to obtain any additional documents which he  would  require  to  reside
    safely in Iraq. Accordingly, he would be able to return safely  to  his
    home area whether that that may be within the IKR or in any other  part
    of Iraq. I agree with that submission. The grounds of  appeal  complain
    that the incorrect identification of the appellant's home area has  led
    the judge improperly to apply the guidance of AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ
    944 and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  UKUT  00212
    (IAC). I cannot see that that is the  case.  The  appellant  will  have
    access to identity documentation (including a CSID) before  he  returns
    to Iraq and will not be at real risk of  destitution  or  ill-treatment
    either in Baghdad or en route to his home area wherever that may be.  I
    find that any error which the  judge  may  have  made  as  regards  the
    appellant's home area is not material to the outcome of the appeal.

 8. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


         Signed                              Date 23 February 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
