

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/08731/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2018                          |On 11 January 2018         |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                 H K M Z R K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr P Georget (counsel) instructed by Tower Hamlets Law
Centre
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. To preserve the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal,  I  make
an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information  regarding   the
proceedings which would be likely to lead members of the public to  identify
the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Beach  promulgated  on  2  June  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


3. The Appellant was born on 27/09/1952 and is a national of Bangladesh.

4. The appellant entered the UK on 17 August 2007 with leave to enter  as  a
visitor valid until 23 January 2008. On 9 February 2016 the  appellant  made
a protection claim. On 5 August 2016 the respondent refused that  protection
claim.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Beach ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  20  September  2017  Judge
Hollingworth gave permission to appeal stating

      1. At paragraph 51 of the decision the Judge states that there was  no
      separate article 8 claim on behalf of the appellant. This formed  part
      of the grounds of appeal.


      2. It is arguable the Judge should have dealt with it.  The  reference
      to article 8 appears under the heading "new matters".

The Hearing

6. (a) For the appellant, Mr Georget moved the appeal. He told me  that  the
Judge completely failed to deal with the article 8 ECHR grounds  of  appeal,
and so failed to exercise jurisdiction.  He  referred  me  to  the  Tribunal
Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  &  said  that  there  is  no  statutory
requirement for an error of law to be a material error of law.  He  told  me
that section 82(1)(a) of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
gives a right of appeal against refusal of a protection  claim.  Section  82
(1)(b) of the 2002 Act creates a separate right of appeal on  ECHR  grounds.
There were therefore two separate appeals before the tribunal, and only  one
has been resolved.

(b) Mr Georget then sought leave to amend the grounds of appeal  and  sought
extension of time so that he could argue an appeal against  the  refusal  of
the protection claim. He relied on rules 5 and 21 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Mr Georget acknowledged  that  the  application
for permission to  appeal  focused  entirely  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds.
Permission to appeal reflected the grounds  of  appeal  as  framed  and  was
granted on 20 September 2017. The decision under appeal with promulgated  on
2 June 2017.

(c) Mr Georget told me that the proposed ground of appeal had merit  because
at [40] of the decision the Judge finds that the  appellant  is  an  Islamic
teacher who makes public speeches. He argued that  the  background  material
indicated that  the  Awami  league  (who  form  the  current  government  of
Bangladesh) will not tolerate religiously motivated politics.  He  said  the
Judge's findings of fact indicates that the appellant is at risk because  he
is a  man  involved  in  religious  politics.  Mr  Georget  argued  that  an
incorrect approach had been taken to the background materials,  because  the
background materials before the First-tier related to the country  situation
in 2013/2014, and that the appellant's account should be viewed against  the
country situation when the appellant was in Bangladesh, prior  to  2007.  Mr
Georget told me that there was a delay in seeking leave to  appeal  on  this
ground because those  instructing  him  made  a  mistake  when  framing  the
grounds of appeal and did not adequately  consider  an  appeal  against  the
First-tier's finding on the appellant's protection appeal.

(d)  Mr  Georget's  application  was  opposed  by  the  senior  Home  Office
presenting officer.

(e) I refuse to extend time and I refuse  to  allow  additional  grounds  of
appeal. No adequate explanation has been given for the delay of  six  months
since the days of appeal expired. The respondent has  not  been  given  fair
notice of the additional ground  of  appeal.  I  note  that  the  additional
ground of appeal focuses on the Judge's finding  at  [40]  of  the  decision
that the appellant was an Islamic teacher who gave speeches. At [40] of  the
decision the Judge also finds that the appellant does not prove that he  was
a member or a supporter of  a  particular  political  party,  and  that  the
background materials do not suggest that as  an  Islamic  teacher  he  would
become a target for threats from the state or others. No challenge is  taken
to the  finding  at  [48]  that  the  appellant  is  not  a  member  of  the
Bangladeshi Islamic front.

(g) There is no justifiable  reason  either  to  extend  time  or  to  allow
amendment to the grounds of appeal.

7. (a) Mr Walker, for the respondent, adopted  the  terms  of  the  rule  24
response. The Home Office presenting officer's record of proceedings  before
the First-tier tribunal, together  with  the  skeleton  argument  relied  by
counsel who addressed the First-tier tribunal. The  Home  Office  presenting
officer's minute says

      Article 8 not relied on

The skeleton argument relies on articles 2 and three  ECHR  grounds  and  is
entirely silent on article 8 ECHR grounds.

(b) Mr Walker told me that  the  appellant  did  not  present  any  evidence
driving at article 8 of  the  1950  convention,  and  that  no  argument  on
article 8 ECHR grounds  were  presented  to  the  First-tier,  so  that  the
decision does not contain an error of law. Mr Walker  asked  me  to  dismiss
the appeal and allow the decision to stand.



Analysis

8. At the start of the appeal hearing I told parties'  agents  that  I  have
the benefit of the Judge's legible record of proceedings. At the  conclusion
of the Home Office presenting Officer's submissions, the Judge notes

      [No Art. 8 or Art.3 med. Grds]

The record of proceedings contains a detailed note of the  submissions  made
by counsel for the appellant. Those  submissions  dwell  on  the  protection
claim. No submissions were made in relation to article 8 ECHR grounds.

9. The appellant's witness statement was adopted as his evidence  in  chief.
Only  paragraph  16  of  the  appellant's  witness  statement  provides  any
evidence which might drive at article 8 ECHR grounds of  appeal.  There  the
appellant says

      I have lived in the UK for nine years and I am 64 years old, I  suffer
      from ill health. I suffer from high cholesterol, high blood  pressure,
      gastric, arthritis and problems with my joints.  I  ask  you  to  take
      these  factors  into   consideration   and   deal   with   my   appeal
      compassionately.

 The  appellant  was  asked  supplementary  questions,  all  of  which  were
directed at the protection claim. The  appellant  was  cross  examined.  The
cross examination related to the protection claim. No questions  were  asked
in re-examination.

10. The skeleton argument was relied on by counsel for the appellant  before
the First-tier. The skeleton argument focuses on the  protection  claim  and
article 3 ECHR grounds of appeal only.

11. The last sentence of 51 of the decision says

      There was no separate article 8 claim on behalf of the appellant.

12. The decision does not  contain  a  material  error  of  law.  The  Judge
accurately recorded that no article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal were pled.  The
three sentences which make  up  paragraph  16  of  the  appellant's  witness
statement do not amount to reliable  evidence  of  the  component  parts  of
private life within the meaning of article 8 of the  1950  convention.  Even
though the grounds of appeal to the First-tier tribunal form the  basis  for
article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal, those grounds of appeal were not moved.

13. In Sarkar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
195, the Court of Appeal indicated that, although Article 8 and  section  55
were mentioned in the Notice of Appeal, where no evidence had  been  adduced
or submissions made before the First-tier Tribunal to support a claim  under
Article 8 of the ECHR, it could be  treated  as  abandoned.   The  Court  of
Appeal said that even if that was wrong where  there  was  evidential  basis
for the First-tier Tribunal to find  in  the  appellant's  favour  in  those
circumstances the Upper  Tribunal  could  not  be  said  to  have  erred  in
refusing to allow permission to appeal on that  ground.  Additionally,  when
re-making the decision following the grant of permission  to  appeal  on  an
unrelated ground, section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
Act 2007 did not  require  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  carry  out  a  complete
rehearing of the original appeal.

14.   In BM (Iran) (2015) EWCA Civ 491 the Appellant sought  to  argue  that
the FTTJ failed  to  take  into  account  the  Respondent's  policy  against
removal to Iran in the Article 8 exercise. The Court  of  Appeal  held  that
the FtT could not be said to have erred in law by failing to have regard  to
a point that was not raised before it. It  was  not  an  obvious  point  and
there was nothing in the case law to alert the FtT to it, let alone  support
it. No evidential foundation had been laid down  for  it  and  the  material
before the FtT did not even contain the policy on  which  the  argument  was
based

15. No reliable evidence of article 8 ECHR private life  was  placed  before
the tribunal. No submissions on the article 8 ECHR grounds  of  appeal  were
made. The result is that the article 8  ECHR  grounds  of  appeal  were  not
placed before the First-tier tribunal, even though  the  appellant  had  the
option to plead those grounds of appeal. As a result, was no article 8  ECHR
appeal before the judge.

16. In any event, at [52] the Judge dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  1950
convention and then in the final sentence of the decision the Judge said

      I dismiss the appeal on protection and human rights grounds.

Insofar as the notice of appeal to the  First-tier  raised  article  8  ECHR
grounds, those grounds were effectively abandoned by the appellant. Even  if
they were not abandoned by the appellant,  the  decision  clearly  dismisses
the appeal on human rights grounds.

17.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

18. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

19. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

20. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
promulgated on 2 June 2017 stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 10 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


