
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/08839/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 12 December 2017                    |                          |
|Prepared on 13 December 2017           |On 14 December 2017       |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Adams, Counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons
                       Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the UK lawfully on 15 November 2006  as  a
           working holidaymaker,  following  a  successful  appeal  to  the
           Tribunal against a refusal of  entry  clearance.  He  became  an
           overstayer on 30 October 2008.

        2. On 30 November 2012 the Appellant attempted to apply for a grant
           of leave to remain, which application was rejected as invalid on
           16 January 2013. He made an  application  on  1  February  2013,
           which was refused on 15 April 2013, with no right of appeal.

        3. On  26  January  2016  the  Appellant  was  interviewed  by  the
           Respondent as to how he came to be in the UK [F1].  He  admitted
           that upon entry as a working holidaymaker he had no intention of
           returning to Bangladesh. He made no  claim  to  asylum  at  this
           point.

        4.  On  9  February  2016  the  Appellant  instructed  his  current
           solicitors [H5]. On  15  February  2016  the  Appellant  claimed
           asylum, on the basis of his sexuality, and he was served with  a
           notice under s120 of the 2002 Act; the "one stop notice" [H6].

        5. In response the Appellant's solicitors wrote to  the  Respondent
           on 22 February 2016 to set out his instructions upon the  detail
           of his claim to protection [H1-],  and  he  was  in  due  course
           interviewed on 9 June 2016  [B1-].  That  interview  prompted  a
           further letter from his solicitors, dated 16 June 2016,  setting
           out his claim once again [H11-].

        6. The Respondent refused the protection claim on 15  August  2016,
           and the Appellant's appeal to the First  tier  Tribunal  against
           that refusal was heard on 26 April 2017. It was dismissed on all
           grounds by decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated
           on 12 June 2017.

        7. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  by  decision  of
           First tier Tribunal Judge Black on 18 October 2017  on  all  the
           grounds advanced.

        8. The Appellant filed a Rule 24 notice on 3 November 2017, arguing
           that the Judge was entitled to conclude that the  Appellant  had
           not told the truth about the core of his protection  claim,  and
           had given adequate reasons for doing so. Moreover,  given  there
           was no Article 8 claim advanced at the hearing, the Judge  could
           have made no material error in his treatment of s117A-B  of  the
           2002 Act.

        9. Thus the matter comes before me.




      Error of Law?

       10. Neither Ms Adams, who did not appear below, nor Counsel who  did
           appear below are the authors of the grounds to  the  application
           for permission. Those grounds are not well drafted, as Ms  Adams
           readily  accepted.  She  sought  to  distil  from   them   three
           complaints as set  out  in  her  skeleton  argument.  Thus,  she
           argued; (a) there was a failure to make a  relevant  finding  of
           fact, (b)  the  Judge's  approach  to  the  credibility  of  the
           Appellant was  fatally  flawed,  because  it  displayed  a  pre-
           determination that his evidence was untrue, and, (c) there was a
           failure to deal with the Appellant's Article 8 case.

       11. No evidence has been filed in support  of  the  application  for
           permission to appeal from either the Appellant, Counsel, or  any
           other person in attendance at the hearing before  Judge  Fox  to
           suggest that in the course of  his  decision  he  misapprehended
           anything  said  to  him  at  that  hearing  in  the  course   of
           submissions made on behalf of the Appellant,  or,  that  he  had
           incorrectly recorded the oral evidence  given  to  him.  In  any
           event the grounds do not, in terms, assert that he did so.




      Failure to make a relevant finding of fact?

       12. It is clear, notwithstanding the assertion to the contrary to be
           found in the grounds of the application for permission to appeal
           [iv-vi], that the Judge  did  make  a  clear  finding  that  the
           Appellant was not homosexual as he claimed to be [34]. Before me
           Ms Adams accepted as much.

       13. Ms Adams advanced the argument that the Judge had however failed
           to  make  a  clear  finding  upon  whether  the  Appellant   had
           nevertheless created the impression with members of  his  family
           that he was homosexual, so that they in any event perceived  him
           to be homosexual, with the result that he was at  real  risk  of
           harm from them (or others) upon return to Bangladesh.

       14. It is difficult to see any  merit  in  this  complaint  for  two
           reasons. First, the evidence  that  the  Appellant  relied  upon
           before the Judge was not that his family proposed to  harm  him,
           but that they had in early 2016 disowned him  upon  learning  of
           his  activities  in  the  UK-  a  quite  different  matter.  The
           Affidavit, said to have been made by  his  mother  on  30  March
           2016, asserted that the  family  had  "recently  learnt  from  a
           reliable source that he has been passing immoral life  disposing
           and deserting the Islamic lifestyle, even doing various  illegal
           activity" [I1]. Moreover in his witness statement  of  19  April
           2017 [ApBp4 #15] the Appellant asserted no risk of harm from any
           member of his family, but merely said that after he had  refused
           pressure to change his sexuality he had been disowned.

       15. Second, the Judge noted, correctly, that  the  Appellant's  case
           over what his family had learned, and  when,  was  inconsistent.
           Thus his instructions, as set out in his solicitor's  letter  of
           22 February 2016 [H1], were that he had  kept  his  sexuality  a
           secret until he had made a recent disclosure of it  to  them  in
           response to  pressure  to  marry.  Those  instructions  are  not
           obviously consistent with the contents of the Affidavit said  to
           have been made by his mother. More fundamentally, as  the  Judge
           noted, his  case  that  his  family  had  only  learned  of  his
           sexuality nine years  after  he  had  left  Bangladesh  was  not
           consistent with his claim that they had actually learned of  his
           homosexuality before he had left  Bangladesh  in  2006.  As  the
           Judge noted [29] the Appellant's evidence upon  this  aspect  of
           his case lacked credibility.

       16. In my judgement the decision must be read as  a  whole,  without
           overly forensic dissection, and when that is done  it  is  plain
           that the Judge not only rejected the claim  that  the  Appellant
           was in truth a homosexual, but also rejected the claim  that  he
           was genuinely perceived to be a homosexual  by  anyone,  whether
           his family, or members of the general public in Bangladesh.

       17. To the  extent  that  it  was  argued  that  the  Appellant  was
           perceived as a homosexual by members  of  the  wider  public  in
           Bangladesh, beyond his former  sexual  partners,  and  that  the
           Judge failed to make a relevant finding upon this claim  -  this
           is in my judgement dealt with by the Judge's clear finding  that
           the Appellant is not a homosexual, and his  clear  finding  that
           the Appellant's account of his past homosexual experiences is  a
           fiction. Thus, although  the  Appellant  had  claimed  that  his
           identity as a homosexual had become widely known  in  Bangladesh
           (leading to  a  risk  of  prosecution  by  the  authorities  and
           persecution by members of  the  public)  when  a  former  sexual
           partner had disclosed  the  Appellant's  identity  as  a  former
           sexual partner as part of his efforts to obtain a  more  lenient
           sentence from the court in Bangladesh;  that  claim  was  in  my
           judgement quite clearly rejected by the Judge as untrue [33].

       18. To the extent that it was argued before me that the Judge failed
           to consider whether the Appellant could be at risk of harm  upon
           return  to  Bangladesh  because  some  currently  perceive  him,
           wrongly, to be homosexual, I note simply that this was never his
           case. In any event the  Judge's  rejection  of  the  Appellant's
           evidence as untrue disposes in my judgement of even this  lately
           identified proposition.




      Failure to adopt an appropriate approach to credibility?

       19. The focus of Ms Adams' argument therefore fell upon whether  the
           Judge's approach to the assessment of the  evidence  before  him
           was flawed to such  an  extent  that  it  rendered  his  adverse
           credibility decisions unsafe, so that the decision had to be set
           aside and reheard.

       20. Ms Adams argued that the  Judge  took  into  account  immaterial
           matters; (i) the Appellant's failure to give details of  how  he
           managed to have heterosexual sexual partners at the age  of  16-
           17, and, (ii) the Appellant's failure to give a  consistent  and
           detailed account of  his  own  developing  appreciation  of  his
           homosexuality. This argument does not form part of  the  grounds
           for the application for permission to appeal, but for  the  sake
           of  completeness  I  shall  deal  with  it  nonetheless.  In  my
           judgement there is no merit in this complaint. The Judge had the
           benefit of hearing the  Appellant  give  evidence,  and  he  was
           entitled to place  that  evidence  within  its  proper  context,
           namely the Appellant's childhood within a Muslim society. If the
           Appellant was claiming to be able to pursue sexual relationships
           with girls at the age of 16 in Bangladesh  it  fell  to  him  to
           explain  how  those  opportunities  had  arisen,  and  had  been
           pursued. It was plainly  relevant  to  a  consideration  of  the
           credibility  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  of  his  developing
           appreciation of  his  sexuality,  to  identify  whether  he  was
           telling the truth about his  past  sexual  experiences,  and  to
           consider how, when, and in what circumstances he had come to the
           conclusion that he was homosexual. The  Judge  directed  himself
           adequately  to  consider   that   the   Appellant   might   face
           difficulties in giving detail  through  shyness,  but  correctly
           balanced that with the Appellant's own assertion that he was now
           living an openly gay lifestyle [23-24].

       21. Ms Adams' second argument, which is ventilated in  the  grounds,
           was that the manner in which the decision was  written,  and  in
           particular  the  order  in  which  its  several  passages   were
           presented was sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge had  pre-
           determined that the Appellant was advancing a false claim, prior
           to undertaking any assessment of  the  evidence  upon  which  he
           relied. In advancing that argument she pointed to paragraphs 14-
           17 of the decision, which she argued stood together  as  a  pre-
           determination of the Appellant as a  false  witness,  placed  as
           they are prior to the assessment of the evidence  undertaken  in
           paragraphs 18-37. She relied upon the guidance to be found in JT
           (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 878, and argued that  the  manner  in
           which the decision had been written disclosed that the Judge had
           regarded  s8  as  being   determinative   of   the   Appellant's
           credibility, rather than as simply one  of  the  matters  to  be
           taken into account as part  of  the  global  assessment  of  the
           credibility of the differing elements  of  the  evidence  before
           him.

       22. The mere fact that the Judge placed the contents of paragraph 16
           of his decision in advance of the extensive  assessment  of  the
           evidence that he then undertook in paragraphs 18-36 does not  in
           my judgement disclose, of itself,  a  pre-determination  of  the
           appeal prior to consideration of that evidence. Any  Judge  must
           start somewhere in writing their decision, and many do so with a
           rehearsal of the immigration history in order to  set  into  its
           proper context the decision that led to the appeal before  them.
           It is a natural consequence of so doing that many  commence  the
           assessment of the evidence with a consideration of  whether  the
           s8 issues raised by that history are to be considered  material,
           or not. Of itself, such an approach discloses no error  of  law,
           as indeed Pill LJ accepted in JT.

           I do not regard the positioning of the section  8  reference  in
           the determination as necessarily fatal.  I  do,  however,  agree
           with the parties that there  is  a  real  risk  that  section  8
           matters were given a status  and  a  compartment  of  their  own
           rather than taken into account, as they shall have been, as part
           of a global assessment of credibility




       23. Thus I  reject  Ms  Adams'  primary  submission  that  the  mere
           location of the assessment of s8 issues within the decision  was
           determinative. Mere placement of reference to s8  issues  within
           the decision at the beginning of the assessment of evidence will
           not of itself give rise to an error of law.

       24.  In  my  judgement  the  following  passage  from  JT  is   also
           instructive;

           Section 8  can  thus  be  construed  as  not  offending  against
           constitutional principles. It is no more than a reminder to fact-
           finding tribunals that  conduct  coming  within  the  categories
           stated in section 8 shall be taken  into  account  in  assessing
           credibility. If there was a tendency  for  tribunals  simply  to
           ignore these matters when assessing credibility,  they  were  in
           error. It is necessary to take account of them. However, at  one
           end of the spectrum, there may, unusually,  be  cases  in  which
           conduct of the kind identified in section 8 is held to carry  no
           weight at all in the overall assessment of  credibility  on  the
           particular facts. I do not consider the  section  prevents  that
           finding in an appropriate case. Subject to that, I  respectfully
           agree with Baroness Scotland's assessment, when introducing  the
           Bill, of the effect of section 8. Where section  8  matters  are
           held to be entitled to some weight, the weight to  be  given  to
           them is entirely a matter for the fact-finder.

       25. Accordingly, in my judgement, one can see that a Judge will only
           fall into error in the use of s8, if the language used,  in  the
           context of the decision when read as a whole, gives rise to  the
           conclusion that  s8  has  been  used  as  determinative  of  the
           credibility of the evidence at the core of  the  appeal,  rather
           than as part of the overall assessment.

       26. Thus Ms Adams argued that the exercise which  she  accepted  had
           been undertaken by the Judge in paragraphs 18-36 of the decision
           was immaterial, because the decision read as a  whole  disclosed
           that the Appellant's evidence had already been rejected  by  the
           Judge as untrue in the course of paragraph  16.  I  reject  that
           argument; it is plain in my judgement that the Judge was seeking
           to conduct an overall assessment of  the  evidence,  looking  at
           different aspects of the appeal  in  turn,  before  drawing  his
           thinking and his conclusions, together in paragraphs 34-37.  Nor
           is it easy to follow an argument that this decision displays the
           predetermination argued for, in the light of the  acceptance  by
           Ms Adams that it would have been open  to  the  Judge  to  state
           simply at the outset  of  his  findings  that  he  rejected  the
           Appellant's evidence as untrue and then to go  on  to  give  his
           findings for that decision, as indeed some  styles  of  decision
           writing do.

       27. I should perhaps confirm that in my judgement the Judge  was  in
           this case entirely justified in the assessment he  expressed  at
           the conclusion of paragraph 16 that s8 of the 2002 Act should be
           applied to  the  evidence  before  him,  in  the  light  of  the
           Appellant's behaviour and immigration history.  That  assessment
           was not only open to him, but it mattered not whether he  placed
           it at the beginning of his assessment of the evidence, or at the
           end. It did not matter, because the key question was  not  where
           he chose to locate  this  assessment  within  the  text  of  the
           decision as a whole. On  the  contrary,  the  key  question  was
           whether the Judge's decision when read as a  whole  demonstrated
           that he did undertake the proper and careful assessment that was
           required of him of  the  weight  that  could  be  given  to  the
           evidence. In my judgement Ms Adams' argument was reduced to  the
           assertion  that  the  exercise  undertaken  by  the   Judge   in
           paragraphs 18-36 was a sterile one, because in reality the Judge
           had already rejected that evidence as incredible in the light of
           the immigration history. It is however  plain  in  my  judgement
           that this was not the Judge's approach.

       28. Nor did Ms Adams' argument gain any extra force in my  judgement
           from the location of paragraph 15  within  the  decision,  which
           paragraph contains a rehearsal of issues raised by s117  of  the
           2002 Act. I accept that the location of  this  passage  at  this
           point in the decision made  no  obvious  sense,  and  given  the
           Judge's self direction in paragraph 46 that no Article  8  claim
           was advanced, it is far from clear why he included  it  at  all.
           References to s117 were quite simply  unnecessary.  However  its
           existence does not of itself demonstrate, either  alone,  or  in
           conjunction with the placement and content of paragraph 16  that
           the Judge had rejected the Appellant's evidence as not  credible
           prior to undertaking an assessment of that evidence.  I  am  not
           satisfied that he did.



      Failure to deal with the Article 8 ground of appeal?

       29. Under the heading "grounds of appeal" to the  Notice  of  Appeal
           the Appellant did not raise Article 8, the text  stated  instead
           that the Appellant did not have a private or family life for the
           purposes of Article  8.  It  is  true  that  this  was  followed
           immediately  thereafter  under  the   heading,   "statement   of
           additional grounds" with text which contradicted  the  foregoing
           in bald terms, with the  simple  assertion  that  removal  would
           interfere with his family and private life. No  details  of  any
           such claim were however identified. It is very  far  from  clear
           what the author of this document  sought  to  achieve  by  these
           passages, or what he  intended  either  the  Respondent  or  the
           Tribunal to make of a case presented in this way.

       30. The Judge's decision recorded  that  there  was  no  claim  made
           before him under Article 8, and no claim that the Appellant  met
           the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  [46].  Although  Ms
           Adams told me that she was instructed to argue that this was not
           what had occurred at  the  hearing,  as  noted  above,  she  had
           already accepted that no evidence had been filed in  support  of
           the application for permission to appeal  to  suggest  that  the
           Judge had misrepresented or misunderstood what had been said  to
           him during the course of the hearing by either the Appellant, or
           experienced Counsel appearing on his behalf.

       31. The grounds of the application for permission to  appeal  assert
           at (xi) that the Judge  had  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
           established a "private life" with his family  and  friends,  and
           that he had concluded that refusal  of  leave  to  remain  would
           interfere  with  his  Article  8  rights,  but   that   it   was
           nevertheless proportionate.  This  passage  not  only  fails  to
           identify any error of law,  but  it  entirely  fails  to  engage
           properly with what the Judge did say on the subject  of  Article
           8,  with  the  result  that  it  materially  misrepresented  the
           relevant passage in the decision. Ms  Adams  (who  was  not  the
           author of this document) could offer no explanation for how this
           came to be.

       32. Notwithstanding these deficiencies Ms Adams  was  instructed  to
           argue  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give  proper  and  adequate
           consideration  to  the  Appellant's  Article  8  claim.  When  I
           enquired what her instructions were as to the substance  of  the
           claim  that  had  been  advanced,  the  response  was  that  the
           Appellant had established a "family life" in the UK. That cannot
           have been the case. The Appellant did not assert  to  the  Judge
           that he was in a durable relationship with any individual in the
           UK that could amount to "family life". When I pointed  this  out
           to her, Ms Adams suggested that  the  Appellant  had  a  "family
           life" with relatives living in the UK, who supported  him.  That
           was in my judgement  a  proposition  that  lacked  any  adequate
           evidential foundation, indeed it was entirely inconsistent  with
           one version of the evidence that  had  been  placed  before  the
           Judge. Indeed, to her credit, Ms Adams accepted as much once the
           Appellant's witness statement for the appeal had been examined.

       33. Taken at its highest therefore the position before the Judge was
           that the Appellant, a 39 year old  adult  at  the  date  of  the
           hearing had left his parents and  siblings  in  Bangladesh  upon
           emigration to the UK. He had accepted in 2016 to the  Respondent
           that far from being a working holidaymaker he had never intended
           to return to Bangladesh, and indeed he had remained  in  the  UK
           illegally for nine years  upon  the  expiry  of  that  visa.  He
           identified no relative in the UK in his  witness  statement  for
           the appeal [ApBp4], and none gave evidence on  his  behalf.  His
           original case as placed before the Judge in his written evidence
           was that his extended family in the UK had disowned him, as  had
           his family in Bangladesh  [ApBp5  #21].  His  inconsistent  oral
           evidence to the Judge had been that family  members  in  the  UK
           supported him. That inconsistency was one of the reasons  relied
           upon by the Judge for rejecting his  evidence  upon  the  asylum
           appeal as untrue [25]. Even if he was "supported" to some extent
           by unidentified family members in the UK, he had  left  entirely
           unexplained what the nature of that support  was,  and  who  was
           providing it. That evidence  could  not  in  my  judgement  have
           established the existence of "family life" for the  purposes  of
           Article 8 either in principle, or, of a nature and strength that
           would engage Article 8.

       34. At best therefore the  only  Article  8  argument  open  to  the
           Appellant  at  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  was  that  he  had
           established  a  "private  life"  in  the  UK,   whilst   present
           illegally, that was of such a nature and strength  that  it  not
           only engaged Article 8, but rendered disproportionate the public
           interest in his removal.  Such an argument faced the  difficulty
           that the Judge had rejected as untrue the  Appellant's  evidence
           concerning an openly gay lifestyle, and his homosexuality.  What
           then was left in his evidence of an explanation  as  to  how  he
           lived his life? The Appellant's  witness  statement  offered  no
           more than his physical presence in the UK, as an explanation for
           that "private life". There was no explanation of how he actually
           spent his time, or, of how he supported himself. In my judgement
           therefore the evidence placed before the Judge  entirely  failed
           to demonstrate the existence of  a  "private  life"  that  would
           engage Article 8. Even if it could do so, in the  light  of  the
           low threshold of engagement, the Judge would have  been  obliged
           to take account of the undeniable fact that this  lifestyle  was
           established by him at a time when  he  was  present  in  the  UK
           illegally. Absent any credible evidence of third  party  support
           that catered for  all  of  the  Appellant's  needs  (none  being
           offered) the only available inference would be that he had  been
           supporting himself by working illegally in  the  UK.  No  friend
           gave evidence on his behalf, and no organisation suggested  that
           his presence in the UK was to the  benefit  of  the  public.  No
           Tribunal  properly  directing  itself  in  accordance  with  the
           current jurisdiction could have concluded  that  these  personal
           circumstances rendered his removal disproportionate.

       35. For all of the above reasons it follows that I am not  satisfied
           that the Judge made any error when he recorded that  experienced
           Counsel appearing before him had advanced no  Article  8  claim.
           Notwithstanding the problems with the way in which  the  grounds
           of appeal had been presented, and  leaving  them  to  one  side,
           since it is well arguable that the grounds of  appeal  expressly
           disavowed reliance upon Article 8, there is nothing  to  suggest
           that such a ground of appeal ever had any merit. No  doubt  both
           Counsel, and the Judge, recognised the reality of that state  of
           affairs, and the Judge felt no need to set out the  reasons  for
           it in full. His failure to do so discloses no arguable error  of
           law. I have only been obliged to do so because of the manner  in
           which Ms Adams has been instructed to advance the appeal.




      Conclusion

       36. In the circumstances I am  satisfied  that  notwithstanding  the
           grant of permission the grounds identify  no  arguable  material
           error of law. The Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
           grounds must therefore stand.





   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  12
      June 2017 did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 13 December 2017



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

      Unless and until the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
      granted anonymity throughout these proceedings.  No  report  of  these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction
      applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
      contempt of court.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 13 December 2017
