
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08052/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing under rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 15 June 2020                      |On 23 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     N V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah instructed by Greater London
                    Solicitors Ltd (written submissions)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (written submissions)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure of publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 10 April  1993.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom,  aged  15,  on  12  May  2008  as  an
    unaccompanied minor.  He claimed asylum on 14 May 2008.  On 5  November
    2008, that application was refused but, due to his age,  the  appellant
    was granted discretionary leave until 9 October 2010.  The  appellant's
    leave then expired and he overstayed.

 3. The appellant's immigration history thereafter is  not  entirely  clear
    but is set out in paras [6]-[12] of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.



 4. On 18 August 2012, the appellant was arrested on  suspicion  of  having
    committed robbery and possession of a firearm.  His immigration  status
    was discovered and he was subsequently served with notice that  he  was
    subject to removal as an  overstayer.   He  was  again  arrested  on  2
    November 2012 for drunk and disorderly.

 5. On 9 November 2012, the appellant was convicted at  North  West  London
    Magistrates Court on two charges of criminal damage and sentenced to  a
    community order, a curfew with a tag imposed and he was ordered to  pay
    compensation of �100.

 6. On 10 January 2014, the appellant's  (then)  representatives  contacted
    the Home Office in an effort to regularise the appellant's  immigration
    position.  However,  on  16  December  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
    maintained the refusal of his claim for asylum  based  upon  his  claim
    that his father had been involved or suspected of having been  involved
    with the LTTE in Sri Lanka.

 7. Shortly after,  on  17  December  2014,  the  appellant  was  detained.
    Further representations were made by his legal  representatives  on  18
    December  2014  and  9  January  2015.   On  20   March   2015,   those
    representations, relying on the country guidance decision  in   GJ  and
    others Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), were rejected on the basis
    that they did not give rise to a 'fresh claim' under para  353  of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 8. On 5 March 2018, the appellant's  present  legal  representatives  made
    further representations on his behalf claiming asylum on the  basis  of
    his sur place activities.  The appellant was  interviewed  on  18  June
    2018.

 9.  On  22  January  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State  again  refused  the
    appellant's asylum claim with  an  in-country  right  of  appeal.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision but the respondent's  decision
    was withdrawn on 12 March 2019 before the  appeal  hearing  could  take
    place.

10. The respondent made a new  decision,  again  refusing  the  Appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and  under  the  ECHR  on  8
    August 2019.

11. The appellant again appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision
    sent on 14 October 2019, Judge Davidge dismissed the appellant's appeal
    on all grounds.

12. Initially, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  refused  by
    the First-tier  Tribunal.   However,  on  6  January  2020,  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Jackson) granted the appellant permission  to  appeal  on
    two of the three grounds set out in the grounds of appeal  but  refused
    permission on a third ground.

Decision Without a Hearing

13. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, in directions dated 1  April  2020
    (and sent by email on 4 May 2020), I indicated that my provisional view
    was that the error of law issue (and whether the decision should be set
    aside if an error of law was established) could be  decided  without  a
    hearing on submissions.

14. In response to  those  directions,  Ms  Jegarajah,  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant made written submissions both on the error of law issue  and,
    although the directions did not invite this, on the proper disposal  of
    the appeal if the decision were to be remade.

15. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Fijiwala made  written  submissions  on
    the substance of the error of law issue.

16. Both representatives were content that,  at  least  the  error  of  law
    issue, should be decided without a hearing on the basis of  the  papers
    and submissions before me.

17. In the light of that, I have decided that it is fair and just  to  deal
    with the error of law issue without a hearing  under  rule  34  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended).

The Judge's Decision

18. Before Judge Davidge, the appellant's case was focused by  his  counsel
    (Ms Jegarajah) upon a claim based under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR  that,
    due to his mental health, there was a real risk that  he  would  commit
    suicide in the UK on discovering that he  was  to  be  removed.   That,
    taken together with his relationship with an adult friend with whom  he
    lived (Mr T), would also amount to a breach of Art 8, in addition to  a
    breach of Art 3 of the ECHR.

19. Before the judge, Ms Jegarajah did not seek to rely upon the underlying
    asylum claim which the  Secretary  of  State  had  previously  rejected
    whether based upon the appellant's  claim  that  his  father  had  been
    involved with the LTTE in Sri Lanka or upon  the  appellant's  own  sur
    place activities in the UK (para 13 of the determination).

20. Further,  Ms  Jegarajah  both  in  her  oral  submissions  and  written
    submissions before the judge focused the Art 3 and Art 8 claim  as  one
    based upon "domestic Arts  3  and  8  grounds"  (see  para  13  of  the
    determination).  In other words, Ms Jegarajah placed no  reliance  upon
    any risk to the appellant, whether of committing suicide or  otherwise,
    on return to Sri Lanka itself.  Indeed,  the  judge  recorded  that  Ms
    Jegarajah was not "arguing that the appellant would be unable to obtain
    treatment in Sri Lanka" (para 14 of the determination).  Instead, as  I
    have said, she focused the claim upon the impact upon the appellant  in
    the UK if he were to be removed to Sri Lanka.  The  appellant's  claim,
    as particularised by Ms Jegarajah, is set out at length at para  15  of
    the judge's determination.

21. In para 21 the judge said this:

         "In respect of Art 3, the threshold  of  harm  in  the  context  of
         health cases is high, it was not argued in the grounds of appeal or
         before me that the medical evidence established an Art 3  claim  in
         the context of treatment for the appellant's mental health  in  Sri
         Lanka, and on my consideration it does not."

22. At para 22 the judge added this:

         "Ms Jegarajah, in her skeleton argument relied upon in submissions,
         argues the domestic Art 3 case in the context  of  a  risk  to  the
         appellant's mental health arising in the United Kingdom during  his
         detention and removal.  The submission is that the Art 3  threshold
         is reached by a combination of  harm  having  been  caused  to  the
         appellant as a result of the state's previous failure to  safeguard
         and protect him, and by maintaining removal knowing the  harm  that
         will be caused."

23. At para 23, the judge made findings rejecting  the  appellant's  Art  3
    claim as put on his behalf as follows:

         "The argument, set out between paras  32  to  34  of  the  skeleton
         argument, lacks coherence.  The expert's reports prepared  for  and
         relied on in the bail hearing and in the appeal reference detention
         as having an adverse effect on the appellant's  mental  health  but
         that is an insufficient basis upon which  to  mount  this  extended
         submission which, at its root, is speculative.  The proposition, of
         future harm based on a lengthy detention because of an inability to
         establish  the  appellant's  nationality  and   identity   to   the
         satisfaction of the SLHC, is speculative.  The  argument  fails  to
         take account of either the bail provisions or the evidence from the
         Home Office records that on 14 February  2018  the  SLHC  confirmed
         their preparedness to  issue  an  emergency  travel  document.   Ms
         Jegarajah's submission, that I should give no weight to the  screen
         shot evidence of the respondent's referring to the  telephone  call
         with the SLHC, and find the appellant stateless  because  there  is
         nothing from the SLHC directly confirming that they have  confirmed
         his identity and are prepared  to  recognise  his  nationality  and
         issue a travel document  to  enable  him  to  return,  because  the
         respondent can write what it likes  on  its  computer  records,  is
         without merit."

24. In para 23 it is clear that the judge accepted the  evidence  from  the
    Home Office that the Sri Lankan High Commission (the SLHC) accepted the
    appellant was a citizen of Sri Lanka and  were  prepared  to  issue  an
    emergency travel document for him to travel to Sri Lanka.

25. Further, at para 32 of her determination, taking that evidence forward,
    the judge found that the appellant  had  failed  to  establish,  as  Ms
    Jegarajah had submitted, that he was stateless.

26. I should say at this stage that the ground that challenged this finding
    was the ground upon which UTJ Jackson refused the appellant  permission
    to appeal.  It was properly  not  pursued  in  Ms  Jegarajah's  written
    submissions.  I see no  basis  upon  which  it  could  be  successfully
    challenged.  The judge was clearly entitled to rely upon  the  evidence
    presented by the Home Office in the form of its records of contact with
    the Sri Lankan High Commission.

27. Turning to the judge's consideration of  Art  8,  having  set  out  the
    relevant law at paras 24-29 of her determination, the judge set  out  a
    number of "undisputed facts" at para 30(a)-(g) as follows:

         "(i)      The appellant is Sri Lankan and has the identity claimed.
         ii) The appellant has the immigration history I have set out.
        iii) The appellant does not have a partner or a child.
         iv) The appellant does not satisfy any of the immigration rules
             giving him any entitlement to remain.
          v) The appellant has a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress
             disorder/anxiety.
         vi) The appellant is an overstayer who made no effort to
             regularise his status when an adult; and
        vii) The appellant has criminal convictions."

27. At para 31, the judge identified two  areas  of  factual  dispute:  (i)
    whether the appellant was stateless; and  (ii)  whether  the  appellant
    enjoyed family life with Mr T.  As I have already indicated, the  judge
    found (at para 32) against the appellant on (i) and that is now  beyond
    challenge.

28. As regards (ii), at para 33 the judge said this:

         "Family Life

         33.  The evidence of Mr T is that, having been released to  section
             4 accommodation in Cardiff in 2015,  the  appellant  felt  too
             alone to stay there as he did not know anyone,  and  contacted
             Mr T, who went and picked him up and took him to  London.   He
             has lived with him ever since and was bailed to his address in
             2018.  I note from the  psychological  reports  that  on  both
             occasions when the appellant has been interviewed by Dr Hilari
             he has been  accompanied  by  his  friend,  and  much  of  the
             information is apparently reported by him.  Even allowing that
             the appellant receives significant support from his friend, as
             reflected  in  the  information  provided  to  Dr  Hilari  and
             observed by Dr Hilari in terms of their interaction during the
             two interviews, the limited  evidence  does  not  establish  a
             relationship  with  a  character  and  quality  of  a   family
             relationship.  This is not a blood relationship extending back
             to birth.  It is common in the context of the 26  years  lived
             by the appellant, a relatively recent relationship.   It  only
             arose as an adult and was formed when the appellant  was  here
             unlawfully.  Rather, I find it is a relationship  which  is  a
             significant part of the appellant's private life,  as  he  has
             developed it in the UK, and can be adequately  encompassed  as
             part and parcel of the appellant's life in  that  context.   A
             holistic  assessment  of  the  proportionality  removal   must
             encompass the factual matrix of the relationship  between  the
             appellant and Mr T."

    Pausing  there  for  a  moment,  the  judge  found  that  although  the
    relationship between Mr T and the appellant did not amount  to  "family
    life" so as to engage Art 8, it nevertheless was  a  relationship,  the
    nature of which was, that  amounted  to  a  "significant  part  of  the
    appellant's private life" so as to engage Art 8 and  had  to  be  taken
    into account, as the judge put it, as part of the "factual matrix" when
    assessing proportionality.

29. At paras 34 - 35, the judge considered the evidence of  Mr  T.   It  is
    fair to say that she was not impressed by him as a witness  upon  whose
    evidence she could rely.  The judge said this:

         "34. Mr T told me that he had tried but  was  unable  to  find  the
             appellant's family when he went to Sri Lanka.  Mr  T  told  me
             that he would be unable to provide any  significant  financial
             support to the appellant were  he  to  return  to  Sri  Lanka.
             Pressed to explain this apparent inconsistency with the  level
             of support he currently provides, he  explained  that  because
             the appellant is living as part of his household it  does  not
             result in any significant expenditure.  I found  his  evidence
             did not sit well with the description of the  devoted  support
             he offers the appellant  now  further  much  was  made  by  Ms
             Jegarajah, that, having had a significant criminal  record  in
             the past as shown by his PNC, Mr T had completely  turned  his
             life around, and  is  now  a  successful  businessman  with  a
             healthy bank balance from  a  sizeable  business  operating  6
             shops in and around London, and keen to help the appellant, in
             the context of his criminal record, to turn his life around.

         35.  I found his evidence had the hallmarks of expedience  directed
             more to his friendship with the appellant and the benefits, as
             he perceived them to be at the time, than to providing a  full
             and accurate account, and I found I could place no reliance on
             his evidence."

30. The judge then went on in paras 36 - 37 to make a  number  of  findings
    significant to the application of Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR as follows:

         "36. The appellant has  been  here  since  2008,  having  left  the
             country aged 15.  He is now 26 and has mental health problems,
             identified when he was in detention in 2017 and for  which  he
             is receiving counselling  in  which  the  medical  information
             indicates will not respond fully to  treatment  whilst  he  is
             concerned about his immigration status.  I paused to note  the
             absence of any evidence  of  the  appellant  suffering  mental
             illness  prior  to  2017,  and  the  fact  that  a  sur  place
             application at the time indicates that the appellant has had a
             significant  period  of  much  higher  functioning  than   now
             reported and observed.  The evidence does not  establish  when
             his functioning became so reduced.

         37.  It was not argued before me that the appellant would be at any
             risk on return to Sri Lanka.  I  find  that  I  can  place  no
             reliance on the  bare  assertions  of  an  absence  of  family
             support in Sri Lanka.  The appellant has provided evidence  by
             way of a UNHCR letter which shows his father as having been in
             Pakistan, at least at one  stage,  and  there  is  nothing  to
             explain  the  absence  of   information   subsequently.    The
             production of the letter implies family contact.  It has never
             been suggested that the appellant's mother is  anywhere  other
             than in Sri Lanka.  Although  Mr  T  will  not  be  physically
             present, the appellant will have his mother.  I find  that  he
             will be able to  obtain  medications  and  appropriate  health
             treatment and care.  Mr T told me he  had  visited  Sri  Lanka
             recently and I find he will be able to visit the appellant  if
             he chooses.  I am satisfied that the appellant will also  have
             the financial support of Mr T.  I find that he will not  be  a
             person without accommodation or resources.  The  appellant  is
             familiar with the culture having lived there until 2008.  I am
             satisfied, and it was not argued otherwise, that  he  will  be
             able to integrate there."

31. Then in paras 38 - 42 the judge dealt  with  the  contentions  made  on
    behalf of the appellant that the appellant had been let down by  social
    services and by the respondent in failing  to  carry  out  her  tracing
    obligations.  The judge rejected both contentions.  So far as  relevant
    to the issues I have to decide paras 41 and 42  are  in  the  following
    terms:

         "41. That the appellant was granted immigration bail at a time when
             there was no imminent prospect of removal because  of  a  late
             made application for asylum on sur place grounds does not show
             that the respondent unlawfully detained the appellant.  Albeit
             the  medical  evidence  is  that  detention  exacerbated   his
             symptoms, that does not establish that the respondent knew of,
             or was responsible or culpable in the context of,  the  mental
             health issues then identified.

         42.  The anticipated failure of the respondent to  prevent  further
             deterioration in the appellant's mental health in the  context
             of the time he will spend here prior to removal has  not  been
             made out for the reasons I have already given."

32. That latter reference in para 42 is a reference  back  to  the  judge's
    findings, rejecting the submissions made on behalf  of  the  appellant,
    that he would be detained pending removal as he was  stateless  and  no
    emergency travel document could be obtained.

33. Then at paras 43 and 44, the judge went on to apply her findings to Art
    8 and concluded that the appellant's removal would be proportionate.

34. First, the judge found that "private but not family life exists in  the
    UK" (para 43).

35. Second, the judge found any interference was proportionate (para 44):

         "As conceded, I find that the requirements of the domestic  private
         life rules at para 276 are not met.  I give significant  weight  to
         the public interest in his removal as a person who  does  not  have
         any rule-based entitled (sic) to remain.  In  terms  of  the  other
         s117 factors, the respondent did not dispute that the appellant has
         good enough English to facilitate integration into the UK, and that
         he will be able  to  continue  to  be  financially  independent  by
         relying on Mr T.   Accordingly,  nothing  adverse  flows  from  the
         financial and language position.  There was no  dispute  before  me
         that the appellant had at best precarious immigration status  until
         October 2010 when his status became unlawful.  I give  some  weight
         to  his  relationship  with  Mr  T  which  has  been  significantly
         beneficial  to  him  since  2015.   There  is  no  merit   in   the
         statelessness point.  I do not find any significance  in  the  past
         harm points raised on his behalf.  I have conducted a balance sheet
         assessment.  This is a case where significant  weight  attaches  to
         immigration control.  I find the positive factors are outweighed by
         the negative.  In short this is not  a  case  where  removal  would
         place the UK in breach of Article 8 obligations."

36. As a consequence, the judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  the
    only two grounds relied upon, namely under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

The Appellant's Challenge

37. The appellant relies upon three grounds in his grounds of appeal  which
    are numbered 2, 3 and 4.  More appropriately, I will call these grounds
    1, 2 and 3.

38. Ground 1, seeks, in  essence,  to  argue  that  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to apply the Court of Appeal's decision in  J  v  SSHD  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 629 in  assessing  the  appellant's  claim  under  Art  3  (in
    particular) that he was at real risk of committing suicide.  The ground
    places some reliance upon the Strasbourg jurisprudence,  in  particular
    the case of Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867.  It places reliance
    upon the Strasbourg court's  view  that  Art  3  entails  a  procedural
    requirement that the respondent should undertake investigations  as  to
    the access to care and the existence of social  and  familiar  networks
    (as the grounds put it) in  the  receiving  state,  namely  Sri  Lanka.
    Further, reliance is placed upon the expert evidence of Dr Hilari  that
    there is a significant risk of suicide in the UK when the appellant  is
    informed of his removal.

39. Ground 2, as I have  said,  concerned  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant was not stateless and permission to  challenge  that  finding
    was refused by UTJ Jackson.

40. Ground 3 contends that  the  judge  failed  properly  to  consider  the
    relationship between the appellant and Mr T in finding that  there  was
    no family life.  It is said that their relationship was one "akin to  a
    de facto family".  As a consequence, it is contended the  judge  failed
    to take into account the impact on the relationship with Mr  T  if  the
    appellant were removed to Sri Lanka.

41. In her written submissions, Ms Jegarajah expanded upon the  appellant's
    challenge under these grounds.

42. Reliance is again placed upon the Court of Appeal's  decision  in  J  v
    SSHD and now the Supreme Court's decision in AM(Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2020]
    UKSC 17.

43. Relying upon AM (Zimbabwe)  Ms  Jegarajah  prays  in  aid  the  Supreme
    Court's adoption of the Strasbourg court's approach in Paposhvili that,
    in addition to those health cases previously covered by Art  3  (namely
    the  so-called  'death  bed'  cases),  an  individual  can  succeed  by
    establishing that on removal to his country of origin  if  he/she  will
    suffer a  "significant  reduction  in  life  expectancy".   She  places
    reliance, in particular, upon the judgment of Lord Wilson at [31].

44. Ms Jegarajah also places reliance upon the Supreme Court's adoption  of
    the Strasbourg court's view in Paposhvili that there  is  a  procedural
    requirement imposed upon the respondent by Art 3.  Once  an  individual
    has demonstrated that there are substantial grounds for believing  that
    if removed he/she would be exposed to a real risk of treatment contrary
    to Art 3, then the respondent (the Secretary of State) is better placed
    to  collect  evidence  about  the  availability  and  accessibility  of
    suitable treatment in the receiving state (see [23] and  [33]  of  Lord
    Wilson's judgment).

45. Placing reliance upon the expert evidence of Dr  Hilari,  Ms  Jegarajah
    submits that the appellant has established a breach of Art 3  and  that
    the judge was wrong to dismiss  the  appeal  notwithstanding  that  the
    decision in AM (Zimbabwe) postdated the hearing as it is declaratory of
    the law.  The evidence shows that the appellant would  be  at  risk  of
    suicide in the UK or on return to Sri Lanka.

The Respondent's Case

46. The respondent's position is set out in the written submissions  of  Ms
    Fijiwala.

47. First,  it  is  submitted  that  the  appellant  cannot  rely  upon  AM
    (Zimbabwe) which postdated the judge's  decision.   In  any  event,  Ms
    Fijiwala submitted that the appellant's Counsel at the  hearing  before
    the judge did not  argue  that  treatment  was  not  available  to  the
    appellant for his condition in Sri Lanka and so the appellant could not
    succeed in establishing a breach of Art 3 on return to Sri  Lanka  even
    applying AM (Zimbabwe) and so any error was not material to the judge's
    decision.

48. Secondly, in applying J v SSHD Ms  Fijiwala  submits  that  the  judge,
    consistently with J, found that the act of removing the  appellant  did
    not  create  a  real  risk  of  suicide.   She  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant's asylum claim had been found not  to  be  objectively  well-
    founded and that finding was not challenged in the  appeal  before  the
    judge.  Further, the expert report whilst it considered the  impact  of
    the appellant's past detention on his mental health it was now accepted
    by the judge (and this was also not challenged)  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    High Commission was prepared to issue  an  ETD  and  so  the  issue  of
    detention in the UK and  its  impact  on  the  appellant's  health  was
    resolved.

49. Thirdly, Ms Fijiwala relies upon the judge's finding in para 42 that it
    had not been established that the  respondent  would  fail  to  prevent
    further deterioration in the appellant's mental health if he was to  be
    removed.  She also found that  the  appellant  had,  in  the  receiving
    state, support from his mother (even if not Mr T's support) and that he
    could obtain the appropriate medication and health treatment such  that
    there was an effective mechanism to reduce the risk of suicide  in  the
    receiving state.

50. Finally, as regards Art 8, Ms Fijiwala submitted  that  the  judge  had
    fully considered the nature of the relationship between Mr  T  and  the
    appellant in considering the impact upon the appellant of  his  removal
    as part of his private life in the UK.

Discussion

    Ground 1

51. In J v SSHD the Court of Appeal recognised that a  claim  under  Art  3
    based upon a risk of suicide to an individual subject to removal  could
    arise in three situations.  At [17], Dyson LJ  (with  whom  Brooke  and
    Lloyd LJJ agreed) identified three potential stages as follows:

         "These are: (i)  when  the  appellant  is  informed  that  a  final
         decision has been made to remove him to Sri Lanka; (ii) when he  is
         physically removed by aeroplane to Sri Lanka; and  (iii)  after  he
         has arrived in Sri Lanka."

52. In relation to those three stages Dyson LJ went on  to  recognise  that
    stage (i) is a "domestic case" and  that  stage  (iii)  is  a  "foreign
    case".  Stage (ii), although less clear,  is  to  be  "treat[ed]  as  a
    domestic case".

53. At [26]-[31], Dyson LJ set out the basis of a claim under Art  3  based
    upon a risk of the individual committing  suicide  in  the  country  of
    return (a "foreign case"):
         "26. First, the test requires an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
         severity of the treatment which it is said that the applicant would
         suffer if removed. This must attain a minimum  level  of  severity.
         The court has said on a number of occasions that the assessment  of
         its severity depends on all the circumstances of the case. But  the
         ill-treatment must "necessarily be serious" such  that  it  is  "an
         affront  to  fundamental  humanitarian  principles  to  remove   an
         individual to a country  where  he  is  at  risk  of  serious  ill-
         treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].
         27. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the  act
         or threatened act of removal or expulsion and the inhuman treatment
         relied on as violating the applicant's article 3  rights.  Thus  in
         Soering at para [91], the court said:
              "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may be
              incurred,  it  is  liability  incurred  by  the   extraditing
              Contracting State by reason of its having taken action  which
              has as a direct consequence the exposure of an individual  to
              proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).
         See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that  the
         examination of the article 3 issue "must focus on  the  foreseeable
         consequences of the removal of the applicants to Sri Lanka..."
      1. Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the article 3  threshold
         is particularly high simply because it is a foreign case. And it is
         even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment is not  the  direct
         or  indirect  responsibility  of  the  public  authorities  of  the
         receiving state, but results from some naturally occurring illness,
         whether physical or mental. This is made clear in para  [49]  of  D
         and para [40] of Bensaid.
      1. Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a  suicide
         case (para [37] of Bensaid).
      1. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of  a  breach  of
         article 3 in a suicide case, a question of  importance  is  whether
         the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving  state  upon
         which the risk of suicide is said to be based is objectively  well-
         founded. If the fear is not well-founded, that will tend  to  weigh
         against there being a real risk that the removal will be in  breach
         of article 3.
      1. Sixthly, a further question of considerable  relevance  is  whether
         the removing and/or the receiving state has effective mechanisms to
         reduce the risk of suicide. If there are effective mechanisms, that
         too will weigh heavily against an applicant's  claim  that  removal
         will violate his or her article 3 rights."

54. The importance of the domestic/foreign distinction is that, inter alia,
    in relation to a claim based upon the impact to an individual's  health
    on removal, Art 3 has been interpreted as applying a  'high  threshold'
    derived from the case law such as D v UK (1997) 24  EHRR  423  and  the
    House of Lords' decision in N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 and the  subsequent
    case in Strasbourg of N v UK (2008) 47 EHRR  39.   That  is  the  third
    point made by Dyson LJ in [28] of his judgment in J.  The jurisprudence
    on Art 3 is summarised by Lord Wilson in AM(Zimbabwe) at [13]-[26].

55. It is in relation to that 'high threshold' that the Supreme Court in AM
    (Zimbabwe) applied the more generous approach of the  Strasbourg  court
    in Paposhvili.  Lord Wilson (with whom Lady Hale, Lady Black  and  Lord
    Kitchin agreed) disproved the Court of Appeal's  view  that  Paposhvili
    only achieved a "very modest" extension of the  previous  position  (at
    [27]-[31]):
         "27. We need to analyse the effect of the decision in the
         Paposhvili case and, first, to survey the analysis of its effect
         conducted by the Court of Appeal. It was that court's view, at para
         39, that the decision reflected only a "very modest" extension of
         the protection against return given by article 3 in cases of ill-
         health. The Court of Appeal fastened in para 39(iv) upon the Grand
         Chamber's questionable choice of language that the previous
         approach to such cases needed only to be "clarified". And it
         buttressed its restrictive view of the effect of the decision by
         claiming in para 39(ii) that the Grand Chamber had noted that there
         had been no violation of article 3 in the N case and in para 40
         that the Grand Chamber had "plainly regarded that case as rightly
         decided". But the careful reader of paras 178 to 183 of the
         judgment in the Paposhvili case may find it hard to agree with the
         Court of Appeal in this respect. Of course the Grand Chamber noted
         that it had been held in the N case there had been no violation of
         article 3; but there is no express agreement on its part with that
         conclusion and, subject to the precise meaning of the new criterion
         in para 183 of the judgment (to which we should now turn), its
         application to the facts of the N case would suggest a violation.
         28.  The Court of Appeal interpreted the new criterion in para 183
         of the judgment in the Paposhvili case, at para 38 as follows:
                 "This means cases where the applicant faces a real risk  of
                 rapidly experiencing intense suffering (i.e. to the article
                 3 standard) in the receiving state because of their illness
                 and  the  non-availability  there  of  treatment  which  is
                 available to them in the removing state  or  faces  a  real
                 risk of death within a short time in  the  receiving  state
                 for the same  reason.  In  other  words,  the  boundary  of
                 article 3 protection has been shifted from being defined by
                 imminence of death in the removing  state  (even  with  the
                 treatment  available  there)  to  being  defined   by   the
                 imminence  (ie  likely  'rapid'  experience)   of   intense
                 suffering or death in the receiving state, which  may  only
                 occur because of the non-availability in that state of  the
                 treatment  which  had  previously  been  available  in  the
                 removing state."
         29. The criticism of the above passage made by the appellant and by
         the  AIRE  Centre  largely  relates  to  the  second  sentence.  In
         relation, however,  to  the  first  sentence,  they  suggest  that,
         irrespective of the precise meaning, in context, of "a  significant
         reduction in life expectancy" in para 183 (as to which see para  31
         below), the paraphrase of "death within a short time"  favoured  by
         the Court of Appeal may not be entirely accurate.  In  relation  to
         the second sentence, their criticism is directed to the words  "the
         imminence (ie likely  'rapid'  experience)  of  ...  death  in  the
         receiving state" attributable to the non-availability of treatment.
         They point out that the Grand Chamber was addressing exposure "to a
         serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  his  or  her  state  of
         health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction
         in life expectancy" (italics supplied); and they contend  that  the
         Court of Appeal has misinterpreted those words so as to refer to  a
         serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  his  or  her  state  of
         health resulting in intense suffering or in a significant reduction
         in life expectancy. The Secretary of State, for her  part,  rejects
         their criticism as narrow  and  syntactical,  apt  perhaps  to  the
         construction of a statute but inapt to the present context in which
         the meaning of para  183  should  be  informed  by  "case  law  and
         realism". Her reference to case law turns out to be an  indorsement
         of the questionable conclusion of the Court of Appeal that  in  the
         Paposhvili case the Grand Chamber approved its decision  in  the  N
         case.  What  remains  is  her  reference,  rather  undeveloped,  to
         realism.
         30. There is, so I am driven to conclude, validity in the criticism
         of the Court of Appeal's interpretation of the  new  criterion.  In
         its first sentence  the  reference  by  the  Grand  Chamber  to  "a
         significant reduction in life expectancy" is interpreted as  "death
         within a short  time".  But  then,  in  the  second  sentence,  the
         interpretation develops into the "imminence ... of ... death"; and,
         as is correctly pointed out, this is achieved  by  attributing  the
         words "rapid ... decline" to life expectancy when, as written, they
         apply only to "intense  suffering".  The  result  is  that  in  two
         sentences a significant reduction in  life  expectancy  has  become
         translated as the imminence of death. It is too much of a leap.
         31. It remains, however, to consider what the  Grand  Chamber  did
         mean  by  its  reference  to  a  "significant"  reduction  in  life
         expectancy in para 183 of its judgment in the Paposhvili case. Like
         the skin of a chameleon, the adjective takes a different colour  so
         as to suit a different context. Here the general context is inhuman
         treatment; and the particular context is that the alternative to "a
         significant reduction in life expectancy" is "a serious, rapid  and
         irreversible decline in ... health resulting in intense suffering".
         From these contexts  the  adjective  takes  its  colour.  The  word
         "significant"  often   means   something   less   than   the   word
         "substantial". In  context,  however,  it  must  in  my  view  mean
         substantial. Indeed, were a reduction in life expectancy to be less
         than substantial, it would not attain the minimum level of severity
         which article 3 requires. Surely the Court of Appeal was correct to
         suggest, albeit in words too extreme,  that  a  reduction  in  life
         expectancy to death in  the  near  future  is  more  likely  to  be
         significant than any other reduction. But even a reduction to death
         in the near future might be significant for one person but not  for
         another. Take a person aged 74, with an expectancy of  life  normal
         for that age. Were that person's expectancy be reduced to, say, two
         years, the reduction  might  well  -  in  this  context  -  not  be
         significant. But compare that person  with  one  aged  24  with  an
         expectancy of life normal for that age. Were his or her  expectancy
         to  be  reduced  to  two  years,  the  reduction  might   well   be
         significant."

56. At [34] Lord Wilson reached the following conclusion:

         "34.  This court is not actively invited to decline to  adopt  the
         exposition of the effect of article 3  in  relation  to  claims  to
         resist return by reference to ill-health which  the  Grand  Chamber
         conducted in the Paposhvili case. Although the Secretary  of  State
         commends the Court of Appeal's unduly narrow interpretation of  the
         Grand Chamber's exposition, she makes no active submission that, in
         the event of a wider interpretation, we should decline to adopt it.
         Our refusal to follow a decision of the ECtHR, particularly of  its
         Grand  Chamber,  is  no  longer  regarded  as,  in  effect,  always
         inappropriate.  But  it  remains,   for   well-rehearsed   reasons,
         inappropriate save in highly unusual  circumstances  such  as  were
         considered in R (Hallam) and R (Nealon) v Secretary  of  State  for
         Justice (JUSTICE intervening) [2019] UKSC 2, [2020] AC 279. In  any
         event, however, there is no question of our refusing to follow  the
         decision in the Paposhvili case. For it was 15 years ago, in the  N
         case cited at para 2 above,  that  the  House  of  Lords  expressed
         concern that the restriction of article 3 to early death only  when
         in prospect in the returning state appeared illogical: see para  17
         above. In the light of the decision in the Paposhvili case,  it  is
         from the decision of the House of Lords  in  the  N  case  that  we
         should today depart.

57. The Supreme Court recognised that the threshold in Art 3 required proof
    that on return to the individual's country of origin there was  a  real
    risk either of "a serious,  rapid  and  irreversible  decline  in  [the
    individual's] state of health resulting in intensive suffering"  or  of
    "a significant reduction in life expectancy" (see [27]  -  [31]).   The
    practical availability and affordability of suitable care or  treatment
    in the country of return was relevant to determining whether  a  breach
    of Art 3 could be established (see [23] and [33]).

58. The Supreme Court's approach provides a clear basis for the claim in  a
    "foreign" case of a real risk of suicide in the country of  return.   A
    "real risk of suicide" will, on the face of it, fall within the  rubric
    of a  "significant  reduction  in  life  expectancy"  subject  to  Lord
    Wilson's point  in  [31]  of  his  judgment  that  "significant"  means
    "substantial"  in  the   context   of   the   particular   individual's
    circumstances.

59. The effect of AM (Zimbabwe) is that, in the context of a "foreign" case
    where a risk of the individual committing suicide is alleged, then  the
    third point made by Dyson LJ in [28] of J has to be read subject to the
    more expansive content of Art 3 accepted by the Supreme Court.

60. It is reliance upon this adoption of Paposhvili that Ms  Jegarajah,  in
    part, now relies.

61. Undoubtedly Ms Jegarajah is correct that the effect of AM (Zimbabwe) is
    declaratory of the law and was, therefore, the applicable  law  at  the
    time that the judge reached her decision.  Of course, the judge  cannot
    be criticised for applying, indeed she was bound to apply, the previous
    jurisprudence until the Supreme Court, as it eventually did, reached  a
    different conclusion in AM (Zimbabwe).

62. There are a number of difficulties with Ms Jegarajah's submissions.

63. Perhaps as a result  of  the  understanding  of  the  'high  threshold'
    applicable under Art 3 until this change, Ms Jegarajah did not  advance
    any case before the judge that the appellant could succeed on the basis
    of the risk to him in Sri Lanka.  She based his case  wholly  upon  the
    impact upon his mental health in the UK and not in Sri Lanka.  In  para
    5 of her written submissions Ms Jegarajah states that  the  appellant's
    case "before the First-tier tribunal"  was  that  he  was  at  risk  of
    committing suicide in the UK in detained and  if  "he  is  successfully
    returned".  With respect, the latter is simply not how the case was put
    to Judge Davidge.  The judge records that expressly  in  para  14  (and
    para 37) of her determination.

64. Ms Jegarajah now seeks to overturn the judge's decision on a basis  not
    even argued  by  her  before  the  judge.   Nevertheless,  perhaps  the
    declaratory effect of AM(Zimbabwe) permits Ms Jegarajah  to  make  this
    point, and rely upon the Supreme Court's decision, despite the lack  of
    any claim based upon a risk of committing suicide in  Sri  Lanka  being
    made before the judge.  I will proceed on that basis.

65. Any error was not, however, material.  In fact, the judge  went  on  to
    consider whether the appellant could establish a  risk  of  suicide  if
    returned to Sri Lanka sufficient to engage  Art  3  in  her  subsequent
    findings, in particular in para 21 and in para 37 which I have set  out
    above.  The judge made a number of crucial findings.  First, the  judge
    found that the appellant would have family support in Sri  Lanka.   She
    found that he would have his mother and he would  be  accommodated  and
    not be without resources (see para 37).  That factual  finding  is  not
    challenged.  Secondly, and the  contrary  was  not  argued  before  the
    judge, she found that the appellant would be able to  obtain  treatment
    in Sri Lanka for his mental health (see paras 14 and 37).  Thirdly, the
    position was that the appellant's fears, to the extent they were  based
    upon his asylum claim, were not well-founded.  That had been  concluded
    by the Secretary of State and  was  not  contested  before  the  judge.
    Consequently, the judge found, in effect,  that  the  circumstances  in
    which the appellant would find himself in Sri Lanka did not engage  Art
    3 because it had not been established that there was a real  risk  that
    he would commit suicide in Sri Lanka.

66. Ms Jegarajah's contention that the expert evidence (see para 32 of  the
    written submissions) and the absence of support from Mr T in Sri  Lanka
    was crucial does not stand up to scrutiny.  The judge was clearly  well
    aware  of  the  expert  evidence  and  was  largely  directed  to   the
    implications to the appellant in the UK (see quotations set out at para
    9 of the written submissions citing paras 97-98  of  Dr  Halari's  main
    report).   The report does postulate a  "significant  deterioration  in
    the appellant's mental health" on return (see para 96  of  the  report)
    but this is  in  the  context  of  reliving  the  trauma  of  his  past
    experiences and questioning about that by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    (see paras 100-107 of the report).   However,  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim was, by the time the case was heard by Judge Davidge, accepted as
    not well-founded.  His fears, upon which Dr Halari's views were  based,
    had no objective basis. Also, Dr Halari's views were also reached at  a
    time when the appellant's position and that of Mr T  (not  accepted  by
    the judge) was that the appellant would have no support from family  in
    Sri Lanka.  In fact, the judge found his mother  was  there  and  could
    provide support and accommodation.  Further, the judge did  not  accept
    Mr T's evidence that he would not be able to continue to  provide  some
    financial support (and indeed could visit) but that, in any event,  the
    appellant would have the support of his mother in Sri Lanka.

67. Consequently, even  if  the  judge  had  applied  the  approach  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe), she would undoubtedly have dismissed the appeal under Art 3
    on the basis that it had not been established that  there  would  be  a
    "significant reduction in life expectancy" for  the  appellant  on  the
    basis of a real risk that he would commit  suicide  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.  Subject  to  the  adjustment  required  by  AM(Zimbabawe),  the
    judge's decision is consistent with, and applied the substance of,  the
    approach set out by Dyson LJ in J at [26]-[31].

68. I agree with Ms Fijiwala's submission that the  judge's  understandable
    error in applying the law prior to the Supreme Court's decision  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe), was not material to the judge's decision that a  breach  of
    Art 3 on the basis of  risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  had  not  been
    established.

69. In large measure, this deals with Ms Jegarajah's additional  submission
    that applying the Art 3 procedural requirement in  Paposhvili,  adopted
    by the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe), the Secretary of  State  had  an
    obligation to enquire whether treatment was available for the appellant
    in Sri Lanka.  The procedural requirement is set out in  [33]  of  Lord
    Wilson's judgment as follows:

         "33.   In the event that the  applicant  presents  evidence  to the
         standard addressed above, the returning state can seek to challenge
         or counter it in the manner helpfully outlined in the  judgment  in
         the Paposhvili case at paras 187 to  191  and  summarised  at  para
         23(b) to  (e)  above.  The  premise  behind  the  guidance,  surely
         reasonable, is that, while  it  is  for  the  applicant  to  adduce
         evidence about his or  her  medical  condition,  current  treatment
         (including the likely suitability of any other treatment)  and  the
         effect on him or her of inability to access it, the returning state
         is better able to  collect  evidence  about  the  availability  and
         accessibility of suitable treatment in the  receiving  state.  What
         will most surprise the first-time reader  of  the  Grand  Chamber's
         judgment is the reference in para 187 to the  suggested  obligation
         on the returning  state  to  dispel  "any"  doubts  raised  by  the
         applicant's evidence. But, when the reader  reaches  para  191  and
         notes the reference, in precisely the  same  context,  to  "serious
         doubts", he will realise that "any" doubts in para  187  means  any
         serious doubts. For proof, or in this  case  disproof,  beyond  all
         doubt is a concept rightly unknown to the Convention."

70. Leaving aside, that this was not a live issue before the judge and that
    therefore, it is difficult to  see  why  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    required before the judge to engage in  this  enquiry,  the  procedural
    obligation only arises if the appellant has established that there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that there is a real risk of a breach
    of Art 3 (see Lord Wilson at [33]).  The judge found that there was not
    taking into account the appellant's personal circumstances and  support
    available in Sri Lanka and because it had not  been  suggested  to  the
    judge that appropriate treatment would not be available.  In any event,
    the appellant led no evidence before the judge, because it was accepted
    treatment was available for his mental health as set out at paras 44-47
    of the respondent's decision letter.  All that was left was Dr Halari's
    view at para 107 of  his  report  that  though  "medical  services  are
    available", the appellant was unlikely to access them because he  would
    be unable to trust medical professionals because of his  fear  that  he
    would be arrested and killed.  But, as I have already pointed out, that
    fear is not well-founded and, again, Dr Halari's view is based upon the
    (false) premise that the appellant would have no support in  Sri  Lanka
    when, in fact, he would have his mother.   The  judge's  finding  that,
    taken with her  other  findings,  that  "he  will  be  able  to  obtain
    appropriate medication,  treatment and  care  for  his  mental  health"
    (para 37) was entirely legally sustainable and fatal to an  Art  3  (or
    Art 8) claim based upon any real risk  of  committing  suicide  in  Sri
    Lanka.

71. Turning now to  the  appellant's  position  in  the  UK,  much  of  the
    submissions and the evidence of Dr Halari was based  upon  the  premise
    that the appellant would be detained in the  UK  (and  therefore  would
    suffer a deterioration in his mental health) because  he  is  stateless
    and there would be at least (if not more) a delay in attaining an  ETD.
    The judge did not accept that the appellant was stateless and that  the
    Sri Lankan High Commission would not issue an ETD.  That finding, given
    UTJ Jackson's refusal of permission on the grounds seeking to challenge
    it, stands.

72. The judge dealt with the 'domestic' aspect of  the  appellant's  Art  3
    claim (which was of course the only aspect pursued before the judge  by
    the appellant's counsel) the judge rejected this at paras  23  and,  in
    her reasons for rejecting the reliance upon past harms caused by social
    services and the respondent, at paras 38 - 42.  Again,  the  judge  was
    well aware of the expert  evidence  but  that  evidence  was  in  large
    measure based upon a premise that the appellant would be detained as  a
    stateless person pending resolution of whether he could obtain an  ETD.
    The judge's unchallengeable finding in paragraph 23 was that this is  a
    false premise.  The judge noted  the  impact  upon  the  Appellant  (as
    claimed) on his mental health during detention at para 36.   Whilst  in
    the UK he continues to enjoy the support of Mr T.  And that the medical
    evidence is that "detention exacerbated his symptoms" (para 41).

73. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge did not  materially  err  in
    law in dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 3.

    Ground 3

74. Turning to the ground which challenges Art 8,  of  course  the  judge's
    finding has to be seen in the context of her conclusions in relation to
    the appellant's failure to establish a real risk of suicide  either  in
    the UK or in Sri Lanka and, in that context, the support which will  be
    available to him through his mother, and possibly  financially  through
    Mr T in the UK, whilst he is in Sri Lanka.  The judge  was  well  aware
    that the appellant had a close relationship with Mr T.  She  recognised
    as much in para 33 of her determination.  Although she did not conclude
    that the relationship between Mr T and the appellant  was  such  as  to
    give rise to "family life", she nevertheless considered that it was  an
    important part  of  the  appellant's  private  life  in  the  UK.   She
    described it as a "significant part" of that private life.

75. Both in  Ground  3  and  Ms  Jegarajah's  written  submissions,  it  is
    contended that there were "de facto family ties" between the  appellant
    and Mr T. Without reference to any case  law,  this  appears  to  be  a
    contention that the appellant's relationship amounted to 'family  life'
    as there was "effective, real or committed support" given by  Mr  T  to
    the appellant (see Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 at [17]).  It  is
    clear that such a relationship may arise between adults in  appropriate
    circumstances (see, e.g. Uddin v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ  338):  all  will
    depend upon the particular facts.  It may well be that the relationship
    between the appellant and Mr T did have some hallmarks of  a  dependent
    relationship, potentially giving rose to family life for  the  purposes
    of Art 8.  However,  the  judge's  view  (at  para  33)  was  that  the
    relationship,  though  close   and   dependent,   was   essentially   a
    relationship formed between the appellant (as an adult) with Mr T as  a
    close friend.  Friends are usually distinguished from, and are not  the
    same as, family.  I am unable to say that the  judge's  conclusion  was
    irrational or not reasonably open to her on the evidence.

76. In any event, I am unpersuaded that the judge's characterisation of the
    relationship had any material impact upon her  application  of  Art  8.
    Providing she took into account the nature of the relationship, and the
    impact upon it if the appellant was removal, in other words  considered
    the substance of the relationship and claimed impact, then  there  will
    be no material error in the application of Art 8 (see Singh and Singh v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at [25] per Sir Stanley Burnton).

77. The judge found the evidence of Mr T on the whole not  to  be  reliable
    (see para 35).  She did not accept that the  impact  of  the  appellant
    moving to Sri Lanka would be that Mr T would not  continue  to  provide
    any further financial support and that Mr T could, as he  had  done  in
    the past, visit Sri Lanka this time to visit the  appellant  (see  para
    37).  The judge also took into account,  and  these  findings  are  not
    challenged, that the appellant would have  support  in  Sri  Lanka  not
    least from his mother and accommodation and resources  to  live  there.
    She found that, having lived there until 2008, the appellant  would  be
    able to reintegrate back in Sri Lanka.  She also,  had  well  in  mind,
    that the appellant's claim had as a central feature the risk to him  of
    committing suicide.   She  found  that  that  risk  was  not  real  and
    established if he returned to Sri Lanka (see para 37).

78. I do not accept Ms Jegarajah's  submission  that  by  categorising  the
    relationship between the appellant and Mr T  as  amounting  to  private
    life, but not family life, the judge failed fully to have regard to the
    implications to the appellant if he were returned to Sri Lanka.

79. Having, brought forward her earlier  findings,  the  judge,  albeit  it
    briefly,  carried  out  the  balancing  exercise  at  para  44  of  her
    determination taking into account the public interest and  reached  the
    conclusion that the public interest outweighed the positive factors  in
    the appellant's favour.  The grounds do  not  suggest,  and  I  see  no
    possible basis upon which they could do so, that the judge's assessment
    was irrational and, therefore, unlawful.  The judge took  into  account
    the  factors  weighing  in  the  appellant's  favour  and  against  the
    appellant on the public interest side.  The  appellant  may  not  agree
    with some of the judge's findings but  they  are  legally  unchallenged
    and, in my judgment, unchallengeable.  In carrying  out  the  balancing
    exercise,  the  judge  undoubtedly  reached  a  rational  and   legally
    sustainable conclusion that the appellant had not established a  breach
    of Art 8.

80. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge did not  materially  err  in
    law in dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

81. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of a material
    error of law.  That decision stands.

82. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                15 June 2020



        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

