
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08518/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 February 2020                  |On 4 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                   GUL [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain,
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on to December 2019, I set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and directed a resumed hearing in the  Upper
    Tribunal. My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant was born on 1 January 1995 and is a male citizen
         of Afghanistan. He arrived in the United Kingdom in  October  2015.
         His application for international protection  was  refused  by  the
         Secretary of State on 18 August 2017. The appellant appealed to the
         First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on 1 May 2019,
         dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,
         to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   At  the  outset  of  the  initial  hearing  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal, Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the Secretary of State, told
         me that the appeal was not opposed.  I  shall  therefore  be  brief
         giving my reasons.

         3.    The  appellant  complains  that  the  expert   evidence,   in
         particular the report of Dr Giutozzi, was not properly addressed by
         the judge. Parts of the report of Dr  Giutozzi  (e.g.  [30])  which
         were supportive of the appellant's appeal were not referred  to  by
         the judge. Rather, the judge refers to the report of Dr Giutozzi at
         [18] and [20] only in support  of  the  respondent's  arguments.  I
         agree that the discussion of the expert evidence  is  not  entirely
         even-handed.  Those  parts  of  the  report  which  supported   the
         appellant's case (in particular, which considered  the  appellant's
         account of past events  to  be  plausible)  should,  if  the  judge
         rejected them, have been properly addressed.

         4.   Secondly, the judge made an error in law by recording [9] that
         the appellant did not wish to argue that he could not return to his
         home area of Afghanistan on account of an Article 15 (c) risk. Both
         parties accept that that was not the case and that he  did  advance
         an appeal on Article 15 (c) grounds. The judge  omitted  discussion
         of one of the grounds of the appellant's appeal. He  thereby  erred
         in law.

         5.   Thirdly, the judge found at [25] that the appellant's  account
         lacked credibility because he claimed that the Taliban were 'likely
         the ones who had taken him to hospital'. The judge considered  that
         this claim 'bestows a degree of benevolence on the Taliban that  is
         inconsistent with what is known of the way they  work...'  However,
         the parties agree that the appellant did not say that  the  Taliban
         had taken him to hospital; indeed, he did not know  who  had  taken
         him because he had throughout the time concerned been unconscious.

         6.   Further  submissions  are  made  in  respect  of  the  judge's
         handling of  the  internal  flight.  The  judge  made  findings  on
         internal flight in the alternative; his primary  finding  was  that
         the appellant was not at risk in his home area. There is some force
         in those submissions but, in the light of what I have said above, I
         do not propose to address them. I set aside  the  entirety  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal decision preserving none  of  the  findings  of
         fact.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None  of  the
         findings of fact shall stand. The decision will be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal following a hearing in Bradford  on  a  date  to  be
         fixed (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane)"

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 13 February 2020, I notified  the
    representatives that I intended  to  allow  the  appeal.  I  shall  now
    briefly give my reasons.

 3. Both parties accept that the appellant is at risk in his home  area  of
    Afghanistan. The only question for the  determination  remains  whether
    the appellant would face circumstances which are  unduly  harsh  if  he
    were to exercise internal flight  within  Afghanistan  to  the  capital
    city, Kabul. Following the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 873, previous  guidance  from  the
    Upper Tribunal to the effect  that  Kabul  is  safe  for  single  males
    returning to  Afghanistan  and  exercising  internal  flight  has  been
    removed. The remitted appeal in AS has not  yet  resulted  in  any  new
    guidance. I have, therefore, had regard to the UNHCR Guidelines  issued
    in August 2018. I note also that the Court of Appeal in AS declined the
    Secretary of State's invitation to subordinate  the  overall  test  for
    internal  flight  to  a  relative  approach  focusing  on   whether   a
    'significant minority' of a country's population live in similarly poor
    conditions to those in the proposed place of relocation,  and  accepted
    the appellant's and UNHCR's  submission  that  there  is  ultimately  a
    threshold below which such conditions would be unreasonable. I am aware
    also that I have to have regard to the  particular  characteristics  of
    this appellant when determining whether relocation to  Kabul  would  be
    unduly harsh.

 4. Whilst the appellant has a shrapnel injury to his chest  which  medical
    evidence indicates is not life-threatening, he is nonetheless  severely
    disabled by reason of an injury to his right  arm  which  renders  that
    limb without use. I find that the appellant would  be  at  very  severe
    disadvantage in seeking work in the Afghan capital. As Mr  Hussain  put
    it, why  would  an  employer  take  on  the  appellant  with  only  one
    functioning arm when he or she might employ a  fully-abled  individual.
    Problems within the labour market would lead, in turn, to the appellant
    encountering   considerable   difficulties   in   obtaining    suitable
    accommodation. Indeed, in my view, it  is  not  possible  to  see  how,
    without income, the appellant would be able to secure accommodation  at
    all; such accommodation as is available is rented  out  at  an  average
    cost of about $15 per day, which the appellant without income would  be
    unable to pay. In  the  light  of  these  observations  and  the  UNHCR
    Guidelines which both parties accept indicate a  considerable  risk  to
    those relocating to Kabul who are not familiar with the city and who do
    not have family members or friends living there, I find that  it  would
    not be reasonable but would be unduly harsh to expect  this  appellant,
    having regard to his particular characteristics, to relocate to  Kabul.
    His appeal is therefore allowed.




    Notice of Decision

    The Upper Tribunal has remade  the  decision.  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 18 August 2017  is
    allowed on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.




    Signed   Date 15 February 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


