
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08152/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st March 2019                   |On 25th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in  this  determination  identified  as  SM.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. In a decision promulgated on 2nd November  2017,  Dr  Storey  found
         errors of law in the decision by the First-tier Tribunal such  that
         the decision to dismiss SM's appeal was set aside to be re-made. He
         noted there had  been  no  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge's adverse credibility finding and the cases was adjourned  to
         be concluded in the Upper Tribunal after  the  anticipated  Country
         Guidance case.

      2. The CG case (HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430  (IAC))  on  12th
         December 2018, directions made and hence the case came before me.

      3. Unfortunately Mr Jarvis was not aware that the  hearing  before  me
         was a resumed hearing. He was  not  provided  with  the  bundle  of
         documents the appellant sought to rely upon until  the  morning  of
         the hearing, which was received by  the  Tribunal  on  18th  March,
         along with a skeleton argument.

      4. This appeal has now "blossomed" into a sur  place  claim  with  the
         appellant relying on  a  number  of  documents  including  FaceBook
         activity; it is not an historical asylum claim of activity in  Iran
         prior to coming to the UK.

      5. Mr Jarvis confirmed that in the light of the evidence that had been
         provided it is likely that the respondent would  need  to  consider
         the FaceBook activity, including issues such as security  settings,
         deletion and so on as well as  considering  these  matters  in  the
         context of HJ(Iran). These may  well  be  matters  upon  which  the
         appellant will want to adduce evidence.

      6. In these circumstances and given the  extent  of  the  fact-finding
         that  has  now  become  necessary  I  have  concluded  that  it  is
         appropriate and in accordance with the Practice Direction, and with
         the agreement of the parties, that this appeal is remitted  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.

      7. No doubt the First-tier Tribunal will make any necessary directions
         and the parties will themselves consider  the  extent  of  evidence
         they seek to adduce  in  connection  with  the  claimed  sur  place
         activity.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

     Date 21sr March 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
