

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08593/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 September 2017                  |On 19 September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                    KMJB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify KMJB. This direction applies to, amongst others,
       all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
       rise to Contempt of Court proceedings. I do so in order to  preserve
       the anonymity of KMJB whose protection claim remains outstanding.

    2. The Respondent refused  the  application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
       protection on 31 July 2016. His appeal against this was dismissed by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Robson ("the Judge") following  a  hearing
       on 27 January 2017.

The grant of permission


   3. Tribunal Judge Pedro granted permission to appeal (20 June 2017) as it
      is arguable that the Judge materially erred in failing to consider the
      documentary evidence properly, speculating, and  failing  to  consider
      and understand material evidence.


Respondent's position

    4. No rule 24 notice was filed. Mrs Pettersen  properly  conceded  that
       there were material errors of law in that the  Judge  wrongly  found
       [59] that articles made  no  specific  reference  to  the  Appellant
       whereas 7 separate articles did, the Judge  had  plainly  speculated
       [53] as to whether the Bangladeshi authorities would monitor  access
       to the British Embassy despite there being no evidence of that,  and
       the Judge at [53]  went  behind  a  concession  [19]  regarding  the
       authenticity of an FIR.


Discussion

    5. Given the concession made by the Respondent, which I will not simply
       repeat, I am satisfied that material errors of law  occurred.  I  am
       also satisfied having heard from  the  representatives  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit the matter de novo  as  the  errors  go  beyond
       those contained within the Presidential Guidance  for  retention  in
       the Upper Tribunal.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing,
    not before Judge Robson.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
18 September 2017
