
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal Number: PA/08004/2019 (P)     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 May 2020                       |On 22 May 2020                       |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                 HOK (IRAQ)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation (by written submissions only):
For the Appellant:     Ms C Soltani, solicitor, of Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Procedure

 1. This appeal was due to be heard on 23 April 2020,  at  Kings  Court  in
    North Shields.  The parties had been notified of the hearing on 6 March
    2020.  On 20 March 2020, however, as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic,
    all hearings in the Upper Tribunal (IAC) were adjourned  until  further
    notice.  On 20 March 2020, directions were sent to the parties  by  the
    Vice President.  Those directions indicated his provisional  view  that
    the matters which would have been determined at the hearing on 23 April
    2020 might properly be determined on the basis of written  submissions.
    In reaching that view, the Vice President indicated  that  he  had  had
    regard to the over-riding objective and to  the  need  to  prevent  the
    spread  of  Covid-19.   Both  parties  were  invited  to  make  written
    submissions on that proposal, and on the merits of the appeal itself.

 2. Detailed written submissions were made by the appellant's solicitors on
    30 March 2020 and by Mr Whitwell, on behalf of  the  respondent,  on  9
    April 2020.  Further brief submissions were made (following a  query  I
    had  raised  about  service  of  the  first  submissions  made  by  the
    appellant) on 12 May  2020.   Neither  party  objected  to  the  course
    proposed by the Vice President.

 3. By rule 34(1) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules,  the
    Upper Tribunal is permitted to make any decision without a hearing.  In
    deciding whether to proceed in that way, the Upper Tribunal is required
    by rule 34(2) to have regard to any view  expressed  by  a  party  when
    deciding whether to hold a hearing and the form of any such hearing.

 4. The provisional view expressed by the Vice President was just  that:  a
    provisional view.  The decision whether to proceed without a hearing is
    my own, and I have considered whether it is fair and appropriate to  do
    so.  In considering that question, I have considered what was  said  by
    Lord Reed in Osborn v The Parole Board [2013]  UKSC  61;  [2014]  1  AC
    1115, at [80]-[96] in particular.

 5. The dispute between the parties concerns, at this stage, whether or not
    the decision reached by the First-tier Tribunal is  vitiated  by  legal
    error.  I am obviously not invited to resolve any disputes of fact,  or
    to consider oral evidence, whether from  the  appellant  or  any  other
    witness.  There can be no suggestion, to my mind, that either party  is
    prejudiced if no oral hearing takes place.  No such submission has been
    made by either party.  The appellant is legally  represented  and  both
    parties have made full written submissions.  I am satisfied, in all the
    circumstances, that it is fair and appropriate to determine whether  or
    not the First-tier Tribunal erred in law without a hearing.

Background

 6. The appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity.  He comes from
    Jalawla in Diyala Governorate, within Iraq's Disputed  Territories  and
    close to the Green Line dividing Iraq  and  the  IKR.   His  claim  for
    international protection was based, in brief outline, on  events  which
    were said to have occurred in  late  April  2016,  when  the  appellant
    attended a conference about religious extremism. The conference was  at
    the Garmian University, at which  the  appellant  was  studying  for  a
    degree.  The appellant  claimed  that  he  had  made  remarks  at  that
    conference  which  had  attracted  the  opprobrium  of  some  of  those
    attending.  He stated that he had been attacked and  that  threats  had
    subsequently been made against him.   The  appellant  sought  temporary
    refuge in a nearby village whilst arrangements were  made  for  him  to
    flee from Iraq.  He travelled into Iran using his own passport  but  he
    continued his journey to the UK clandestinely, arriving here  in  2016.
    He was returned to France, through  which  he  had  travelled,  but  he
    returned to this country again in January 2017.

 7. The respondent considered the appellant's account to  be  untrue.   She
    considered that he could be returned safely  to  Iraq  without  the  UK
    being in breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention or  the
    ECHR.  The appellant appealed.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant's appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cope,
    sitting at North Shields, on 24  September  2019.   The  appellant  was
    represented by a solicitor  (not  Ms  Soltani),  the  respondent  by  a
    Presenting Officer.  The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant
    and  submissions  from  both  representatives  before   reserving   his
    decision.

 9. The judge's reserved decision was issued on 22 November 2019.   He  did
    not accept the appellant's account of events: [61].  He concluded  that
    the appellant's home area was no longer under control of ISIL  and  did
    not accept, in any event, that the appellant would be of  any  interest
    to that group: [71].  The appellant had  access  to  his  Civil  Status
    Identity Document  ("CSID")  because  it,  and  his  Iraqi  Nationality
    Certificate, had been left with his  parents  in  Jalawla:  [85].   The
    appellant remained in contact with them  and  they  would  be  able  to
    provide the document for him: [ibid]. There was no reason to think,  in
    the circumstances, that  the  appellant  would  be  in  danger  between
    Baghdad (to which he would be returned) and his home area:  [90].   The
    judge did not accept that the appellant was  entitled  to  Humanitarian
    Protection on account of the situation in his home  area:  [110].   Nor
    did he consider the appellant's return would be in breach of the  ECHR:
    [114].

10. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant,
    who considered that the judge's credibility and other findings had been
    open to him as a matter of law.  The appellant renewed his  application
    to the Upper Tribunal.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The grounds of  appeal  are  not  properly  delineated  into  separate,
    particularised complaints of legal error, as required by  Nixon  [2014]
    UKUT 368 (IAC) and Harverye [2018] EWCA  Civ  2848.   There  are  seven
    paragraphs.  The first six  make  various  criticisms  of  the  judge's
    assessment of the appellant's credibility.  The final paragraph  is  in
    the following terms:

         "The FTJ has also erred in his assessment of AAH (Iraq) [2018] UKUT
         212 CG (IAC) by departing from  country  guidance  and  failing  to
         properly assess whether the appellant can safely return to his home
         area or relocate to IKR in light of the facts of his case.  Even if
         considering the most up to date  information,  this  would  suggest
         that the current situation in Diyala is such that it cannot be said
         that the appellant could not return to this area safely."

12. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup, only in relation
    to the safety of the appellant  returning  to  his  home  area.   Judge
    Pickup engaged at some length with the grounds  which  related  to  the
    judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility.  He cited  what  was
    said by McCombe LJ at [12] of VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA  Civ  522  and
    concluded that the judge had been entitled to reach the conclusions  he
    had, having noted various respects in which the appellant's account was
    legitimately thought to be inconsistent and implausible.  In respect of
    the final point in the grounds, Judge Pickup said this:

         "The judge gave cogent reasoning for  finding  that  the  appellant
         will have access to his CSID.   It  was  also  concluded  that  the
         situation in Diyala Province had changed so that it was no longer a
         contested area and  the  appellant  would  be  able  to  return  to
         Jalawla.  However, given the remaining uncertainty of the  security
         situation, and in the light of more recent  case  authority  it  is
         arguable that the findings on return to the home  area  are  flawed
         and in addition the decision failed to address the  alternative  of
         relocation as a Kurd to the IKR.  On this ground  alone  permission
         is granted."

13. As I have already noted, detailed written submissions were made by both
    parties in response to the directions issued by the Vice  President  at
    the end of March.

Submissions

14. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Soltani submits that the Upper  Tribunal
    should permit argument in relation to the judge's credibility findings.
     At [8], she notes that the judge had accepted that the  appellant  had
    been  consistent  in  his  claims  regarding  the  events  at   Garmian
    University but had founded his  adverse  finding  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's account on what he perceived to be  the  implausibility  of
    that account.  Ms Soltani submitted that the  judge  had  erred  in  so
    concluding, for three reasons.  Firstly, she submitted that the judge's
    conclusions had been inconsistent.  At [36],  he  had  stated  that  it
    would be 'quite wrong to draw any determinative conclusion' purely from
    his concern  that  the  reaction  to  the  appellant's  statements  was
    implausible.  Subsequently, however, that was precisely what the  judge
    had done, she submitted.  Secondly, the judge had failed to identify in
    his decision  what  evidence  he  relied  upon  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's account was implausible in this  regard.   Thirdly,  in  so
    concluding, the judge had lost sight of what was said by  Neuberger  LJ
    at [28]-[29] of HK [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.

15. At [11], Ms Soltani submitted that the remaining  findings  reached  by
    the judge had flowed from his concern that the appellant's account  was
    implausible.  As such, she submitted, the remaining findings could  not
    stand and the assessment fell to be set aside as a whole.

16. In relation to the matters upon which permission  to  appeal  had  been
    granted, Ms Soltani submitted that the safety of the appellant's return
    to Iraq was now to be considered in light of the decision in SMO (Iraq)
    CG  [2019]  UKUT  400  (IAC).   The  particular  circumstances  in  the
    appellant's home area had been considered in that  decision  and  there
    were  several  factors  which  were  relevant,  including  the  ongoing
    circumstances there  and  the  specific  features  of  the  appellant's
    individual case: [12]-[16].

17. At [17]-[18], Ms Soltani sought to raise  further  matters  which  fell
    outside the scope  of  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.  It  was
    submitted  that  there  was  no  adequate  reason  for  the  Tribunal's
    conclusion that the appellant was not in contact with his parents,  and
    no properly reasoned assessment of their present location.  It was also
    submitted that the judge had erred in treating the appellant's  contact
    with the Red Cross as 'evidentially neutral' when it  clearly  favoured
    the appellant's account.  The appellant sought a decision in which  the
    judge's assessment was set aside as a whole and the appeal remitted  to
    the FtT de novo.

18. In his initial submissions for the respondent,  Mr  Whitwell  responded
    only to the  submissions  for  which  permission  to  appeal  had  been
    granted.  At [10], he accepted that Judge Cope's decision had 'not aged
    well' as a result of the issuance of SMO (Iraq) at the end of 2019.  He
    nevertheless submitted that SMO had concluded that the appellant's home
    area was no longer contested and that the findings made by  the  judge,
    set against the backdrop of the  new  country  guidance,  were  largely
    dispositive of the appeal.  He noted that  Judge  Cope  had  found,  in
    particular, that the appellant is a  Kurdish  Sorani  speaker  who  had
    lived with his family and managed to supplement his income  by  working
    whilst he was a student.  The judge had not accepted that the appellant
    had fallen out of touch with his family and had concluded that he would
    be in a position to obtain his CSID.

19. Mr Whitwell submitted that  the  challenge  presented  to  the  judge's
    assessment of the safety of return was largely unarticulated.   It  was
    not explained, he submitted, why the judge had  failed  to  assess  the
    appellant's return to his home area adequately.  In any event, in light
    of the judge's primary findings of fact,  the  judge's  assessment  was
    adequate.  There had been a proper basis for the judge to conclude that
    the appellant  could  return  to  Diyala.   It  was  submitted  by  the
    appellant that the judge had erred in departing  from  AAH  (Iraq)  but
    there was no error in that respect, since SMO had replaced all previous
    country guidance.  Setting the judge's findings  against  the  relevant
    parts of SMO, there was no legal error on the part of the judge, and no
    need for any further findings of fact.

20. When I first came to the papers in this appeal, I was concerned by  the
    fact that Mr Whitwell had not seen the submissions which were filed  by
    Ms Soltani in response to the Vice President's  directions.   I  issued
    further directions to ensure that  any  decision  I  reached  would  be
    procedurally fair.  It transpired that there had been  a  communication
    error, with Ms Soltani sending her written submissions to a Home Office
    email address for FtT  correspondence.   That  difficulty  having  been
    resolved, Mr Whitwell made further submissions in writing.  He  opposed
    the appellant's attempt to raise the grounds of appeal upon which Judge
    Pickup had  refused  permission  to  appeal.   The  correct  course  in
    relation to those points was for the appellant to pursue  a  'Cart'  JR
    under CPR 54.7A.  In the event that  permission  was  granted  for  the
    appellant to raise these new points, he sought an opportunity  to  file
    and serve additional submissions.



Analysis

21. Permission to appeal was refused by Judge Pickup on  those  grounds  of
    appeal which sought to challenge the judge's adverse findings as to the
    appellant's credibility.  Ms Soltani nevertheless  submits  that  those
    challenges were arguable  and  that  I  should  grant  permission.   Mr
    Whitwell opposes that course, submitting that the appellant should have
    made an application to the Administrative Court under CPR 54.7A.

22. I do not accept Mr Whitwell's submission that the appellant should have
    pursued relief in the Administrative Court.   CPR  54.7A  is  concerned
    with applications for judicial review of decisions made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal refusing permission to appeal.  CPR 54.7A(1) states  expressly
    that it applies 'following refusal by the Upper Tribunal of  permission
    to appeal against a decision of the First Tier Tribunal'.  There is  no
    reference in the rule to the possibility of an application  being  made
    where permission has been granted on limited  grounds  only.   This  is
    plainly an intentional omission, since the CPR makes express  provision
    for  such  applications  in  other  contexts.   Where,   for   example,
    permission to proceed with an application for judicial review has  been
    granted 'on certain grounds only', CPR 54.12 makes  provision  for  the
    partly successful applicant to request that decision to be reconsidered
    at a hearing.

23. If it had been intended that an appellant who had been granted  limited
    permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal should have to seek recourse
    in the Administrative Court, that would have been  made  clear  in  CPR
    54.7A.  I note that rule 21(2)(b) of the  Upper  Tribunal's  own  rules
    makes express provision for a person who has been granted permission by
    the FtT on limited grounds only to apply to the Upper Tribunal.  Had it
    been intended  that  a  'Cart'  JR  was  the  appropriate  course  when
    permission was granted in the Upper Tribunal on limited  grounds  only,
    the CPR would have made that clear.

24. That is not to suggest that an  appellant  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    unable to seek to persuade a judge considering an appeal  to  entertain
    argument on grounds upon which permission  was  refused  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal permission judge.  The  position  in  that  regard  is  to  be
    contrasted with that which applies in an appeal to the Court of  Appeal
    as a consequence of the s54(4) of the Access to Justice Act 1999: James
    v Baily Gibson & Co [2002] EWCA Civ 1690; [2003] CP Rep 24  refers.  In
    the absence of any such statutory  regime,  the  wide  case  management
    powers conferred upon the Upper Tribunal by rule 5 do, in my  judgment,
    enable a judge to entertain argument upon grounds in respect  of  which
    permission was originally refused by the Upper  Tribunal.   That  power
    will  obviously  not  be  exercised  lightly,  since  to  do  so  would
    potentially prejudice the opposing party and run counter to  principles
    of judicial comity, but I do consider there to be such a power.

25. I am wholly unpersuaded that this is a proper case for the use of  that
    power, however.  I agree with the reasons given  by  Judge  Pickup  for
    refusing permission to appeal against the judge's credibility findings.
     Judge Pickup cited what had been said by McCombe LJ in VW (Sri  Lanka)
    about impermissible attempts  to  reclothe  disagreement  with  factual
    findings as assertions of legal error.   Those  remarks  are  certainly
    apposite in respect of these grounds of appeal.  Also relevant is  what
    said Lewison LJ at [114] of Fage v Chobani [2014] EWCA Civ 5, regarding
    the danger of an appellate body merely 'island  hopping',  whereas  the
    trial judge  will  have  regard  to  the  whole  sea  of  the  evidence
    presented.

26. Presumably in recognition of the logic of much  of  what  was  said  by
    Judge Pickup in refusing permission, Ms Soltani sought in  her  written
    submissions to focus her fire on one particular aspect of  the  judge's
    credibility assessment.  She concentrated upon the judge's  observation
    that it was implausible that other attendees at  the  conference  would
    have reacted in the manner claimed  by  the  appellant.   The  relevant
    section of the judge's decision is at [35]-[38]:

         "[35]    I find it difficult to  understand  quite  how  his  words
         could have been misconstrued as an attack on Islam as a whole.

         [36] I readily acknowledge that there may be different cultural and
         religious sensibilities in a society such as Iraq which could  lead
         to difficulties of interpretation with a  liberal  western  society
         such as the United Kingdom.  It would thus be quite wrong  to  draw
         and determinative conclusions on the basis of  this  factor  alone,
         and I do not do so.

         [37] Nonetheless it does seem to me implausible  that  there  would
         have been  that  type  of  reaction  described  by  the  appellant,
         especially  in  the  context  of  a  conference   about   religious
         extremism.

         [38] So far as the physical attack on the appellant is concerned  I
         again bear in mind the cultural differences that there might be  in
         Iraq compared to the United Kingdom.  However, I once more find  it
         somewhat implausible in the context of an academic conference."

27. Insofar as it is suggested by Ms Soltani that the judge's approach  was
    contrary to that required by Neuberger LJ in HK v SSHD,  the  point  is
    unarguable.  As Keene LJ subsequently explained in Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA
    Civ 1223, a judge in this field is not required to accept at face value
    an account of the facts  proffered  by  an  appellant,  no  matter  how
    contrary to common sense and experience of human behaviour the  account
    may be.  What the judge is required  to  do  is  to  look  through  the
    spectacles provided by the country information before him  in  deciding
    whether an account is plausible or not.  That is evidently  what  Judge
    Cope did in the present case.  The section  above  shows  that  he  was
    cognisant of the particular situation in Iraq, characterised as  it  is
    by heightened sensitivities of political, religious and  ethnic  types.
    That awareness is also  apparent  from  an  earlier  paragraph  of  the
    decision, in which the judge said this:

         "[20]    As is well known in this jurisdiction and generally,  Iraq
         in recent years since the  American-led  western  invasion  of  the
         country in 2003 has been blighted by sectarian, ethnic  and  tribal
         violence.  More recently this has particularly taken  the  form  of
         attacks by Islamist fundamentalist groups called variously  Islamic
         State, ISIS, ISIL or Daesh, against the governments in Baghdad  and
         in the KRI.  In this  decision  I  refer  to  these  fundamentalist
         groups as ISIS."

28. It is abundantly clear, to my mind, that the judge  was  aware  of  the
    approach he was required by the  authorities  to  adopt,  and  that  he
    adopted that approach by taking careful account  of  the  situation  in
    Iraq before observing as he did at [37]-[38].

29. Ms Soltani submits that the judge's conclusions were  inconsistent,  in
    that he said at  [36]  that  it  would  be  quite  wrong  to  draw  any
    'determinative conclusions' from his concerns as to the plausibility of
    the account but he went on to do just that.  This submission  is  based
    on a misreading of the decision and a misunderstanding of the  approach
    required by the authorities.  The judge did not attach  'determinative'
    weight to his concern regarding the  plausibility  of  the  appellant's
    account.  It was one of a package  of  points  which  led  him  to  the
    conclusion that the appellant's account was not reasonably likely to be
    true.  Other points concerned the judge's concern about two aspects  of
    the appellant's account which he felt unable to reconcile.  On the  one
    hand, at [39], he noted that the appellant had stated that he  did  not
    know who had attacked and threatened him and which group they  belonged
    to.  At [40], however, the judge noted that the  appellant  had  stated
    that the group would be able to find him wherever he went in Iraq.   At
    [41], the judge also observed that  the  appellant  had  developed  his
    account: in his SEF he had known nothing about the  group,  whereas  he
    had said that it was a Shia militia group  in  his  witness  statement.
    Yet further problems were considered by the judge at [43]-[47].   There
    was a contradiction in the appellant's evidence  as  to  whether  there
    were security guards present during  the  conference  and  it  was  not
    plausible that his brother had been able to remain at the  family  home
    for several months after being threatened there by the group.

30. At [57]-[61], the judge  drew  together  the  various  strands  of  his
    analysis.  He noted that there was  a  degree  of  consistency  in  the
    appellant's  account  but,  weighing  that  against  concerns  he   had
    expressed in the preceding paragraphs, he concluded  that  the  central
    account presented by the appellant was  not  reasonably  likely  to  be
    true.  It is quite clear, with respect to Ms Soltani, that the  judge's
    analysis  did  not  begin  and  end  with  his  observation  that   the
    appellant's account  was  implausible.   On  the  contrary,  the  judge
    adopted precisely the approach required by  Karanakaran  [2000]  3  All
    449.  He did not treat his  concerns  about  the  plausibility  of  the
    appellant's account as determinative.  Instead,  his  concern  in  that
    regard was woven into his analysis of the account as a whole before  he
    reached an overall conclusion  that  the  account  was  not  reasonably
    likely to be true.  It is not arguable that the judge's assessment  was
    inconsistent in the manner suggested by Ms Soltani.

31. It is then said by Ms Soltani that the judge failed to  identify  which
    specific parts  of  the  background  evidence  led  him  to  doubt  the
    appellant's account.  But it was not for the judge  to  pinpoint  which
    parts of the background evidence caused him to  doubt  the  appellant's
    account.  Nor was the judge  required  to  rehearse  exactly  what  the
    appellant had said, to whom he  had  said  it  and  what  was  said  in
    response.  This is the 'sea of evidence' of which Lewison LJ  spoke  in
    Fage v Chobani.  In this case, the judge heard contested evidence  from
    the appellant, who was cross examined about the events which he claimed
    to have taken place in Iraq.  The judge considered  that  evidence  and
    took account of the background circumstances in Iraq.  Having done  so,
    he did not consider the appellant's account of events at the university
    to be plausible. It is not  arguable,  in  my  judgment,  that  he  was
    required to particularise his  process  of  reasoning  in  any  greater
    detail.  To require judges of the FtT to do  so  would  be  to  require
    elaborate decisions, bringing about unnecessary delay to litigants  and
    the state alike. The appellant can be under no illusion about the basis
    upon which he has lost and it is unarguable that  the  judge's  reasons
    were inadequate to explain the basis of his concerns.

32. In the circumstances, I agree with Judge Pickup that the  challenge  to
    the judge's credibility findings is unarguable.  Proper and sustainable
    reasons were given for the judge's conclusion that  the  appellant  had
    fabricated his account of events at the university.

33. I therefore turn to the basis upon which permission was actually given.
     Ms Soltani contends that the judge reached an unsustainable conclusion
    when he decided that the  appellant  could  return  to  his  home  area
    (Diyala) in safety.  The judge decided this appeal  in  November  2019.
    Shortly before Christmas 2019, the  Upper  Tribunal  gave  new  country
    guidance in the  form  of  SMO  (Iraq).   That  new  guidance  was  not
    mentioned in the appellant's  renewed  grounds  of  appeal  which  were
    settled on or about 20 January 2020, but  it  was  clearly  this  'more
    recent case authority' which prompted Judge Pickup to grant  permission
    to appeal.

34. Both advocates have based their submissions on the  guidance  given  in
    SMO (Iraq).  I consider there to be a  fundamental  problem  with  that
    approach.  A country guidance decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  is  one
    which considers the factual situation in a given  country  at  a  given
    time.  It is not a decision to which  the  declaratory  theory  of  the
    common  law  applies.   It  does  not  have  the  retrospective  effect
    considered by the Appellate Committee in Kleinwort Benson Ltd v Lincoln
    City Council & Ors [1998] UKHL 38;  [1999]  2  AC  349.   As  the  Vice
    President put it in Adam [2017] UKUT 370 (IAC); [2018] Imm  AR  183,  a
    failure to take  into  account  a  Country  Guidance  decision  not  in
    existence at the time of the judge's decision could not be an error  of
    law.  The up-to-date  situation,  including  any  more  recent  country
    guidance, is only relevant at the point that an  appellant  has  passed
    through the gateway presented by s12(1) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (by securing a finding that the FtT erred in  law)
    and the Upper Tribunal is considering which of the actions specified in
    s12(2) should follow from that conclusion.

35. In CA (Ghana) v SSHD [2004] EWCA  Civ  1165;  [2004]  Imm  AR  640,  in
    relation to the previous  statutory  scheme,  Laws  LJ  summarised  the
    position in this way, at [15]:

         "... once a material error of law is shown, I  for  my  part  would
         accept that the IAT must then decide what if any relief to grant in
         the light of the facts arising at the time it  is  considering  the
         case. The appellant's skeleton argument prepared for the permission
         application accepts as much. The judicial review  court,  and  this
         court on appeal in cases where our jurisdiction goes to legal error
         only, proceeds in precisely the same manner."

36. Sir Martin Nourse agreed.  Mummery LJ gave a short judgment of his own,
    underlining Laws LJ's rejection of the submission made by the Secretary
    of State, which was that up-to-date evidence  could  be  considered  as
    soon as permission to appeal had been granted.  These dicta continue to
    apply, in my judgment, to appeals governed by the TCEA 2007.

37. As Mr Whitwell submitted in writing, it is not altogether clear what is
    said by the appellant to be wrong with the risk  assessment  undertaken
    by the judge on the basis of the country guidance which was in force at
    the time of his decision.  He was very much aware of the development of
    the country guidance on Iraq, as he demonstrated by the  full  list  of
    such cases at [19] and the application of those cases at [63]  et  seq.
    The judge was aware that the Upper  Tribunal  had  held  in  AA  (Iraq)
    [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) that the situation in the appellant's  home  area
    was contrary to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  Over the
    course of two pages of his decision (pp13-14), he analysed the evidence
    that ISIL had been removed from the formerly  contested  areas  and  he
    considered what had been said about Diyala in AAH (Iraq) CG [2018] UKUT
    212 (IAC).  He concluded that it had not been shown that the  appellant
    would be at risk from indiscriminate  violence  arising  from  internal
    armed conflict in his home area: [110].

38. In an earlier section of the decision, at [86]-[91] in particular,  the
    judge also considered whether the appellant would be  at  risk  on  the
    journey from Baghdad (to which the  appellant  would  be  returned)  to
    Jalawla.  He gave detailed and cogent reasons for concluding  that  the
    appellant, who would be in possession of his CSID,  would  be  able  to
    make that journey without encountering  treatment  contrary  to  either
    Convention.

39. There is no reasoned challenge to these conclusions in the  grounds  of
    appeal.  It is said that the judge erred in departing from the  country
    guidance but there is no reason given for why his detailed analysis  is
    said to be legally  deficient.   The  approach  adopted  by  the  judge
    essentially mirrored that required by MST (Eritrea) CG [2016] UKUT  443
    (IAC) and the evidential basis upon which he decided not to  follow  AA
    (Iraq) cannot be  faulted.   It  is  said  that  the  judge  failed  to
    'properly assess' whether the appellant could safely return to his home
    area but there is nothing in that criticism; the judge undertook a full
    and reasoned analysis and came to a proper conclusion on the  basis  of
    the evidence before him.

40. It is then suggested in the grounds, as I understand it, that the judge
    overlooked evidence which suggested  that  'the  current  situation  in
    Diyala is such that it cannot be said that the appellant  could  return
    to his area safely'.  As Mr Whitwell observes,  however,  there  is  no
    further particularity in this challenge.  The evidence which the  judge
    is said to have overlooked is not identified and it is far  from  clear
    to me, having considered the evidence  in  the  file,  that  there  was
    anything which militated specifically against the conclusion reached by
    the judge.

41. I do not consider there to be a legal error in the decision reached  by
    the judge on the basis of the evidence before him.  As I have explained
    above, that suffices to dispose of the appeal.  Since both parties have
    made submissions about the effect of SMO (Iraq), however, I will  state
    my conclusions on those submissions.

42. With respect to Mr Whitwell, I think he might have accepted too readily
    that the  judge's  decision  had  not  'aged  well'  in  light  of  the
    subsequent country guidance.  On the contrary, I consider  the  judge's
    decision to have aged really rather well in light of  SMO  (Iraq).   He
    reached the same conclusion that the Upper Tribunal reached in  respect
    of the general Article 15(c) situation in Diyala and the other parts of
    the formerly contested areas.  He noted the central importance attached
    to the CSID in Iraq and he concluded that the appellant would not be in
    difficulty because he would have access to his own  CSID,  rather  than
    having to navigate the task of replacing it from the  UK  or  in  Iraq.
    The judge even noted, at [82], the progressive replacement of the  CSID
    with a document which, in SMO, the Upper Tribunal decided to  call  the
    'INID', the Iraqi National Identity  Card.  That  was  a  matter  which
    particularly concerned the Upper Tribunal, as can be seen at  [383]  of
    our decision in that case.  In many respects,  therefore,  the  judge's
    decision enquired into many of the matters which were considered to  be
    particularly relevant in SMO.

43. With some encouragement from the basis upon which permission to  appeal
    was granted, what Ms Soltani submits, however, is that  the  there  are
    aspects of the judge's decision in which he has not conducted  as  full
    as an enquiry as would now be expected of a judge applying SMO  (Iraq).
    I accept that submission.  The judge reached the same conclusion as the
    Upper Tribunal in respect of the  first  stage  of  the  Article  15(c)
    enquiry in Diyala but he did not undertake a detailed  'sliding  scale'
    analysis thereafter, encompassing the matters set out  at  [5]  of  the
    headnote to that decision.  In  her  written  submissions,  Ms  Soltani
    helpfully set out [98] and [112]  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision,
    highlighting certain sections of  the  background  material  concerning
    Diyala in general and Jalawla in particular.

44. It is clear that Diyala  is  a  particularly  vulnerable  part  of  the
    formerly contested areas.  It is also clear that the  Kurds  have  been
    marginalised in Diyala, as set out at [112] of SMO.  This appellant  is
    a non-practising Muslim who has no association with ISIL  or  with  the
    security apparatus.  He is not - or has not been accepted  to  be  -  a
    known opponent of the GOI, the KRG or  local  security  actors  in  the
    region.  He is fit and well.  He has family members there and  will  be
    able to travel (on the judge's findings) on his own CSID card.  On  the
    basis of the findings reached by the judge,  therefore,  the  appellant
    will be returning to a volatile region as a member of a minority  group
    (being Kurdish) but with his own document and a support  base.   Had  I
    been required to apply the 'sliding scale' analysis for myself, on  the
    basis of those findings, I would  have  concluded  that  the  appellant
    would not be at enhanced  risk,  and  that  his  return  would  not  be
    contrary to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

45. As I have made  clear  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  I  reach  those
    conclusions on the basis of the findings made by the judge.   In  doing
    so, I have not lost sight of the final attempt made by Ms  Soltani,  at
    [17]-[18] of her written submissions, to attack the  findings  made  by
    the judge about the appellant's access to his CSID and the location  of
    his parents.  I consider that these findings were open  to  the  judge,
    however.  He concluded that the appellant had lied  to  him  about  the
    substance of his asylum claim and, as he  explained  at  [49]-[50],  he
    also concluded that the appellant had lied about the extent to which he
    had been in contact with his parents.  Against this  backdrop,  it  was
    open to the judge to conclude that the Red Cross letter (which recorded
    a 'tracing' approach by the appellant) was 'evidentially  neutral'  and
    to draw the inference that the appellant's parents remained in  Diyala,
    where they could provide support and a CSID.   These  were  permissible
    inferences for the Tribunal of fact to draw  and  not,  as  Ms  Soltani
    sought to submit, merely an impermissible 'leap' of the type  cautioned
    against by Lord Dyson JSC at [21]-[33] of MA (Somalia) UKSC 49;  [2011]
    2 All ER 65.

46. I do not accept, in the circumstances, that the decision of the FtT was
    vitiated by legal error.  Nor do I accept the submissions  made  by  Ms
    Soltani  about  the  subsequent  guidance  in  SMO  (Iraq).    In   the
    circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT did not contain a material error  of  law  and  will
stand.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                M.J.Blundell

                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                                 19 May 2020

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.
