
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08871/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th March 2019                             |On 2nd April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                    Mr N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer instructed by Courtney Smith & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan, appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 6th July  2018
    to refuse to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection.   First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  CAS  O'Garro  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 27th September 2018.  The Appellant now appeals to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  on  21st
    December 2018.

 2. At the hearing before me Mr Singer summarised grounds  contending  that
    there are two major errors of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.  In the first ground it is contended that the judge failed to
    properly apply the case law to the facts as found.  The  second  ground
    contends that the judge failed to have regard to the evidence.

 3. In my view the first ground has been made out.  As  Mr  Singer  pointed
    out the Secretary of State accepted most of the Appellant's case in the
    Reasons for Refusal letter.  At paragraphs 40 to 42 of the reasons  for
    refusal  letter  the  Secretary  of  State  set  out  the   Appellant's
    background.  The Secretary of State accepted that the Appellant is Shia
    and Tajik, that his brother was attacked and abducted  by  the  Taliban
    and that the Taliban had threatened his mother  to  hand  him  over  to
    them.

 4. Mr Singer pointed out that this conclusion was based on the Appellant's
    evidence as set out consistently in  his  screening  interview,  asylum
    interview and witness statement that he had been accused by the Taliban
    of being a government spy (at screening interview 4.1, asylum interview
    Q46).  The Appellant claimed that the Taliban considered that he was  a
    spy because he had studied in the UK.  At Q46 the  Appellant  described
    how his brother had been beaten up and accused of being a  collaborator
    and that he was abducted and that his mother was warned that she  would
    have to report the Appellant as well as he was  also  considered  as  a
    collaborator and a spy.  At paragraph 43 of  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    letter the Secretary of State stated that the Appellant claimed that on
    return he feared that he would be killed by the  Taliban  because  they
    accused him of being a government collaborator.  The Secretary of State
    accepted at paragraph 44 that the Appellant had demonstrated a  genuine
    subjective fear on return to Afghanistan.

 5. However the Secretary of State concluded that the Appellant's fear  was
    not objectively well-founded because he could  internally  relocate  to
    another part of the  country.   The  Secretary  of  State  went  on  to
    consider the country guidance case of AS (safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan
    CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) and concluded that, as the Appellant  was  a
    low profile person and was still in contact with his mother,  he  could
    relocate to Kabul.

 6. In my view there are some inconsistencies in the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    letter. At paragraph 44  it  is  concluded  that  the  Appellant  could
    internally relocate but at paragraph 49 it appears that  the  Secretary
    of State did not accept that the Appellant had a genuine fear on return
    to Afghanistan.  The Secretary of State went on  to  consider  internal
    relocation from paragraph 50 and at paragraph 55 again stated that  the
    Appellant was not at risk in Kabul  from  the  Taliban  because  he  is
    considered to be low profile and would be supported by  his  family  on
    return.

 7. The judge appears to have proceeded on the basis that  the  Appellant's
    claim was accepted for example at paragraph 25 the judge said

         "The Appellant's claim is that he  would  be  at  risk  if  he  was
         returned to Afghanistan because he is at  risk  of  harm  from  the
         Taliban.  He claims that the Taliban is looking for  him  and  will
         kill him because they perceive him to be a spy".

    This is restated at paragraph 29 where the  judge  says  the  Appellant
    will be returned to Kabul "the Appellant's case is that the Taliban  is
    everywhere including Kabul and as they are looking for him because they
    view him as a spy and they will find him in Kabul".

 8. The judge went on to consider the guidance in  AS  (safety  of  Kabul).
    The judge set out paragraph 174 of that  decision  where  the  Tribunal
    concluded:

         "The risk of a  specific  individual  being  successfully  targeted
         depends upon their identification as a target (for example, due  to
         past or present  actions/circumstances)  and  the  ability  of  the
         Taliban to locate and then carry out an attack on that  person,  as
         well as their will or priorities in doing  so.   The  evidence  was
         broadly in agreement as to the order of importance of  targets  for
         the Taliban in Afghanistan  being  (i)  senior  serving  government
         officials and the security services, (ii) spies, and at  the  lower
         level, (iii) other  collaborators  (including  the  wider  security
         forces, government authorities, foreign embassies, the UN, NGOs and
         anyone passing information to the government about the Taliban) and
         deserters.  Dr Giustozzi's evidence was that  the  Taliban  keep  a
         blacklist of all those who are wanted by the Taliban/identified  as
         legitimate targets, some of whom are included just because of their
         high-profile position and others at a  lower-level  are  identified
         because they have been through a system of sentencing and only then
         are they a legitimate target."

 9. It is clear from paragraph 174 above that those who are  considered  to
    be spies are targets  for  the  Taliban  in  Afghanistan.   However  at
    paragraph 33 of the decision the judge extrapolated from  the  decision
    in AS that the Taliban did not have the manpower or resources to search
    and find in Kabul individuals who are of interest to them in their home
    area and that, unless the individual is a high profile, the chances  of
    being identified by the Taliban as a person of  interest  in  Kabul  is
    small.  I accept Mr Singer's submission that it appears from  paragraph
    34 that the judge accepted that the Appellant is a target  in  his  own
    area because he is a spy.  I accept  Mr  Singer's  submission  that  in
    accepting that the Appellant was a spy or perceived to  be  a  spy  the
    Appellant comes within the identified targets identified in AS .

10. Ms Jones accepted that this submission was put forward  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as recorded at paragraph 31 of the judge's decision.  She
    accepted that the Appellant's account was accepted  by  the  Respondent
    and that relying on the guidance in AS a person who is a spy  would  be
    at risk in Kabul.  Ms Jones was unable to forward any objection to this
    interpretation.

11. In my view it is clear that, based on the findings made  by  the  judge
    based on the reasons for refusal letter and applying the guidance in AS
    at paragraph 174, the Appellant is at risk in his home  area  from  the
    Taliban and is at risk in Kabul as  a  result  of  the  fact  that  the
    Taliban perceive him to be a spy.

12. In these circumstances I find that the judge made a material  error  of
    law in the application of the country guidance case of AS.  I  set  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside maintaining the  unchallenged
    findings of fact.  In these circumstances  I  remake  the  decision  by
    allowing the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 28th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 28th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

