
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08355/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2019                            |On 19 February 2019           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                  miss j M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan dated 31 August 2018 dismissing  her
    asylum claim.  The appellant claimed that on  return  to  Pakistan  she
    would be persecuted on the basis of her sexuality.

2.   I accepted Mr Chelvan's submission that the judge materially  erred  in
    law by  acting  procedurally  unfairly  by  relying  on  the  statement
    evidence of  Miss  L,  when  this  evidence  had  been  withdrawn.   Ms
    Isherwood accepted that the statement of Miss L was  withdrawn  at  the
    hearing.  Ms L did not give evidence at the hearing.  I  find  that  in
    the light of the fact that the statement of  Ms  L  was  withdrawn  the
    judge erred in law in  relying  on  it  to  discredit  the  appellant's
    evidence.

3.   I also find that the judge erred in law in allowing the  respondent  to
    cross-examine on matters relating to sexual activity of  the  appellant
    and make adverse credibility  findings  relating  to  sexual  activity.
    This was in contravention of  the  respondent's  own  published  Asylum
    Policy Instruction on Sexual Orientation issues  in  the  asylum  claim
    published in August 2006 and contrary to EU law.

4.   I find that in the light of these material errors the judge's  decision
    cannot stand.  It is set aside in order to be remade.

5.   The appellant's appeal is remitted to Harmondsworth for rehearing by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than FtTJ M A Khan.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  13 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
