
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08053/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2019                           |On 04 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   Mr a m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Ali, Sohaib Fatimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant, born on 1 February 1993 is a citizen of Afghanistan.  In
    a decision promulgated on 7  December  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Traynor dismissed the  appellant's  protection  claim  on  all
    grounds.

 2. Mr Jarvis conceded at the error of law hearing, properly  in  my  view,
    that the decision was an infected material of error not  least  due  to
    the fact that at  several  instances  in  the  decision,  including  at
    paragraph [48], the judge noted that there  was  no  new  evidence  and
    specifically no statement from the appellant's brother Mr T  H  in  the
    past five years, nor, the judge found, had it been explained why he had
    not provided 'any formal written statement'.  However, the  appellant's
    bundle, B20 to B22 contained a witness statement from  the  appellant's
    brother, Mr T H dated 7 August 2017, which I accept,  and  it  was  not
    disputed, was before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. It is evident  therefore  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    consideration material evidence (his brother having been successful  in
    his asylum appeal in 2013).  Whilst such may not ultimately affect  the
    outcome of the appellant's appeal and  Mr  Jarvis  confirmed  that  the
    respondent continues  to  rely  on  the  reasons  for  refusal  of  the
    appellant's fresh claim, I cannot  say  with  any  certainty  that  the
    judge's decision would have necessarily been the same, had he  properly
    taken into consideration all the evidence before him.

 4. In light of the  respondent's  concession,  I  need  not  consider  the
    remaining grounds of appeal (although I note in passing that these have
    considerably less force and the fact  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision  was  not  issued  for  just  under   four   months,   without
    establishing a nexus between that delay and any claimed  error,  is  in
    itself, unremarkable and not a reason to set aside  the  decision  (see
    including SS (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1391)).

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that it must be set aside.  Due to the nature and extent of  the  fact-
    finding required I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, Taylor,
    other than Judge Traynor or Judge Mailer.


Signed                                  Date:  1 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  1 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

