
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08251/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th November 2017                |On 7th December 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                  Mr M P M
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Kotas (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the parties as "the appellant" and  "the  Respondent".
    This is an error of law hearing. I consider whether or not there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Amin) ("FTT") promulgated on 29th March 2017 in which  the  appeal  was
    dismissed on protection grounds.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  and  claimed  asylum  on  the
    grounds of his sexual orientation, namely that he is gay and  he  fears
    persecution living as  an  openly  gay  man.   He  is  a  member  of  a
    particular social group who would  be  unable  or  unwilling  to  avail
    himself of protection.

FTT decision

3.   The FTT found that his evidence was entirely credible and that  he  was
    gay.  The FTT found that there would be sufficient protection from  the
    police or authorities living as a homosexual  in  Bangladesh  [72].  It
    found that the appellant could relocate and live openly in some part of
    that country where there is an active gay community and where he  would
    not be persecuted. The FTT found that prosecution for  homosexual  acts
    was rare in Bangladesh and that homosexuality was a part of Bangladeshi
    culture [73 -74]. There would be discrimination but not persecution.

Application for permission to appeal

4.   In ground one it was contended that  the  FTT  conflated  the  risk  of
    persecution with the risk of prosecution and further failed to  explain
    what kind of lifestyle that the appellant was  expected  to  forego  on
    return to Bangladesh.

5.   In ground two it was argued that the FTT  failed  to  place  sufficient
    weight on the expert evidence of Dr Siddiqi and the  credible  evidence
    of the  appellant  and  his  witnesses  together  with  the  background
    reports.

Permission grant

6.   Permission was granted  by  UTJ  Plimmer  who  found  that  there  were
    arguable grounds that the FTT having found the appellant to be credible
    and that he will live as an openly gay man  in  Bangladesh  placed  too
    much weight on the absence of criminal prosecutions and failed to  take
    into account the expert evidence  that  even  without  prosecution  the
    extent of the likely discrimination meets the threshold of persecution.
     It was arguable that inadequate reasons were given for  rejecting  the
    expert evidence.

Rule 24 Response

7.   The respondent opposed the application arguing that  the  FTT  properly
    concluded  that  there  was  discrimination  not  persecution  and  the
    appellant was not a LGBT activist and not at risk.   The  decision  was
    sustainable when looked at holistically.

Submisssions

8.   Mr  Jorro  expanded  on  his  detailed  skeleton  argument.   Mr  Kotas
    acknowledged that the FTT accepted all  of  the  appellant's  evidence.
    The FTT looked at the issue comparatively not as set out  in  HJ(Iran).
    However the FTT properly took into account the risk of prosecution  and
    reached the conclusion that there would be discrimination.  Overall the
    decision was not irrational.

Discussion and conclusion

9.   I found that the FTT materially erred in law and failed  to  apply  the
    proper test in HJ(Iran)  (paragraph  78-82).   Whilst  the  absence  of
    prosecutions was a relevant factor, it  was  not  the  main  test.  The
    appellant's evidence, which the FTT accepted entirely, was  that  there
    was a risk of violence as shown by the experiences of gay  men  in  the
    Ramna park  in  Dhaka  and  which  was  consistent  with  the  expert's
    evidence.  It was accepted by the FTT that the appellant  had  to  hide
    his sexuality in Bangladesh and that  again  was  consistent  with  the
    background material. In reaching a decision the FTT failed to focus  on
    the actual evidence found to be credible which formed  the  finding  of
    fact, and failed to reach its  decision  with  regard  to  the  correct
    issue, persecution.  In addition there is no explanation by the FTT  as
    to what was meant by "what he will not be able to do ..." [72] and  /or
    reference to evidence that there are open and safe gay  communities  in
    Bangladesh [73] as found by the FTT.  I adopt the arguments put  in  Mr
    Jorro's skeleton arguments and conclude that the grounds of appeal  are
    made out.

Decision

10.  There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside.  I heard submissions before re making the decision. I have  read
    the current Country Policy  and  Information  Note  Bangladesh:  Sexual
    orientation and gender identity  dated  November  2017  admitted  under
    Rules 15(2A) UT Procedure Rules. I take the findings made by  the  FTT,
    which fully accepted his  account  in  all  material  respects.   I  am
    satisfied that the evidence established that the appellant faces a real
    risk of persecution on return to Bangladesh as a man living  an  openly
    gay life.  I rely on the expert report (which was not  challenged)  and
    which refers to the Home Office's December 2016 guidance in which it is
    stated that it is not possible to be openly  gay  and  that  there  are
    risks of violence at  the  hands  of  thugs  ("mastans")  and  Islamist
    militants, and of arrest and extortion  from  the  police  [65].  I  am
    satisfied that in the event that the appellant lives as an  openly  gay
    man and as he has lived in the UK, he would face a real risk of assault
    and ill treatment. There  is  insufficient  protection  available  from
    state agencies.  The reason why the appellant  was  not  persecuted  in
    Bangladesh was because he hid his sexuality and acted secretively [57].
     Whilst I accept that the current Guidance specifically refers to risks
    to LGBT activists, there is nevertheless  reference also  to  risks  to
    LGBT people who do not live openly in order to avoid discrimination and
    violence including attacks from non state actors (2.3.16) At 2.3.17 the
    2017 guidance states " in general, an LGBT person who does not  conceal
    their sexual  orientation  or  gender  identity   may  be  at  risk  of
    treatment , which by its nature and repetition amounts  to  persecution
    or serious harm". It further states that the  State  appears  able  but
    unwilling to offer effective protection and the person will not be able
    to avail themselves of  the  protection  of  the  authorities  (2.4.5).
    There is found to be no option of internal relocation for those men who
    choose not to conceal their sexual identity (2.5.3).  On the  facts  as
    found I conclude that the appellant is a refugee.  I allow  the  appeal
    on protection grounds.




                               Signed   Date 6.12.2017
                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 6.12.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


