
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/08094/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 25th August 2017                   |       On 1st September 2017          |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                          mr twana mohammed ibrahim
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONNOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding (instructed by Sentinel Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a Decision of  Judge  Rayner  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 3rd March  2017.   The  Decision
    and Reasons is dated 26th April 2017 and the judge allowed  the  appeal
    on asylum grounds.  The Secretary  of  State  sought  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal the second time of asking  by  an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge on the basis it was arguable  that  the  Respondent  proposed  to
    return the Appellant to Erbil and that being overlooked by  the  Judge,
    there was a possible error of law.  However,  as  was  accepted  by  Mr
    Walker this morning the  Respondent  did  not  propose  to  return  the
    Appellant to Erbil;  rather  the  Respondent  proposed  to  return  the
    Appellant to Baghdad and it was then for him to make  his  own  way  to
    Erbil.  That is the only reason the matter comes before  me  today  and
    the judge at paragraph 56(1) dealt with the issue of travelling to  the
    IKR and in the  final  sentence  noted  that  the  Respondent  had  not
    demonstrated how the Appellant might travel from Baghdad  to  the  IKR.
    The judge found that in the absence of such information travel  between
    the two places was not practical and therefore internal relocation  not
    an option for the Appellant.  That being the only  issue  before  me  I
    find that the Decision and Reasons did not contain a material error  of
    law and the appeal to the Upper Tribunal therefore is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 1st September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date 1st September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
