
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08783/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2018                            |On 30 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                    [F M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Corban, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born on [ ] 1969. She  entered  the
    UK on 27 February 2004. with leave to  enter  as  a  visitor.  She  has
    overstayed  since  23  July  2004,   having   made   two   unsuccessful
    applications for indefinite leave to remain on  compassionate  grounds.
    On 2 August 2017, she was encountered and detained. She was served with
    notices informing her  of  her  liability  to  removal,  whereupon  she
    claimed asylum. A referral was made to investigate whether  she  was  a
    victim of modern slavery, which resulted in a  negative  decision.  The
    appellant's protection claim was  refused  on  6  September  2017.  The
    appellant appealed on protection and article  8  grounds  but,  at  the
    beginning of the hearing, in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  withdrew  her
    protection claim.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 16 October 2017, Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Jessica Pacey dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
    The appellant's case on article 8 grounds was brought on the basis  she
    had been in a four-year relationship with a partner,  who  had  refugee
    status and who could not therefore be expected to return to Kenya. With
    respect to her private life, the appellant claimed to have  broken  all
    her ties with Kenya and, as a 48-year-old woman in a highly corrupt and
    chaotic society, she was unlikely to be able to re-adapt to life there,
    particularly in order to find work. She would have no home or financial
    resources so she was likely to become homeless,  which  would  lead  to
    considerable emotional  and  psychological  difficulties.  Neither  the
    appellant nor her partner gave evidence and the case proceeded  on  the
    basis of submissions only.  The  Judge  noted  the  appellant  had  not
    challenged the finding made  by  the  respondent  that,  when  she  had
    applied for a visit visa, she had been in employment. The  Judge  found
    the appellant's age was not  an  insuperable  bar  to  finding  further
    employment. She was not satisfied the appellant was in  a  relationship
    with her claimed partner. She noted that,  as  the  appellant  had  not
    challenged the asylum decision or the credibility findings made on  it,
    it could reasonably be concluded that the situation in  Kenya  and  her
    reasons  for  leaving  that  country  could  not  now  constitute  very
    significant obstacles to return. Even if she accepted the appellant had
    broken all her ties with Kenya, that was a matter  of  choice  and  the
    appellant had chosen to remain in the UK in breach of the law  allowing
    her ties with  her  home  country  to  weaken.  Her  removal  would  be
    proportionate.

 3. The application for permission to appeal suggested the Judge had  erred
    in law because she did  not  give  weight  to  the  witness  statements
    regarding the appellant's relationship with her partner.  She  did  not
    give reasons why she did not accept the  evidence  contained  in  those
    statements and she had penalised the appellant for her decision not  to
    give  evidence.  The  Judge  erred  in  referring  to  the  credibility
    challenge maintained by the respondent in  respect  of  the  protection
    claim because this claim had been withdrawn. Finally, the grounds argue
    the Judge had erred by failing to consider any  of  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the rules. Relevant matters had not  been  taken
    into account in the proportionality balancing exercise.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted because it was arguable the Judge  had
    misdirected herself by failing to consider paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
    the rules. Had the evidence on this matter been taken into account,  it
    might have made a material difference to the outcome or to the fairness
    of the proceedings.

 5. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response opposing the  appeal.  This
    argues that it was never contended that the appellant could satisfy the
    rules with respect to private life and the thrust of the appeal,  after
    the asylum element had been dropped, was her family life.  It  was  not
    incumbent on the Judge to go through every item as long as  the  reader
    of the decision could clearly ascertain why the appeal had been won  or
    lost.

 6. I heard submissions from the representatives on the  issue  of  whether
    the Judge's decision was erroneous.

 7. Mr Corban relied on  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  and
    adopted the observation of the Judge who granted permission to  appeal.
    He suggested the failure of Judge Pacey to consider paragraph 276ADE(1)
    of the rules was "obvious". She should have done this before  embarking
    on consideration of article 8  outside  the  rules.   When  considering
    proportionality, she had  not  taken  all  the  relevant  factors  into
    consideration.

 8. Mr Nath argued the Judge had given adequate consideration to  the  rule
    and he pointed out the Judge had considered the case as it had been put
    to her on behalf of the appellant.

 9. I indicated at the end of the hearing that I would dismiss  the  appeal
    because I did not consider the Judge's decision contained any  material
    error of law. My reasons are as follows.

10. Permission to appeal was granted to argue a single point:  whether  the
    Judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  give  consideration  to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi). That paragraph provides that the requirements to be  met
    by an applicant for leave to remain on the grounds of private  life  in
    the  UK  are  that  they  are  aged  18  years  or  above,  have  lived
    continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting  any  period
    of imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles to their
    integration into the country to which they would have to go if required
    to leave the UK.

11. It is clear that the appellant's article 8 case was based in large part
    on her claimed family life with her partner.  The  Judge  rejected  the
    appellant's claim to have a partner and that part of  her  decision  is
    not now the subject of challenge. The Judge noted how the private  life
    claim was constructed in the grounds of appeal at [14]. She then  noted
    Mr Corban's submissions at [16], in  which  she  was  reminded  of  the
    appellant's  length  of  residence,  her  lack  of  home  or  financial
    resources in Kenya and the absence of  any  welfare  system  in  Kenya.
    Finally, she noted the presenting officer's submissions at [23].

12. The Judge's findings include the following paragraphs:

         "38. She has not sought to challenge the asylum  decision  nor  the
         credibility findings and, then, it can only reasonably be concluded
         that the situation in  Kenya  and  her  reasons  for  leaving  that
         country cannot constitute very significant obstacles to her return.

         39.  Even if I accept the Appellant had broken all ties with Kenya,
         I note (given a lack of challenge to the  asylum  findings  of  the
         Respondent) that this was a matter  of  choice  in  the  deliberate
         knowledge that she was opting to remain in  the  UK  in  breach  of
         immigration rules and, on her argument, allowing ties in  her  home
         country to weaken."

13. If that is not a consideration of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  it  is  not
    clear what it is. To the extent the challenge being made  is  that  the
    Judge made no findings on the application of  the  rule,  the  case  is
    unarguable. She plainly did. She recorded the arguments and set out her
    conclusions.

14. Mr Corban sought to exceed the remit of  the  grant  of  permission  by
    arguing that the Judge failed to  give  consideration  to  the  factors
    weighing in the appellant's favour. If I understood him  to  mean  that
    the  Judge  had  not  given  adequate  consideration  to  the   correct
    application of the rule, I  do  not  find  the  decision  contains  any
    material error.

15. The meaning of  the  similar  provisions  in  relation  to  deportation
    appeals found in section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act and paragraph 339A  of
    the rules were considered in SSHD v AK (Sierra Leone) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    813. Sales LJ said at paragraph [14] that the  "idea  of  "integration"
    calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as  to  whether  the
    individual will be enough of an insider in terms of  understanding  how
    life in the society in that other country is carried on and a  capacity
    to participate in it, so as to have  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
    accepted there, to be able to operate on a  day-to-day  basis  in  that
    society and to build up within a reasonable time  a  variety  of  human
    relationships to give substance to the individual's private  or  family
    life." In Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -  compelling
    circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC), McCloskey J, in  re-making
    the decision, said the "very significant obstacles" test was clearly an
    elevated threshold. Mere hardship, mere difficulty, and  mere  upheaval
    or inconvenience, even where multiplied, will generally be insufficient
    (see [37]).

16. Judge Pacey clearly had in mind the factors put forward  on  behalf  of
    the appellant (her length of residence, the loss of ties, her age,  the
    nature of Kenyan society, her lack of resources and difficulty  finding
    employment) and rejected them. She found the appellant  had  previously
    worked for an airline and her age did not put beyond reach the prospect
    of her finding employment. Even if,  despite  the  adverse  credibility
    findings made, she accepted the appellant had lost her ties with people
    in Kenya, this would not be sufficient to meet the requirements of  the
    rule.

17. Contrary to Mr Corban's arguments, I consider Judge Pacey did  consider
    all the relevant factors and her decision is sustainable.

18. There is no error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal and the decision shall stand. The appellant's appeal
    is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and her decision dismissing the appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 23 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
