
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/08151/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision Promulgated             |
|On 3 May 2018                             |On 11 May 2018                   |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                    MSII
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms N Patel, instructed by Lei Dat Baig
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malik promulgated 10.10.17, dismissing  on  all  grounds
    her appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    10.8.17, to refuse her protection claim.

 2.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pedro  refuse  permission  to  appeal  on
    24.11.17. However, when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted permission on 25.1.18.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 3.5.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 5. In essence, the grounds assert that the judge erred by finding that the
    appellant's delay in claiming asylum damaged  her  credibility  without
    considering the reasons she gave for delay. They also assert  that  the
    judge erred in finding the appellant  would  not  face  persecution  on
    return, despite having accepted that she was pregnant when she made the
    application and that her child would be born outside wedlock.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, Judge McGeachy considered it arguable
    that the judge failed to make a clear finding  that  the  appellant  is
    unmarried and  was  pregnant,  and  that  he  had  not  considered  the
    implications of that on return to Iraq.

 7. There is no merit in the ground in respect of the judge's  reliance  on
    delay. The delay the judge considered at [38I] was that relating to her
    awareness from childhood that she was to be  forced  into  an  arranged
    marriage. On arrival in the UK she would have been aware  that  it  was
    time-limited and that she would  have  to  return  to  Iraq.  In  those
    circumstances, it was open to the judge to conclude that she had  ample
    opportunity to seek protection against the forced marriage a number  of
    years before she did so. The explanation of the appellant relied on  in
    the grounds is that she was not pregnant on arrival in the UK  and,  as
    NAS was still with her, believed she had time to persuade  her  family.
    That is a different matter and is not an adequate explanation  for  the
    delay referred to by the judge and addressed further at [38V].

 8. With all due respect to Judge McGeachy, it is quite clear from [35]  of
    the decision that the judge proceeded on the basis that  the  appellant
    was pregnant and unmarried. At [36] the judge noted the  concession  to
    that effect on the part of the Secretary of State. It  cannot  be  said
    that there is not a clear finding as to this issue.

 9. The only ground with any potential merit is the suggestion that at  [3]
    of the grounds that even if the judge did not accept that the appellant
    was at risk on return based on her relationship, "there was the further
    finding to be addressed in respect of A's treatment upon return  as  an
    unmarried female with a child outside of wedlock. This  is  a  distinct
    and independent finding that required assessment because  even  if  A's
    family did not accept her relationship there  was  a  separate  further
    risk  posed  to  the  appellant  returning  with  a  child  outside  of
    wedlock...The IJ's failings to make a finding on the risk on return  to
    (Iraq) as a woman with a child outside of wedlock is a  material  error
    of law."

10. The child had not been born at the date of the appeal  hearing,  though
    she was pregnant out of wedlock. At [37] the judge recognised from  the
    objective country evidence that 'honour' crimes are  prevalent  in  the
    Iraqi Kurdish community, in the main perpetrated by male family members
    against women relatives,  and  that  protection  or  support  from  the
    authorities is limited. However, for the reasons set out under [38]  in
    the decision, the judge reached the conclusion that the  appellant  had
    not provided a full or credible account of her claim and ultimately did
    not accept that she would be at risk  on  return  due  to  her  out  of
    wedlock relationship with NAS, or at risk of a forced marriage,  or  at
    risk for an 'honour' crime for becoming pregnant outside of wedlock.

11. The reasons given by the judge were detailed and comprehensive, open to
    him on the evidence before the tribunal. In particular, at  [38VI]  the
    judge gave reasons for not accepting that the appellant's  father,  who
    had found out about the pregnancy, had threatened to kill her for  that
    or any other reason. The judge also took  into  account  that  NAS  had
    returned to Iraq and the same local community and that  there  were  no
    reprisals against him or  his  family.  In  summary,  no  part  of  the
    appellant's claim was found to be credible. The  judge  thus  concluded
    that "neither (NAS) nor the appellant are at risk from her  family  for
    any of the appellant's claimed reasons and whilst  she  now  says  that
    they are no longer in a relationship, I find even to a lower  standard,
    that this is contradictory,  as  she  says  NAS  was  happy  about  the
    pregnancy and called her from Iraq."

12. Ms Patel urged on me that the judge failed to address  the  independent
    risk on return from the culture and  society  the  appellant  would  be
    returning to, a risk as the member of a particular social group  (PSG).
    However, the case was presented and pursued at appeal on the basis of a
    risk of honour killing by her own family, a risk the  judge  has  found
    not proven even to the lower standard of proof.

13. Mr McVeety accepted that the judge did not address any specific risk on
    the basis of out of wedlock pregnancy or birth of a child arising  from
    outside of the family but submitted that the omission was not material,
    as if the judge did not accept that there was  any  risk  at  all  from
    members of her own family, and there was no specific  evidence  of  any
    threat or risk from anyone outside the family, it was difficult to  see
    from where any risk on return would emanate.

14. On the judge's findings, the appellant was not at risk from her  father
    or anyone else within the family. This view  was  strengthened  by  the
    fact that NAS had returned  to  Iraq  without  any  adverse  attention,
    despite the appellant's family and in particular her father being aware
    that the appellant had become pregnant. It follows that  the  appellant
    would be returning with the support of her family and if  that  is  the
    case, she had nothing to fear from them and every expectation that they
    would continue to support her and not permit any action against her. In
    this regard, the judge noted  her claim that her father had  power  and
    influence in the community, which would surely be additional protection
    for her.

15. Whilst the skeleton  argument  submitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    alleged a "risk on return as a single woman at risk of honour killing,"
    it does not appear from the record of the hearing that  there  was  any
    focus on an independent risk outside of the family. That the judge  was
    alert to this issue is clear from what is said at [37] and [23] of  the
    decision, but as he noted, honour  killings  are  perpetrated  by  male
    family members on female relatives. Other evidence  addressed  how  the
    authorities allegedly do  not  provide  a  sufficiency  of  protection,
    because they are regarded as  "family  issues."  All  of  the  evidence
    suggests that the relevant risk arose from the appellant's father or at
    the most the extended family. All the appellant's case had  been  about
    how she would not be able to survive or hide from her family on return,
    but that becomes unnecessary if in fact she has nothing  to  fear  from
    her family. Honour killings are by their nature  family-based,  because
    of the shame becoming pregnant or having a  child  outside  of  wedlock
    supposedly brings on the person's family. If the judge did not  accept,
    on the credibility assessment, that her father or any other  member  of
    the family would harm the appellant for becoming pregnant or  having  a
    child outside of wedlock, it is difficult to see where the risk  arises
    or alternatively on what evidence the judge could properly  have  found
    such a real risk.

16. I am satisfied that all findings were properly open to  the  judge  and
    for which cogent reasons have been provided. In all the  circumstances,
    I am not satisfied that the appellant  has  demonstrated  any  material
    error of law in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusion & Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law such as to require it to be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                       The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stands  and
                    the appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
