
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08804/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 September 2017                         |On 13 November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                  SECRETRY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    R A K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D O'Callaghan of Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                    Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Griffith promulgated on 20 May 2017 allowing the RAK's appeal against a
    decision of the Respondent's dated 4 August 2016 refusing a  protection
    claim.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant and RAK is the Respondent, for the  sake  of  consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  hereafter
    refer to the Secretary of State  as  the  Respondent  and  RAK  as  the
    Appellant.


3.   The Appellant's nationality has been the subject of  dispute.   Indeed,
    her exact position on her nationality may well have  recently  shifted:
    see further below. In her application and hitherto in the  appeal,  the
    Appellant  has  claimed  to  be  a  national  of  Eritrea,  whilst  the
    Respondent has taken the view that she is a national  of  Ethiopia  and
    returnable thereto.


4.   The Appellant claims to have been born in Assab in 1978 -  a  territory
    which is now within the borders of the country of Eritrea.  It is  said
    that she relocated in 1983 to Addis Ababa with her parents and brother.
     The Appellant would have been 5 years old at this point.  It  is  said
    that in March 2000 she was expelled with  her  mother  and  brother  to
    Eritrea, her father having recently been also expelled.


5.   The Appellant, on her account, shortly thereafter  relocated  to  Sudan
    with an uncle; she  then  worked  as  a  housekeeper  in  Khartoum  for
    approximately seven years.  During this time she became involved in the
    Pentecostal Church.  There came a time where her employer was minded to
    relocate, and it is said that  in  the  circumstances  the  Appellant's
    uncle, concerned that the Appellant  might  not  be  able  to  continue
    living in Sudan without the effective protection of an  employer,  made
    arrangements for her to come to the United Kingdom.  She arrived in the
    United Kingdom in November 2007 and made  an  application  for  asylum.
    The application was refused on 14 July 2010, and  a  subsequent  appeal
    dismissed on 14 September 2010 by decision of Immigration Judge  Archer
    (reference AA/10692/2010).


6.   The Appellant then seems to have made  a  number  of  sets  of  further
    submissions to the Respondent. Representations made in  September  2014
    eventually culminated in the decision of 4 August 2016  to  refuse  the
    Appellant asylum again, with a right of appeal.


7.   The Appellant lodged an appeal in the IAC. The appeal was  allowed  for
    reasons set out in the Decision of Judge Griffith.


8.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal, which was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on 15 August 2017.


9.   The focus in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  -  and  in  due
    course in the Respondent's challenge to the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal - was on the Appellant's claimed nationality.  Judge Robertson
    concluded that the Respondent had raised arguable grounds in respect of
    Judge Griffith's approach to the Appellant's linguistic  skills,  Judge
    Griffith having come to a different conclusion in this regard from that
    reached by Judge Archer in  the  Appellant's  previous  appeal.   Judge
    Robertson expressed the arguable case in these terms:

         "The question is whether the Judge was entitled to take a different
         view  from  the  previous  Judge  (who  assessed  the   Appellant's
         credibility in the context of all the credibility findings) on  the
         basis simply of what he thought may or may not be unusual, and this
         point is reasonably arguable."


    In  granting  permission  to  appeal  on  this  point  Judge  Robertson
    commented that the materiality of this point  to  the  outcome  in  the
    appeal was not clear in light of the  Appellant's  attempts  to  obtain
    documentation from the Embassy for Ethiopia in the UK.




10.  During the course  of  argument  I  invited  the  observations  of  the
    representatives, and in particular Mr O'Callaghan, as to the  relevance
    or otherwise of the decisions in ST (Ethnic Eritrean  -  nationality  -
    return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT and MA (Ethiopia) [2009] EWCA Civ  289,
    both of which had been cited in the Decision of Judge  Griffith.   Both
    those cases  involved  claims  based  on  an  allegation  of  arbitrary
    deprivation of citizenship amounting  to  persecution  giving  rise  to
    entitlement to  international  surrogate  protection.   This  was  not,
    seemingly, the way in which the Appellant  had  put  her  case  to  the
    Respondent and to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  appeared  that  the
    Appellant had not put her case on the basis that she was Ethiopian  and
    had been deprived access to her citizenship rights  by  reason  of  the
    refusal to issue travel documentation, but rather had consistently  put
    her case on the basis that  she  was  Eritrean  and  faced  a  risk  of
    persecution in Eritrea such that she was entitled to protection.


11.  I pause to note that the Respondent  acknowledged  that  the  Appellant
    would be at risk in Eritrea, but did not propose to return  her  there.
    It was the  Secretary  of  State's  case  that  as  the  Appellant  was
    Ethiopian - notwithstanding the  Appellant's  denial  -  she  could  be
    safely returned  to  Ethiopia.   The  exploration  of  the  Appellant's
    ability to obtain travel documentation from the authorities of Ethiopia
    therefore appears to have been relevant to the question of  nationality
    and returnability rather than the risk of persecution per se.


12.  Be that as it may, having invited observations on the applicability  or
    otherwise  of  ST  and  MA,  following  a  lunchtime   adjournment   Mr
    O'Callaghan drew certain matters to  my  attention  in  consequence  of
    which it is now essentially common ground that this appeal needs to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a decision to be remade in  the
    appeal with all issues at large.


13.  In essence Mr O'Callaghan acknowledged that it would  now  appear  that
    both before Judge Archer and before Judge Griffith  nobody  had  really
    fully and properly understood  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's  case.
    Indeed, after some exploration it is not entirely clear to  me  whether
    the Appellant's representatives fully understood the  Appellant's  case
    at the  time  that  they  were  making  their  further  submissions  in
    September 2014.  Mr O'Callaghan now says that this  is  indeed  a  case
    which should be articulated on the basis  of  the  Appellant  being  an
    Ethiopian national who has been arbitrarily deprived of her citizenship
    and it should no longer be  articulated,  as  it  seems  to  have  been
    hitherto, on the basis of her claiming to be an  Eritrean  national  at
    risk in Eritrea: cf. the representations  of  4  September  2014  which
    continued to describe the Appellant in the heading as Eritrean. (Whilst
    I note that some  passages  in  that  letter  refer  to  the  arbitrary
    deprivation of Ethiopian nationality, such  passages  are  not  readily
    reconcilable  with  the  description   of   the   Appellant's   claimed
    nationality in the heading, or the passages that  strongly  argue  that
    she was not Ethiopian. It seems to me likely  that  the  references  to
    arbitrary  deprivation  appear  only  by  reason  of  careless  use  of
    standardised paragraphs from a template, and not because this  was  the
    conscious intention of the author. The seeming  continuing  absence  of
    any clear articulation of the  case  up  until  the  afternoon  of  the
    hearing reinforces this notion.)


14.  Mr O'Callaghan now draws the following matters to  my  attention.   The
    Appellant was born in 1978, in territory which whilst now being part of
    the territory of Eritrea was  at  the  time  the  within  territory  of
    Ethiopia - Eritrea not then existing as a country.  When the  Appellant
    moved from Assab to Addis Ababa in 1983, as she claims, it was  a  move
    within the territory of the nation state of Ethiopia.  It was not until
    1991 that there was a universal declaration of independence on the part
    of Eritrea; it was not until 1993 that Eritrea became a de jure state -
    at which time in the Appellant's claimed chronology she was outside the
    territory  of  Eritrea  and  within  the  territory  of  Ethiopia.   Mr
    O'Callaghan submits that consequently the Appellant would have been  at
    birth a citizen of Ethiopia, and there is nothing to indicate  that  at
    any point thereafter she would have acquired  citizenship  of  Eritrea.
    (This is of course all premised upon an acceptance of  the  Appellant's
    claimed narrative chronology: as Mr O'Callaghan points out, it  is  not
    readily apparent that clear findings have been made in this regard.)


15.   Pursuant  to  the  above,  Mr  O'Callaghan  now  indicates  that   the
    Appellant's case is  seemingly  really  one  of  being  a  national  of
    Ethiopia who has been arbitrarily deprived of citizenship, and not one,
    as hitherto, of being a national of Eritrea who  fears  persecution  in
    her country of nationality.   I  emphasise  in  this  regard  that  the
    Appellant continues to express a fear of  going  to  the  territory  of
    Eritrea but it is not this that Mr O'Callaghan says forms the claim for
    international surrogate protection.


16.  I entirely understand the way in which Mr O'Callaghan now seeks to  put
    the case, having been prompted into it by the  invitation  to  consider
    the  applicability  or  otherwise  of  ST  and  MA  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision. However, the question  for  me  is  slightly  more
    difficult: what, if any, error of law  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    made in circumstances where it does not seem overt that  the  Appellant
    put her case on the basis that it is now articulated.   Mr  O'Callaghan
    suggested that in circumstances where the Judge  failed  to  appreciate
    the true nature of the case it might be considered that  the  error  of
    law was a lack of appropriate or 'anxious' scrutiny.


17.  I hesitate to determine the  case  on  that  basis.   I  understand  Mr
    O'Callaghan's  resistance  to  the  notion  that  the  case  should  be
    determined on the basis of the challenge of the Secretary of State, but
    it seems to me that there is substance to that  challenge.   (I  should
    record that Mr Tarlow did not resist the suggestion in any  event  that
    this case should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  indeed
    observed that there might then be an opportunity for the Respondent  to
    consider  how  best  to  respond  to  the   new  articulation  of   the
    Appellant's claim.)


18.  I am satisfied that there was an error of law in the  approach  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   Given  the  common  ground   adopted   by   the
    representatives as to the way forward, inherent in which is an  absence
    of meaningful resistance by the Appellant to the Respondent's challenge
    to the decision  of  Judge  Griffith  on  the  basis  that  it  is  now
    acknowledged that the Judge did not determine the  true  basis  of  the
    Appellant's case, I do not propose to go into too much detail.  Suffice
    to say, I am satisfied that the point identified as arguable  by  Judge
    Robertson in the grant of permission to appeal,  is  indeed  made  out.
    Whilst  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith  reached  conclusions  in
    respect of the Appellant's use of language in the home at paragraph 43,
    he did so without any reference to, or attempt  to  explain,  why  such
    matters should be revisited after the findings of Judge Archer in light
    of the new evidence which in essence only amounted to the  attempts  to
    obtain documentation from the Ethiopian Embassy. Judge  Archer  gave  a
    number of reasons by reference to the submissions before him as to  why
    he did not find the Appellant credible, and necessarily his  evaluation
    of her claim to have changed the use of language  at  home  involved  a
    consideration of those reasons.  There was nothing in Judge  Griffith's
    decision that explored any of those matters and to  that  extent  I  am
    satisfied that the Judge fell  into  error  in  failing  adequately  to
    reason or explain why the different approach indicated at paragraph  43
    was appropriate. (It does not follow  that  Judge  Griffith  inevitably
    reached the wrong conclusion in this regard;  it  does  mean,  however,
    that the conclusion he reached was not  supported  by  any  sustainable
    reasons and was thereby unsafe - and may require to be revisited in due
    course.)


19.  Moreover, insofar  as  the  Judge  may  have  placed  reliance  in  his
    analysis of the Appellant's case on the case law of ST and MA it  seems
    to me that in the context of  the  way  in  which  the  case  had  been
    articulated before the First-tier Tribunal the reliance on that line of
    authority was inappropriate.  It is clear from  those  cases  that  the
    Ethiopian authorities are inclined to refuse to issue travel  documents
    in some cases to its own nationals if there  is  something  to  suggest
    that they may be Eritrean  by  way  of  background  or  ethnicity.   It
    follows that the value of a refusal to issue  a  national  document  is
    limited as an indicator of nationality and so did not  really  go  very
    far towards demonstrating that the Appellant was Eritrean as the  Judge
    concluded - and, as Mr O'Callaghan now  indicates,  the  Appellant  now
    wishes to deny in any event!.  Whilst it may well be that Judge  Archer
    made some observations in his decision as to  the  potential  value  of
    obtaining  evidence  as   to   any   attempts   to   obtain   Ethiopian
    documentation, it seems to me that no expectation could be said to have
    arisen from those observations one way or the other as  to  the  impact
    that that might have upon re-evaluation of the entire case.


20.  Accordingly I am satisfied that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  fell
    into error of law.  The consequence is that the decision in the  appeal
    is to be set aside, and the decision in the appeal  therefore  requires
    to be remade. Given  that  the  Appellant  now  essentially  wishes  to
    rearticulate her case, remaking the decision in the appeal will involve
    renewed fact-finding; accordingly the appropriate forum is  the  First-
    tier Tribunal before any Judge  other  than  Judge  Griffith  or  Judge
    Archer.


21.  Because the Appellant seeks to put her case  on  a  different  basis  I
    directed at the conclusion of the hearing that the Appellant is to file
    and serve within 21 days her restated case, and that the matter  should
    be set down on the  first  available  date  after  six  weeks  from  26
    September 2017 for a Case Management Review hearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal - by which point the Respondent will, it is hoped, be  in
    a position to indicate whether or not this appeal is ready  to  be  set
    down for a substantive hearing or whether the  Respondent  wishes  more
    time to consider the re-articulation of the Appellant's case.


Notice of Decision

22.  The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.


23.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Archer  or
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith with all issues at large.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 9 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

