

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08011/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2017                          |On 27 June 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                     MN
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Pickering of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for  asylum  and
       ancillary protection on 19 July 2016. His appeal  was  dismissed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon ("the Judge") following a hearing on
       16 December 2016.

    2. I make an anonymity order  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as the Appellant's asylum  and
       ancillary protection claim, for  reasons  that  will  become  clear,
       remains outstanding.

The grant of permission


    3. Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted permission to  appeal  (8  March
       2017) on the grounds that it is arguable that  the  Judge  erred  in
       relation to the issue of paternity and in particular  regarding  the
       need to obtain DNA evidence where  there  was  a  birth  certificate
       which identified it.


Respondent's position

    4. Mr Diwnycz submitted, in the absence of a rule 24 notice,  that  the
       Judge considered all the evidence despite the exclusion  of  such  a
       reference to that in [46] where the Judge said "the only evidence of
       paternity is a birth certificate".


    5. He pointed out that the Judge had considered evidence as to  whether
       the Appellant and child's mother were in a genuine relationship  and
       noted inconsistencies in their evidence regarding  the  relationship
       [38, 40], linguistic challenges to developing a  relationship  where
       neither  spoke  English  fluently  [39],  his  adverse   credibility
       regarding complying with immigration laws [41] and delay [42], and a
       lack of documentary evidence of them being together [45].


    6. He noted the Judges reliance on TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ
       20 regarding the Judge's entitlement to factor  in  the  absence  of
       obtainable evidence.

Discussion

    7. In my judgement, the decision was inadequate regarding paternity  to
       such an extent that it amounts to a material error of  law  for  the
       following reasons.


    8. There is a baby. The  baby  has  a  father.  The  birth  certificate
       identifies who the mother told the registrar was the  father.  There
       is no evidence she has been prosecuted by the  relevant  authorities
       for providing false information. The fact that DNA evidence could be
       obtained does not mean it needed to be given the bare  assertion  he
       was  not  the  father.  The  Judge  did  not  just  have  the  birth
       certificate as evidence of paternity. He also had  the  evidence  of
       both purported parents. None of the adverse points identified  above
       [5] impact on that core issue.  Many  children  are  conceived  from
       brief relationships where there may be little evidence of an ongoing
       relationship, or parental knowledge of each other, or even that  the
       parents speak the same primary language.


    9. The issue of paternity was an integral part of the assessment of the
       relationship between the Appellant and child especially as the child
       and mother were both at the hearing.  I am therefore satisfied  that
       the Judge  made  a  further  material  error  of  law  in  that  his
       assessment of that relationship was inadequate.

   10. Both representatives agreed, once I announced my decision that there
       was a material error of law, that it was appropriate  to  remit  the
       matter with no findings being preserved for a  de  novo  hearing  on
       paternity, the nature of the relationship, the  consequent  risk  on
       return to Pakistan, and the family  life  issues  that  flowed  from
       those assessments.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    The matter shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  not  before
    Judge Moxon with a time estimate of 3 hours and  there  being  an  Urdu
    interpreter to assist the Appellant and an  Indonesian  interpreter  to
    assist the child's mother.





Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
26 June 2017
