
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/08367/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th June 2019                       |On 25th June 2019                   |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     MAU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs of Counsel, instructed by Eric H Smith
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Twydell made
following a hearing at Taylor House on 26th October 2018.

The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He has a complex immigration
history but suffice it to say that he applied for asylum on 5th December
2014 on the grounds that he would be at risk on return to Bangladesh
because of his political activity.

The judge dismissed his appeal, finding that he was not a credible witness
and whilst she accepted that he had had some involvement both in Bangladesh
and in the UK with the BNP Party, she concluded that he would not be at
risk on return.

The appellant challenged her decision on the grounds that the judge had
applied the wrong standard of proof, namely the balance of probabilities,
finding that it was unlikely that the appellant would be at risk on return,
had erred in law in her approach to the documentary evidence, had reached
irrational conclusions in respect of whether he could access state
protection from persecutory harm at the hands of non-state actors and had
failed to make any findings in relation to the evidence of three witnesses
who had given evidence in support of the appellant.

Mr Walker accepted that the judge had erred and that the decision would
have to be remade.

Whilst the judge cited the correct burden and standard of proof at the
commencement of her determination, she did subsequently repeatedly refer to
the question of whether it was likely or unlikely that he would be at risk
on return.

Whilst this would not necessarily have been fatal, the real problem is that
three witnesses gave evidence on the appellant's behalf in relation to a
family member who was said to have suffered in Bangladesh as a consequence
of the appellants political opinions, and about his activities there. Their
evidence was not considered by the judge at all.

Accordingly, she erred in failing to make findings on relevant matters.

It is also the case that, in concluding that the appellant could relocate
in Bangladesh and obtain state protection if it were needed, she did not
engage with the submission that it was not likely that a known activist,
which all parties accept that the appellant is, would realistically be able
to obtain protection from the government which he opposes.  It was
incumbent upon the judge to consider whether he would be likely to repeat
the views which he has expressed in the UK on a return to Bangladesh.

This is clearly a very detailed and thoughtful determination and the judge
has taken a great deal of time and trouble to consider the evidence, which
is extensive.  Nevertheless, for the reasons cited above and unopposed by
the Secretary of State, the appeal will have to be reheard at Taylor House
by a judge other than Judge Twydell.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed                              Date 22 June 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
