
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08360/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                    |
|On 26th October 2018                      |On 28th November 2018          |
|                                          |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                 MS LING XUE
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Designated Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Murray dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of China.  She claimed to be at risk of
      persecution as a worshipper at the Almighty God Church, otherwise
      known as "Eastern Lightning".  The Designated Judge did not believe
      the appellant's evidence and, in particular, that she was involved
      with this church in China or had come to the adverse attention of the
      authorities because of this.

   3. The Designated Judge looked at the appellant's activities since her
      arrival in the UK, which included leafleting and posting material of a
      religious nature online.  The judge found that the appellant had
      carried out these activities in bad faith in order to bolster her
      claim.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted on the ground, in particular, that
      the Designated Judge had not considered the risk to the appellant from
      these posts.

   5. In his submission before me Mr Winter adopt the grounds for seeking
      permission to appeal.  The first of these was that the Designated
      Judge had erred in her assessment of risk even though the appellant
      was found to have been acting in bad faith when carrying out her
      religious activities in the UK.  The second was that the judge did not
      make proper findings on what activities the appellant had actually
      been carrying out.

   6. On the second of these grounds Mr Winter submitted that it was unclear
      whether the judge had accepted that the appellant had been leafleting
      on behalf of the church.  If it was accepted that she had been, then
      there had to be an assessment of the risk arising from this, whether
      the appellant was acting in bad faith or not.

   7. Mr Winter referred to the opinion of Lord Brodie in the Inner House
      decision in MMY [2018] CSIH 16.  This showed that Eastern Lightning
      was not in the same position as other unregistered churches in China.
      It had been classified by the authorities as an "evil cult".  Because
      of this the country guideline case of QH (Christians - risk) China CG
      [2014] UKUT 00086 should be distinguished.  This distinction affected
      the assessment of risk even if the appellant was acting in bad faith.
      Not only was Eastern Lightning designated an evil cult but the members
      had a duty to proselytize, unlike the members of Falun Gong, which was
      also so designated.

   8. For the respondent Mr Govan relied on a rule 24 response.  The
      conclusions of the Designated Judge were clear.  The appellant had a
      lack of knowledge of the Church of Almighty God.  She was found to
      lack genuine faith and to have acted in bad faith.  Mr Govan asked
      what evidence there was before the judge to show that the Chinese
      authorities would be aware of her Facebook posts.  There was no
      evidence that these were on a publicly accessible account.  Even if
      the posts were discovered, there was no personal information to
      identify the appellant apart from her name, and there was no
      photograph of her.  There was no evidence the Chinese authorities were
      monitoring social media outside China.  The appellant was not a church
      member and there was no expectation that she would behave in such a
      way as to bring her to the attention of the authorities.  Photographs
      of her leafleting in the UK had been produced but these were unclear
      and there was no evidence they had been published.  It was difficult
      to identify the appellant in the photographs, as the judge observed.

Discussion

   9. I will address first the second of the appellant's grounds.  This
      concerns whether the Designated Judge accepted the appellant's
      involvement in activities in the UK to promote the Church of Almighty
      God.  The judge's findings are at paragraph 54 of the decision.  The
      judge observed that the appellant's name is not on the leaflets
      produced in evidence.  The photographs of the appellant leafleting are
      said to be unclear.  Nevertheless, notwithstanding these concerns it
      is apparent that having regard to the low standard of proof the judge
      accepts that the appellant was leafleting in the UK.  The judge then
      observes that the Facebook posts and the leafleting were done to
      bolster the appellant's claim.  This implies that the judge also
      accepted that the appellant made Facebook posts from the UK.  In the
      previous paragraph the judge had rejected the appellant's evidence
      that she had also made social media posts about the church in China
      before her departure.

  10. For the foregoing reasons I find there is no issue of substance in the
      contention that the judge did not make adequate findings on whether
      the appellant had been carrying out activities for the church in the
      UK.

  11. The other ground I must consider is whether the judge properly
      assessed risk on return having regard to the Danian point (as Mr
      Winter referred to it) that even activities carried out in bad faith
      may give rise to a real risk.  The issue of bad faith is nevertheless
      significant to the assessment of risk in the circumstances of this
      appeal.  The appellant is not a genuine believer and this
      distinguishes her from the appellant in MMY, whose faith was found to
      be genuine.  There is no reason to suppose that the appellant would
      consider herself under any duty to adhere to the church or to
      proselytize on its behalf were she to return to China.

  12. The only activities accepted by the judge which might conceivably give
      rise to a risk to the appellant on return was her leafleting in the UK
      and her social media posts.  The only evidence of the leafleting,
      apart from the appellant's own evidence, is some unclear and
      unpublished photographs.  The judge was entitled to find these would
      not give rise to a real risk to the appellant.  As far as the social
      media posts are concerned, as Mr Govan pointed out, it was difficult
      to identify the appellant from these posts and anyway there was a lack
      of evidence before the judge to show that the Chinese authorities were
      monitoring posts of this nature outside China.  The judge was entitled
      to find that the appellant did not face a real risk of persecution or
      serious harm on the basis of her sur place activities in the UK.

Conclusions

  13. There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
      and accordingly the decision stands.

  14. The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal did not involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

  15. The decision is not set aside.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity and I see no
reason of substance for making such a direction.




M E Deans
                                 31st October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



