

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/08768/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 1st August 2017                    |On: 3rd August 2017                   |
|                                       |                                      |
|                                       |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                              Ahsanullah Niazai
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Aitken, Counsel instructed by Satha & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Afghanistan who  is  accepted  to  have
    been born in 1998.  On the 13th  April  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge L. Nolan) allowed  his  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.  The
    Secretary of  State  now  has  permission[1]  to  appeal  against  that
    decision.


 2. The crux of the Secretary of State's appeal is  that  in  reaching  its
    conclusions the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in that  it
    failed to apply the principles in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  to
    findings of fact made by earlier Tribunals.




    The Devaseelan Findings


 3. The Respondent Mr Niazai claimed asylum in the United  Kingdom  on  the
    5th April 2011. He was refused protection, but due to his young age was
    granted Discretionary Leave. He appealed against that decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal. In a determination dated 15th July 2011 the First-
    tier Tribunal  (Judge  Andonian)  dismissed  the  protection  'upgrade'
    appeal. No findings were made on human rights, since at the date of the
    determination Mr Niazai had  already  been  granted  limited  leave  to
    remain.  The only finding made by Judge Andonian that is  pertinent  to
    the present appeal appeared at paragraph 45 of that judgement:  "it  is
    simply not credible that the Appellant would not know where to  contact
    his family".  That was a finding upheld on  appeal  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Pitt in her decision of the 30th May 2012.


 4. On the 7th August 2013 Mr Niazai applied for further  leave.  This  was
    refused on the 6th March 2015. His appeal came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Robison). In a decision dated the 17th  September  2015
    the protection element  of  the  claim  was  once  again  rejected.  In
    particular, it was not accepted that Mr Niazai  faced  any  risk  as  a
    westernised returnee.  Article 8 is addressed very briefly at paragraph
    46 of the decision, the Tribunal finding that since he had  lived  most
    of his life in Afghanistan, it was not a disproportionate  interference
    with his private life to send him there now.    Although  the  Tribunal
    recorded evidence from the Red Cross that they had been able  to  trace
    Mr Niazai's family, no specific finding is made on that matter.

 5. That decision was subject to an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  a
    decision dated the 19th  February  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson
    dismissed the appeal, which was concerned wholly  with  the  protection
    findings made by Judge Robison. In his evaluation of the grounds  Judge
    Hanson commented that it had not been shown that Mr Niazai  would  face
    any risk as a westernised returnee: "it has  not  been  shown  that  he
    cannot re-adjust to the life he had prior  to  coming  to  the  UK.  No
    language or cultural issues have been made out even  if  the  appellant
    has the mannerisms of a young person who has lived in the UK  for  some
    time" [at 13].

 6. On the 26th July 2016 further representations were made on Mr  Niazai's
    behalf. The Secretary of State for the Home Department refused to grant
    leave but treated the representations as a fresh human rights claim and
    accordingly a further right of appeal ensued.   It was  that  decision,
    dated 4th August 2016, that was subject to the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal in the instant appeal.


    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 7. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the protection claim.  No  issue  has
    been taken with that decision by either side.


 8. In its assessment of Article 8 the Tribunal dealt first with  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules. Noting that Mr Niazai had  only  spent
    six years in the UK, it directed itself that the only conceivable  limb
    of that provision that might apply to him would be 276ADE(1)(vi).  This
    required him to demonstrate that there were "very significant obstacles
    to his reintegration" in Afghanistan.  The Tribunal's consideration  of
    that rule is set out at paragraphs 50-52 of the decision. In summary it
    identifies the following factors as relevant to the question of whether
    there are "very significant obstacles":

              i) Mr Niazai has spent the years aged 13-19 in the UK  and  is
                 now a "typically British young man". As someone whose adult
                 identity has been formed by an immersion into UK  life  and
                 culture he would face significant hardship  and  difficulty
                 in re-integrating himself into life in Afghanistan;


             ii) His position is distinct from that of a UASM who has  spent
                 six years living with other (Afghan) family members in  the
                 UK, because he has been in the  care  of  the  state/foster
                 families;

            iii) His position is distinct from that  of  an  adult  who  has
                 spent six  years  living  in  the  UK  because  these  were
                 formative years;

             iv) Although he could in time re-acquire  his  native  language
                 skills the Tribunal accepted that Mr Niazai is  now  fluent
                 in English and that he has lost his ability to  communicate
                 in Pashto and Dari;

              v) The Tribunal accepted that  he  had  lost  touch  with  his
                 family in Afghanistan;

             vi) The background  information  indicates  that  young  people
                 without support networks face particular difficulties  over
                 and above those faced by all returnees,  such  as  lack  of
                 employment and housing;

            vii) He has missed  out  on  schooling  in  the  Afghan  system,
                 further compromising his ability to find work.


 9. Having considered all of  those  matters  cumulatively  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found itself satisfied that the test was met. Although it  was
    not open to the Tribunal to allow  the  appeal  'under  the  rules'  it
    considered its  own  positive  finding  relevant  to  the  question  of
    proportionality and went on to allow the appeal on Article  8  grounds,
    notwithstanding the public interest factors set out  in  s117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).




    The Challenge


10. The Secretary of State alleges that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    law in the following material respects:


              i) In failing  to  apply  the  Devaseelan  principles  to  the
                 finding of Judge Hanson that  there  were  no  cultural  or
                 language issues arising in Mr Niazai's return to Kabul;


             ii) In failing  to  apply  the  Devaseelan  principles  to  the
                 finding of Judges Andonian and Pitt that Mr Niazai had  not
                 credibly shown himself to be out of touch with his family;

            iii) In failing  to  ascribe  "little  weight"  to  Mr  Niazai's
                 private life in accordance with s117B(5) NIAA 2002




    The Response


11. Mr Aitkin pointed out that there can be no doubt  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was aware of the  earlier  determinations.  It  had  expressly
    referred to them in its  judgement  and  had  directed  itself  to  the
    Devaseelan principles at paragraphs  14,   34,   43,  and  47   of  the
    decision. The Tribunal had been entitled to draw its own conclusions as
    to the new material, namely: the  country  background  reports  on  the
    difficulties faced by young returnees to Afghanistan, Mr  Niazai's  own
    evidence about his updated situation (and in particular his family  and
    language ability), and the letter from the Red Cross, dated 12th August
    2014. In respect of  this  latter  document,  which  demonstrated  that
    family tracing had been unsuccessful, it had been  before  the  Robison
    tribunal but no findings had been made on it. As such  it  was  plainly
    open to the Tribunal to make its own findings on this new material.




    Discussion and Findings


12. It is apparent from all of the decisions which precede my own that  the
    primary focus of Mr Niazai's case has historically been his  protection
    claim. Judges Andonian and Pitt were not concerned with  Article  8  at
    all, given that Mr Niazai had leave  to  remain  at  that  time.  Judge
    Robison dealt with it  in  very  brief  measure  and  made  no  express
    findings on either of the factual issues raised in this appeal,  namely
    whether Mr Niazai has lost the ability to  speak  Dari  or  Pashto  and
    whether he has lost contact with his family.   Judge Hanson did comment
    in the Secretary of State's favour in respect of both matters,  but  it
    is hard to see that when he did so it amounted  to  a  new  finding  of
    fact: he simply adopted the findings  of  preceding  Tribunals  in  the
    context of a discussion as to whether there was any 'error of  law'  in
    the protection decision of Judge Robison.   There is no  indication  in
    the decision that Judge Hanson had regard to any up  to  date  evidence
    about language when he made the comments that he did; nor is there  any
    indication that either he or  Judge  Robison  had  considered  or  made
    findings on the evidence from the Red Cross  that  family  tracing  had
    yielded no results.


13. This is in contrast to the findings of Judge Nolan, who looked at those
    matters afresh through the prism of Article 8, whilst reminding himself
    of the earlier findings. See for  instance  the  following  passage  at
    paragraph 50 (emphasis added):


         "50....in this case what must  be  considered  is  the  nature  and
         quality of the years the appellant has spent in the UK as he is  in
         a very different position from a person arriving in the  UK  as  an
         adult, who has already grown up and spent their formative years  in
         their country of origin. The appellant is also in a very  different
         position from a young person who has lived in the UK from  the  age
         of 13-19 with their own family, as he arrived as an  UASM  and  has
         been dependent upon the state and foster families from his  arrival
         until he was considered able to live independently. However, it was
         considered by the UT in February 2016 that the appellant  had  then
         been unable to demonstrate that he would be unable to re-adjust  to
         life in Afghanistan. The appellant today gave evidence that he  has
         lost much of his native language ability in Pashto  and  Dari,  and
         that he instead now speaks fluent English. The Appellant  has  been
         educated in the UK from the age of 13 years  old,  and  has  always
         been cared for by the state and foster families, and I  accept  his
         evidence that he lost touch with his own family in Afghanistan  and
         thus his foster families are the only family he has had  since  the
         age of  13.  Mr  Aitkin  submitted  several  pieces  of  background
         information setting out the quite significant problems  that  young
         people experience after their forced removal back  to  Afghanistan,
         which include those problems common to all returnees  (for  example
         the difficulties finding  accommodation  and  employment)  and  the
         particular difficulties faced by young returnees, especially  those
         who are returned to Kabul  without  any  family  or  other  support
         networks to assist them in finding accommodation, employment or the
         other necessities of life...."

14. Judge Nolan made those findings on  the  evidence  before  him,  having
    regard in particular to the direct oral evidence given by Mr Niazai. It
    cannot be said that he was oblivious to the significance of the earlier
    decisions (he made specific arrangements for these to be provided:  see
    paragraph 23) or to the Devaseelan  principles,  which  are  repeatedly
    invoked throughout  the  determination.    He  has  clearly  reached  a
    different conclusions  - on the issues of language and family - to  his
    predecessors, but I am unable to conclude that he did so  in  violation
    of the Devaseelan principles. He had regard to  the  earlier  findings,
    but on the new, up to date evidence before  him,  reached  a  different
    conclusion.


15. I accordingly find that the Tribunal was entitled to conclude that  the
    high test in paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) was met,  having  regard  to  the
    cumulative weight of the factors identified at paragraphs 50 -52 of the
    decision.   It follows that I need not address the second issue  raised
    in the appeal, concerning the weight to be afforded to a  private  life
    developed under precarious circumstances.  That  is  because  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules reflects  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department's view about where the balance should be struck in Article 8
    cases. If an applicant shows he can meet the requirements  therein,  it
    follows that the Secretary of State must be satisfied that his  removal
    would be disproportionate. Mr Avery accepted  that  this  must  be  the
    case.



    Decision


16. For the reasons set out above I am not satisfied that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law. The  decision
    is upheld.

17. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on that facts of the
    case I see no reason to do so.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             2nd August 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ford) on the
4th May 2017 but granted upon renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge
Allen on the 16th June 2017.


