

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/08120/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 March 2019                         | On 19 March 2019                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                  mr T h t
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Muzira (solicitor)
For the Respondent:     Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                   Resumed hearing - DECISION AND REASONS


1.   An error of law was found in respect of the decision of F-tTJ  O'Hanlon
    which was set aside following my decision and reasons  dated  15.1.2019
    and in which I made a direction  for  a  resumed  hearing  to  consider
    evidence as to the risk arising from the perception of the  authorities
    rather than linked to actual political activities.  And  having  regard
    to the F-tT's finding that it was "possible"  that  the  appellant  had
    been arrested. It found  that  the  appellant  had  attended  political
    demonstrations, been detained and had been released from detention.

Background
2.     The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam.  The F-tT found  his  evidence
    credible and consistent that  he  attended  a  political  demonstration
    against the arrest of Tran Thi Xuan on  21st  October  2017,  that  was
    objectively confirmed to have taken place.  He  was  detained  for  one
    month and then released after payment of a bribe. Other than attendance
    at the one demonstration the F-tT found no evidence  of  any  political
    activity. The F-tT found that the evidence as to future  reporting  was
    not reasonably likely to be true [46].  In finding an error  of  law  I
    was satisfied that the F-tT was unclear as to whether or not  it  found
    that the appellant had been arrested  and  there  had  been  no  proper
    consideration of imputed political opinion.

Resumed hearing

3.   The appellant attended the  hearing  with  a  view  to  give  evidence.
    However there was no interpreter  available  despite  one  having  been
    booked to attend.  Both representatives were content to proceed on  the
    basis of submissions only.

4.   Mr Kandola indicated that his submissions were premised  on  a  finding
    that the appellant  had  been  arrested.  I  was  satisfied  given  the
    position adopted by Mr Kandola and agreed by Ms Muzira, that to proceed
    on that basis would create no unfairness to the appellant.

Submissions
5.   Mr Kandola contended that the appellant had  a  low  political  profile
    and the fact that he was released after detention showed that he was of
    no interest to the authorities.  There had been one single incident and
    no evidence of any continuing interest in the appellant.   He  was  not
    engaged in any political activity in the UK. It was  possible  that  he
    may be arrested by  the  authorities  but  this  would  not  amount  to
    persecution.

6.   Ms Munzira produced and relied on the upto date  CPIN  and  a  skeleton
    argument.  She submitted that the findings made by the F-tT [44] as  to
    the appellant's motives and attendance at the demonstration formed part
    of the overall consideration and that it followed that the  F-tT  ought
    to have made a clear finding that the appellant was arrested.   He  had
    been handing out posters and shouting in support which had brought  him
    to the attention of the authorities who had  treated  him  as  an  anti
    government protestor and beaten him.  The appellant had  been  required
    to report and had fled from Vietnam  and  failed  to  comply  with  the
    reporting conditions. This arguably was enough for the  authorities  to
    perceive him as a threat.  The background evidence showed  that  arrest
    was commonplace.  The recent CPIN dated September 2018 stated that  the
    risks were to politically active organisers.  It was acknowledged  that
    the appellant was a  low  level  activist  but  nevertheless  could  be
    perceived as being critical of the government in light of  his  history
    of arrest and failure to report.

Re making
7.    I go on to remake the decision based  on  the  unchallenged  facts  as
    found by the F-tT and a finding that the appellant was arrested at  the
    demonstration.  He is a low level activist.  He fled Vietnam.  The F-tT
    did not believe his evidence that he was required to  report.   I  have
    considered the recent CPIN dated September 2018,  US  State  department
    reports 2017 and the Amnesty International reports 2017 /2018 relied on
    by the appellant and in that context I  assess  whether  the  appellant
    faces  a  real  risk  of  harm  arising  from  any  perception  by  the
    authorities.   The background  material  highlighted  in  the  skeleton
    argument makes particular reference to the restrictions on  freedom  of
    expression, association and peaceful assembly and violations  of  human
    rights included arbitrary detention and arrest.  The more  recent  CPIN
    at 2.4.6 acknowledged that those who openly  criticise  the  Government
    and who protest are likely  to  attract  adverse  attention  but  their
    treatment will depend on  the  level  of  involvement,  activities  and
    profile.  It is stated that a low level protester would be  subject  to
    intimidation, may be arrested and released but this was not  sufficient
    to amount to persecution.  I accept that the appellant is a  low  level
    protester and has no profile as a political activist, but  he  has  had
    adverse interest in him by reason of his arrest and detention following
    attendance at a protest.  In such circumstances I am just satisfied, in
    the  light  of  the  Vietnamese  government's  active  suppression   of
    political opposition that he has met the lower standard to show that on
    return he faces a real risk  of  persecution  as  the  authorities  may
    perceive him as a threat given his past arrest  and  detention  of  one
    month which will place him in a position where enquiries will  be  made
    and accordingly he would be treated as someone outside the category  of
    persons who would be subject to intimidation only.


Decision
8.   I  remake  the  decision  of  the  F-tT  by  allowing  the  appeal   on
    asylum/protection grounds.




                               Signed                     Date 14.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






ANONYMITY ORDER


NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                     Date 14.3.2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
