
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08264/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 August 2018                             |On 26 September 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     I N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Patyna instructed by Migrant Legal Partnership,
Cardiff


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge I D Boyes promulgated on 20  September  2017,
    allowing Mr Neanaa's appeal against a decision made on 30  August  2017
    to refuse his protection and human rights claim, the Secretary of State
    having made a  decision  to  deport  him  under  Section  5(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 as his presence in  the  United  Kingdom  was  not
    conducive to the public good.

 2. The appellant's case is  that  he  has  taken  part  in  demonstrations
    against the ruling party and  the  president  in  Egypt  and  had  made
    numerous Facebook postings but later deleted those  on  advice  of  his
    brothers.  In summary, his case is that he has been sentenced to a term
    of imprisonment in his absence and a fine had been imposed  on  him  on
    the basis that  he  was  a  member  of  the  Muslim  Brotherhood.   The
    appellant's case is that he is not a member but that the family of  his
    late partner, F, had manufactured the  claims  in  order  to  have  him
    punished by the authorities.

 3. The Secretary of State's case is that the respondent simply  cannot  be
    believed.  It was noted that he had:-

      i) entered the United Kingdom on 16 April 2010 clandestinely, claiming
         to  be  a  Palestinian  national,  it  being   discovered   through
         fingerprint analysis that he had previously been  fingerprinted  in
         Greece and Germany;

     ii) absconded prior to his transfer to Greece after  his  asylum  claim
         had  been  refused  on  5  August  2010  pursuant  to  the   Dublin
         Regulations;

    iii) failed to attend a substantive asylum interview on 25 October 2010;



     iv) been convicted at Southwark Crown  Court  on  28  January  2016  of
         exposure and possessing an identity document - a  Belgian  identity
         card - with intent,  resulting  in  a  total  of  fourteen  months'
         imprisonment;

      v) failed to respond to the decision to deport  notice  served  on  16
         February 2016 resulting in a deportation order signed  on  4  April
         2016;

     vi) he signed a disclaimer on 19 April 2016 saying he wished to  return
         to Egypt under the Facilitated Returns Scheme but on  26  May  2016
         made an asylum claim on the basis that his return to Egypt would be
         contrary to the Refugee Convention and the European  Convention  on
         Human Rights.

 4. The Secretary of State also drew inferences adverse to  the  respondent
    from his failure to claim asylum in his current  identity  until  after
    his conviction and being served with a  deportation  decision  (26  May
    2016), having failed to explain  this  adequately;  and,  that  despite
    numerous opportunities to raise his claim of a fear of return,  he  had
    waited until the last possible minute and in light of his initial claim
    of  asylum  assuming  the  identity  of  a  Palestinian  national.  The
    Secretary of State did  not  accept  either  the  authenticity  of  the
    documents supplied.

 5. In addition,  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    respondent had a family life with his  partner,  Ms  T,  it  not  being
    accepted that the couple were married lawfully or that they were  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.  It was considered  also  that  he
    did not meet the private life requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    nor were there very compelling  circumstances  such  that  his  removal
    would be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations pursuant to  the
    Human Rights Convention.

 6. Judge Boyes concluded [29] that the respondent  had  succeeded  in  his
    claim for asylum, accepting that he would be likely  to  be  persecuted
    for a perceived membership of the  Islamic  Brotherhood.   The  reasons
    given are as follows:-

    "30. I reach this conclusion for the  following  reasons;  I  find  the
         version of events given by the appellant as  to  what  happened  to
         himself and Fatima to be truthful and credible.  I  do  not  accept
         the suggestion that the appellant made this up.  I so find that the
         appellant was open, honest and frank when  it  came  to  discussing
         this aspect of his claim and I did not reach  the  conclusion  that
         the appellant had embellished the version of events or 'gilded  the
         lily'.  The detail he gave, I was satisfied, was indicative of  the
         events occurring.  I rely upon the objective evidence  provided  by
         the appellant that honour killings are not uncommon".

 7. In dealing with the contrary factors the judge held as follows:-

    "34. I take  on  board  the  [respondent's]  convictions  for  a  false
         document offence however that  does  not  mean  that  automatically
         every document he provides or purports to rely upon is viewed  with
         a deep  sense  of  suspicion  or  scepticism.   The  [respondent's]
         reasons as to why these  documents  were  not  provided  sooner  is
         logical and I find it to be the truth.  If the respondent sought to
         believe that the documents were not genuine then further  enquiries
         could have been made.  Producing an excerpt from 'Wikipedia'  about
         forged documents is hardly reliable evidence.

    35.  The [respondent] does not come with clean hands to the Tribunal in
         seeking this protection but looking at matters in the  round  I  do
         not hold his criminal convictions against him as so damaging to his
         credibility that he is incapable  of  belief.   The  [respondent's]
         refusal to  accept  his  convictions  and  underlying  factors  are
         unattractive but not demonstrative of a  serial  liar.   There  are
         many reasons why a person may not accept or may not wish to  accept
         shameful behaviour.  That he is untruthful is one such  reason  but
         not the sole reason.  I have considered Section 8 of the Asylum and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 but do not hold
         that the delay of the previous lies against the appellant.  He  has
         provided satisfactory reasons for these matters".

 8. The judge did not reach any  conclusions  regarding  the  Human  Rights
    Convention having concluded that the appellant was entitled to asylum.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred:-

      i) in failing to give clear reasons why the respondent's  account  was
         accepted despite continuing to deny the offences of  which  he  had
         been convicted, the submission that the false ID card was  only  to
         get into nightclubs having been rejected absurd by  the  sentencing
         judge;

     ii) as, given the use of a false nationality  document  and  absconding
         and  the  dismissal  of  his  appeal  as  well  as  the   lack   of
         corroborative documents, the judge ought  to  have  considered  and
         given clear reasons for accepting credibility;

    iii) in effectively reversing the burden  of  proof  in  suggesting  the
         respondent should  make  further  enquiries,  contrary  to  Tanveer
         Ahmed.

10. On 19 January  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark  Davies  granted
    permission to appeal.

11. In considering the challenge to Judge Boyes' decision, I have borne  in
    mind R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982

12. The Secretary of State's case is both a challenge to  the  adequacy  of
    reasons and also, in effect, a perversity challenge.  The  respondent's
    case, as set out in the rule 24 notice and expanded upon in submissions
    is that the reasoning is adequate, and the decision comes nowhere  near
    the high threshold to amount to perversity.  It is also submitted  that
    if, the Secretary of State were correct on that account, then it  would
    never be possible for an appellant to overcome  credibility  challenges
    such as these.  I disagree with that point; the case is rather that the
    evidence in this case was so lacking that it could  not  have  overcome
    the damage caused to the respondent's credibility.

13. For the reasons set out below, and despite the submissions made by  the
    respondent to the contrary, I consider that Judge Boyes'  reasoning  in
    this case was inadequate given  the  many  serious  reasons  militating
    against the respondent's credibility.  Further,  his  conclusions  with
    regard to credibility are perverse  as  properly  understood  -  see  R
    (Iran) at [11].  In reaching these conclusions, I bear in mind there it
    is a high threshold to be met.

14. There is no indication that Judge Boyes  took  proper  account  of  the
    sentencing remarks of the sentencing judge who stated:-

         "I deal first with the offence  involving  the  identity  card.   I
         reject any suggestion that you obtained it  that  very  evening  in
         order to use it to gain entry to nightclubs.  In the event  you  no
         longer persist in that absurd basis of plea.

         ... The Belgian identity card that you had would have given you the
         chance to take employment in  this  country  and  to  have  freedom
         within the European Union.  So the improper intention which you had
         in relation to the possession of that  document  was  serious.   In
         relation to the offence of exposure, this involved you in  exposing
         your penis which was erect and masturbating in a crowded street  in
         front of many people including  children.   This  presence  in  the
         street is likely to be explained because they were making their way
         from the New Year's Eve fireworks display on the river.   The  fact
         that you were drunk makes the offence more serious".

15. It is of note that the respondent pleaded  guilty  and  in  consequence
    received a reduction  of  one-third  in  his  sentence.   Judge  Boyes'
    treatment  of  this  is  inadequate  as  it  fails  to  deal  with  the
    respondent's use of a false identity card and the finding of why he had
    used it. That he had just used it that evening was roundly rejected  by
    the sentencing judge. It  is  of  note  that  the  respondent,  despite
    dropping the basis of plea in the criminal  case,  sought  to  make  it
    again before Judge Boyes who nonetheless gave no proper  indication  as
    to why accepted the explanation, or why, if he did not, did not draw an
    adverse inference as to the respondent's credibility.

16. Judge Boyes' failed also to deal adequately with the  use  of  a  false
    identity to claim asylum, a deception in which the respondent persisted
    for a significant period.  What Judge Boyes did not  do  adequately  is
    set out the respondent's explanations for matters which inevitably went
    to his credibility and explain adequately why  he  accepted  them.   He
    does not, for example, set out when he accepts the  respondent  learned
    of the threats to him in Egypt, nor does he explain why  he  considered
    that the respondent's decision to make a voluntary return to Egypt  did
    not also undermine his credibility.

17. Viewed as a whole, I regret to say that the judge's  finding  that  the
    respondent was credible as to the core of his claim, when faced with so
    many serious credibility issues, is wholly inadequate and perverse.

18. For these  reasons,  I  find  that  the  judge's  positive  credibility
    findings did involve the making of an error of  law  and  must  be  set
    aside.  It follows from this that the positive findings with regard  to
    the reliability of the documentary evidence must also fall  given  they
    are predicated on the respondent's reliability as a witness.

19. Accordingly, I find that none of the  findings  of  fact  made  can  be
    sustained and that accordingly, it will be necessary for fresh findings
    of fact on all relevant issues.  It is therefore I consider appropriate
    to remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for  it  to  be  heard
    afresh by a different judge.

Notice of Decision

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and I set it aside.


      2) I remit the  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         decision on all issues.


      3) The appeal must not be heard by Judge Boyes.


      4) I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date 28 August 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
