
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08456/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28th March 2019                 |On 29th April 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                           MR THIERRY HABANABAKIZE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms S Rashid, Advocate, instructed by Neil Barnes,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Agnew dismissing an appeal on protection  and  human  rights
       grounds.

    2. The appellant is a national of Rwanda.  He claims to be  at  risk  of
       persecution in Rwanda after  agreeing  in  2017  to  be  one  of  600
       nominees of an unsuccessful presidential  candidate,  Diane  Rwigara.
       According  to  the  appellant,  in  October  2017  he  was  detained,
       questioned about his support for Diane Rwigara, and ill-treated.   He
       claimed his eight year old daughter was questioned at school by armed
       government agents.  The judge did not find the  appellant's  evidence
       credible.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  grounds
       which were said to be that in essence it was arguable that the  judge
       applied too high a standard of proof in finding the appellant was not
       credible.

Submissions

    4. At the beginning of the hearing it was pointed out that an additional
       bundle of country information  had  been  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant.  Mr Govan said that this evidence had not been before  the
       First-tier Tribunal and no application had been  made  to  admit  new
       evidence under  rule  15(2A).   Ms  Rashid  submitted  that  the  new
       evidence supported the submission that the First-tier Tribunal  erred
       in law.

    5. Ms  Rashid  submitted  that,  as  set  out  in  the  grounds  of  the
       application  for  permission  to  appeal,  the   judge   had   placed
       unreasonable reliance on the appellant's inability to remember dates.
        The findings of fact made  by  the  judge  were  not  based  on  the
       evidence.  She further submitted that the credibility  findings  were
       based on issues of which the appellant was not given fair notice  and
       was not given an opportunity to refute.

    6. Ms Rashid continued that at paragraph 15 of her  decision  the  judge
       accepted that if the appellant's account was true  he  faced  a  real
       risk of persecution.  The success  of  the  appeal  depended  on  the
       credibility of the appellant.

    7. On the particular issue  of  unreasonable  reliance  upon  dates,  Ms
       Rashid submitted that the judge  had  founded  upon  the  appellant's
       inability to remember the exact date he nominated  Mrs  Rwigara,  the
       date he first met Mrs Rwigara, the date his daughter  was  approached
       at school, and the date his daughter went to live with  his  brother.
       It was unreasonable to expect the appellant to remember these  dates,
       especially in the context of the turmoil he  has  described  and  his
       treatment in detention.  Reliance was based on the Australian case of
       Kopalapillai [1998] FCA 1128 and on Hathaway at page 85.

    8. Ms Rashid referred to  the  second  ground  of  the  application,  in
       relation to paragraph 29 of the decision,  where  the  judge  made  a
       finding without any basis in the evidence.  There was no evidence  on
       which to draw a reasonable inference and this was an error of law.

    9. Ms Rashid  said  that  the  third  ground,  at  paragraph  5  of  the
       application, concerned matters on which the judge  made  findings  at
       paragraph 33 of the decision without giving the appellant fair notice
       and a chance to respond.    Neither  at  the  interview  nor  at  the
       hearing was the appellant asked why he  took  his  daughter  back  to
       Rwanda after travelling with her to Goma in the DRC.  He was given no
       opportunity  to  address  this  issue.   The  newly  lodged   country
       information concerned the risk to young Rwandans in Goma, where  they
       may be accused of being rebels.  Procedural  fairness  required  that
       parties were given notice of the issues and an opportunity to address
       them, as stated in HA & TD [2010] CSIH 28 at paragraph 31.   In  that
       case an immigration judge raised an issue as to whether the signature
       on a document was genuine without giving the appellant notice of this
       issue and an opportunity to address it.  This was prejudicial to  the
       appellant.  At paragraph 36 of the decision the judge made an adverse
       credibility finding based on a matter about which the  appellant  had
       not been asked.  This concerned his  attempts  to  travel  to  Uganda
       through DRC.

   10. It was pointed out that this issue arose from  paragraph  42  of  the
       respondent's reasons for refusal letter.  Ms  Rashid  submitted  that
       the appellant responded to this at page 4 of his  witness  statement.
       He had not been asked about this  at  his  interview.   The  negative
       findings were made without a legal basis.  The judge applied too high
       a standard of proof.

   11. For the respondent Mr Govan said that he  opposed  the  appeal.   The
       grounds of the application for permission to appeal went further than
       suggesting the judge applied too  high  a  standard  of  proof.   The
       application  maintained  that  the  judge  made  findings   that   no
       reasonable judge could make.   There  was  a  high  threshold  for  a
       challenge based on rationality.

   12. Turning to the appellant's lack  of  knowledge  of  dates,  Mr  Govan
       submitted  that  if  this  was  the  only  reason  for  the  negative
       credibility findings then it could be said that too much  weight  had
       been placed upon this issue.  However, the judge  gave  a  number  of
       reasons why the appellant's evidence was not credible.   It  was  not
       irrational for the judge to rely on a failure to recall  dates.   The
       appellant was well-educated  and  these  were  dates  of  significant
       events.  At paragraphs 18-19 the judge records that the appellant was
       asked for clarification.  The judge  had  other  reasons  for  making
       adverse credibility findings, as set out at paragraphs 20, 22, 23 and
       25, which all formed part of her overall assessment.  Although it was
       said that the appellant was going through a turbulent  period,  there
       was nothing to show that the appellant was unable to recall other key
       facts in his account.   This was a matter for the judge and there was
       no error in her approach.  It had certainly not been shown  that  her
       decision was one which no reasonable judge would reach.

   13. Mr Govan then turned to the second ground,  at  paragraph  4  of  the
       application.  This was concerned with the findings made by the  judge
       from  paragraph  29  onwards  regarding  the  plausibility   of   the
       appellant's account of his attempts to leave Rwanda.   A  reading  of
       paragraph 29 showed the judge did not accept why  the  appellant  did
       not leave Rwanda immediately if he had the financial means to do  so.
       This finding was open to the  judge,  who  referred  to  two  further
       attempts to leave, described at page 4  of  the  appellant's  witness
       statement.  In one attempt the bus from Goma to Kampala  was  stopped
       by fighting.  If the appellant had not known on the first occasion he
       attempted to use this route that it was unsafe he knew by the  second
       occasion.   The  judge's  findings  in  relation  to  this  were  not
       unreasonable and a disagreement with those findings did not  disclose
       any error.

   14. Mr Govan continued that the third ground of the application concerned
       an issue which was raised in the refusal letter, as  pointed  out  by
       the judge at paragraph 36 of her  decision,  and  by  the  Presenting
       Officer at the hearing.   In  his  witness  statement  the  appellant
       sought to address the issues arising from  paragraphs  41-42  of  the
       refusal letter  but  failed  to  answer  the  questions  raised.  The
       appellant said his problems started in August 2017.  He travelled  to
       DRC on his own  passport.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  weigh  the
       evidence and make a finding against the  appellant.   The  issue  was
       clearly live at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   Overall
       the judge gave a detailed and  thorough  decision,  which  should  be
       upheld.

   15. In response Ms Rashid acknowledged that  the  events  for  which  the
       appellant could not remember the dates were significant but this  was
       a time of trauma and turmoil and the appellant was not  writing  down
       the dates.  He had no document to look at to remind  himself  of  the
       dates.

   16. In respect of the second ground, Ms Rashid said there was  a  problem
       with the second half of paragraph 29 of the decision, where the judge
       made an assumption which  was  not  based  upon  the  evidence.   The
       appellant's position was that he did not know the roads  were  unsafe
       before making the decision to make the journey through the  DRC.   It
       was speculation to say that on the second occasion he knew  the  road
       was unsafe.

   17. In relation  to  the  third  ground  Ms  Rashid  submitted  that  the
       appellant  had  explained  the  journeys   he   undertook   and   the
       circumstances of them.  Overall three errors were identified  in  the
       application  which  made  the  adverse  credibility  finding  unfair.
       Without those errors a different finding might have been  made.   The
       appropriate course was remittal.

Discussion

   18. If it were to  be  established  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal based her credibility  findings  on  matters  of  which  the
       appellant did not have notice and an  opportunity  to  explain,  then
       there would be unfairness in the decision.  In order to establish  if
       this occurred, however, it  is  necessary  to  look  at  the  judge's
       findings in the context both of her  decision  as  a  whole  and  the
       evidence and submissions which were before her.

   19. The contention which is made in this regard in  the  application  for
       permission to appeal is that the appellant did not have a  chance  to
       respond to the judge's observation to the effect that  the  appellant
       did not explain why he returned with his daughter from DRC to  Rwanda
       rather than remain in DRC and either make further attempts to  travel
       from there overland to Uganda or arrange to leave DRC by air.

   20. The starting point  for  the  judge's  analysis  of  the  appellant's
       attempts to leave Rwanda is to be  found  at  paragraphs  41  of  the
       respondent's refusal letter, quoted by the judge at paragraph  31  of
       her decision.  This passage in  the  refusal  letter  summarises  the
       appellant's account of how he left Rwanda by  air  on  31st  December
       2017 but points out that in the 2 months prior to this the  appellant
       left Rwanda on at least 5  occasions,  according  to  stamps  in  his
       passport.  At paragraph  37  the  judge  listed  the  stamps  in  the
       appellant's passport for the last three months of 2017.  At paragraph
       36 the judge pointed out  that  the  appellant  made  no  mention  of
       several unsuccessful attempts to travel with his daughter  to  Uganda
       until the respondent referred to the passport stamps in  the  refusal
       letter.

   21. From the point of view of fairness, it is significant that after  the
       issuing of the refusal letter on 22nd June  2018  the  appellant  had
       notice that his passport stamps from the last months of  2017  raised
       an issue affecting the credibility of his claim.  As Mr Govan pointed
       out in his submission, the appellant sought to address  this  in  his
       witness statement of 31st July 2018, in response to paragraphs  41-42
       of the refusal letter, but his  explanation  was  not  sufficient  to
       satisfy the judge.  The judge comments in some detail on the relevant
       part of this statement at paragraphs 32-36 of her decision.

   22. The judge records at paragraph 37 that  at  the  hearing  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal the appellant was shown a copy  of  his  passport
       containing the relevant stamps, as listed by the  judge.   The  judge
       then makes a finding at paragraph 38 to the effect that she  did  not
       find the appellant's explanations plausible or satisfactory of why he
       kept returning to Rwanda with his daughter when he feared persecution
       or death. The judge points out, in particular, that on 18th  December
       2017 the appellant and  his  daughter  succeeded  in  leaving  Rwanda
       overland to DRC with visas  in  their  possession  which  would  have
       allowed them to travel from DRC to the UK.  Then at paragraph 39  the
       judge questions how the appellant was able to  travel  backwards  and
       forwards from Rwanda to DRC while he was allegedly in  hiding.   This
       is a further point arising from the respondent's refusal letter.  The
       judge points out that as the appellant's travel to the UK was  funded
       by his brother-in-law in the UK, this funding could  have  been  made
       available to fly from DRC instead of from  Rwanda.   These  were  all
       findings or observations which the judge was entitled to make on  the
       evidence and submissions she received.

   23. One part of Ms Rashid's response to this on behalf of  the  appellant
       was to seek to lodge further  country  information  relating  to  the
       safety of Rwandans in DRC.  However, this evidence was  not  produced
       at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   There  was  evidence
       before the First-tier Tribunal about the road between Goma in DRC and
       the Ugandan border being  closed  owing  to  fighting  but  this  was
       presented as indiscriminate violence and not  described  as  directed
       specifically at the appellant or at Rwandans.   Where  the  appellant
       has failed to offer any explanation of his behaviour which  satisfied
       the First-tier Tribunal, it is not sufficient for  the  appellant  to
       seek to explain this to the Upper Tribunal on the  basis  of  country
       information of a general nature which was  not  previously  produced.
       Even if this country information were to be the subject of  a  proper
       application under rule 15(2A) and to be admitted, it does not at  all
       fill the gaps  left  by  the  inadequacies  in  the  appellant's  own
       evidence of his actions and intentions.

   24. The third ground of the application for permission  to  appeal  takes
       one paragraph, paragraph 33, from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and attempts to show it contains a finding based on  matters
       of which  the  appellant  had  no  notice,  without  looking  at  the
       surrounding part of the decision, where the emergence of  the  issues
       and the failed attempts by the  appellant  to  respond  to  them  are
       explored and analysed.  When the context and background  are  studied
       there is nothing at all unfair or improper about the comments made by
       the judge at paragraph 33.  This is an entirely  different  situation
       from that in HA & TD, relied upon by Ms Rashid, where the judge  made
       an adverse finding about a signature on a membership card without any
       issue relating to the signature having been raised  at  the  hearing.
       In this appeal the third ground does not disclose any error of law on
       the part of the First-tier Tribunal.  The position in this appeal  is
       much closer to the first case considered by the Inner House in  HA  &
       TD, where having heard the evidence the immigration judge found  that
       the appellant had not satisfactorily explained the questions  arising
       from it.

   25. I have  started  my  consideration  with  the  third  ground  of  the
       application because this was potentially the most significant, if  it
       was made out.  The other two grounds may be addressed more briefly.

   26. Turning to the second ground, it is said  that  the  judge  erred  at
       paragraph 29 of the decision by drawing an adverse inference from the
       appellant's repeated attempts to leave  Rwanda  overland  instead  of
       doing straightaway what he resorted to at the end of 2017, which  was
       bribing his way out through the airport  in  Rwanda.   Again,  it  is
       necessary to look at this finding in  the  context  I  have  set  out
       above.  The appellant failed to explain to the  Judge's  satisfaction
       why he made repeated journeys from Rwanda to DRC in last 3 months  of
       2017.  The judge recorded at paragraph 28  the  appellant's  evidence
       that he did not try to leave Rwanda by air until he decided he had no
       other choice.  Clearly the judge did not accept this explanation, for
       reasons which she sets out  in  succeeding  paragraphs.   The  second
       ground of the application for permission to  appeal  is  little  more
       than an attempt to make further  detailed  submissions  on  a  matter
       which was considered by  the  judge  and  on  which  the  judge  made
       properly reasoned findings based on the evidence.

   27. The first ground of the application concerns the judge's findings  on
       the appellant's inability to recall a number  of  significant  dates.
       On first reading this does seem to have some weight.  How  could  the
       appellant be expected to remember the precise dates of the events  in
       question?  On further examination, however, there  is  more  to  this
       than at first appears.  The judge recorded at paragraph 18 that there
       were occasions when the appellant "did not  answer  simple  questions
       directly but gave lengthy answers which were not to the  point".   At
       paragraph 19 the judge records that the  appellant  was  asked  about
       certain dates but answered by specifying only the  month.   It  seems
       that in response to direct questioning at the hearing  the  appellant
       provided no more than the month in which an event occurred,   he  did
       not give even a part of the month, for example either early or  late,
       or a day of the week, or whether towards the beginning or the end  of
       the week.  A similar issue arose at paragraph 22, when the  appellant
       was asked the date when his daughter was questioned at school.

   28. Ms Rashid suggested that the judge should have taken into account the
       trauma and turmoil experienced by the appellant.  Mr Govan  responded
       that this did not seem to have  affected  any  other  aspect  of  the
       appellant's recollection of events.   It  may  be  observed  that  in
       general recollection may be affected by the nature of events  or  the
       emotions surrounding them.   Nevertheless,  in  the  context  of  the
       evidence in this appeal the judge was entitled to find it  surprising
       or damaging that the appellant should be so vague about these  dates,
       for the reasons which she gave.

   29. I have examined the judge's findings and reasons in some detail.  The
       appellant disagrees with some of those findings  and  has  sought  to
       show that they were tainted by errors of law.  For the reasons I have
       given, I am not at all persuaded that this is so.  The Judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal assessed  the  evidence  before  her  fairly  and
       thoroughly and made findings which were based upon the  evidence  and
       supported by adequate and valid reasons.

Conclusions

   30. The making of the decision of the Fist-tier Tribunal did not  involve
       the making of an error of law.

   31. The decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

Anonymity

  The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I have
  not been asked to make such a direction and see no reason of substance
  for doing so.


M E Deans   23rd April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
