
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08453/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 August 2017                        |On 08 September 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    k h h
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Alban of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or court directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the appellant.  This direction  applies
    to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant claims to be from Syria and to be at risk on return.  The
    appellant claims to come from the northeast  corner  of  Syria  from  a
    place called Al-Malikiyah.  He  claims  to  come  from  the  Maktoumeen
    Group.  It is not disputed that he would be at risk on return to  Syria
    but the Secretary of State does not accept that he is from Syria.

 3. The appellant claims that he left Syria  on  29  January  2016  and  he
    arrived in the UK on 10  February  2016.   He  was  apprehended  on  11
    February 2016 as an illegal entrant.  On that  date,  he  also  claimed
    asylum.

 4. In a decision dated 28 July 2016, the Secretary of  State  refused  the
    appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under Art  8
    of the ECHR.  The Secretary of State did not accept that the  appellant
    came from Syria.  In  part,  the  Secretary  of  State  relied  upon  a
    language analysis report dated 28 June 2016 produced by an organisation
    called Verified AB.

 5. In that report, following a telephone interview, an assessment was made
    of the appellant's language.  Two conclusions were reached.  First,  as
    to him speaking the "SK" dialect of his  claimed  area  in  Syria  (the
    Derik district of the Al-Hasakar governate), the report concluded  that
    the results were "more likely than not inconsistent" with him  speaking
    that dialect (page 46 of the bundle).   On a scale running  from  minus
    three to plus three that is  a  result  of  "-2"  in  relation  to  the
    appellant speaking the dialect  of  the  region  from  which  he  came.
    However, the report goes on (at page 49 of the bundle)  to  state  that
    the results "more likely than not are consistent" with his  speaking  a
    dialect of Kurmanji  locating  him  in  the  dialect  region  of  "SEK"
    covering the Duhok province in  Iraqi  Kurdistan  (IKR).   On  a  scale
    running from minus three to plus three that is  a  result  of  "+1"  in
    relation to the appellant speaking the dialect of the region from which
    he came.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  linguistic
    report featured significantly in Judge Fowell's decision to dismiss the
    appellant's appeal on the basis that he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was from Syria, in particular the area from which he claimed.
     Judge Fowell dealt with the linguistic report at  paras  25  -  32  as
    follows:

         "25. I will start with the language report itself which is the main
             evidence relied on by the respondent.  For reasons  which  are
             unclear to me the full version of this report appears only  in
             the appellant's bundle at pages 40 to 59.  It is produced by a
             company called Verified AB.  The interview was conducted on 28
             June 2016 and the language  for  analysis  was  Kurmanji.   It
             lasted  36  minutes.   The  hypothesis  considered  was  quite
             specific - whether the language displayed was consistent  with
             the language community in Derik  district  of  the  Al-Hasakah
             governorate in Syria,  and  accordingly  to  the  summary  the
             phonological and morphological  features  were  noted  in  the
             appellant which generally deviated from the eastern Al-Hasakah
             variety, i.e. there were differences in both the sound and  in
             the structure and form of the words used.

         26.  The overall conclusion  was  that  the  language  was  from  a
             different Kurdish language  community,  (more  accurately  was
             'consistent with' this other community)  labelled  SEK,  which
             covers the Duhok province in  Iraqi  Kurdistan.   It  is  also
             called a Bahdini dialect.

         27.  It also stated that the 'morphological features'  noted  [i.e.
             structure and form] were partly  consistent  with  and  partly
             deviating from SEK.

         28.  The degree of confidence in these results as  expressed  on  a
             scale of  1  to  3,  with  3  showing  certainty,  2  'clearly
             suggesting' and 1 'somewhat suggesting'.  In the present  case
             the conclusion was that eth results clearly suggested that the
             appellant was not speaking the SK dialect, common to  the  Al-
             Hassakah Province and somewhat suggested that he  was  instead
             speaking the SEK dialect.

         29.  I have given careful consideration  to  this  report,  stating
             from a position of some scepticism that it would  be  possible
             to identify so precisely the dialect area.  Nevertheless,  the
             accompanying the guidance on the methods and limitations  used
             has addressed these  concerns.   It  explains  that  there  is
             essentially a collaboration between the native speaker analyst
             in each  test  and  their  linguistic  colleagues.   For  each
             dialect groups there are a number of features for  the  native
             speaker analyst to detect:

                  'As a rule, reports specifically recorded  occurrences  of
                  at least eight different features on at least two distinct
                  levels (e.g. phonological, morphological  and  syntactic).
                  Each  feature  is  described  by  comparison  with   other
                  relevant  adjacent  linguistic  communities.   After   the
                  description of  the  feature,  examples  of  the  person's
                  speech, which are drawn from a recording and which pertain
                  to the linguistic feature in question, are specified."

         30.  It is the identification of these features which distinguishes
             the relevant dialect and so it is only the  person  conducting
             the interview who needs to be a native speaker.  In this  case
             the analyst is described as a native speaker of Kurdish with a
             northern Kurdish dialect, and also have an Arabic  at  mother-
             tongue level.

         31.  Despite the criticisms made of this  exercise  therefore,  the
             conclusion that the language analysis 'clearly  suggests'  the
             appellant is not from the Al-Hassakah province has to be given
             due weight.  The rival hypothesis that his dialect is that  of
             southeast Turkey or northern Iraq is  weaker,  but  since  the
             area of lraq in question is part of the Independent  Kurdistan
             Region, in either of which areas he would be safe  to  return,
             there would clearly be an advantage to the appellant  claiming
             to come from the Derik area."

 7. At para 37, the judge concluded as follows:

         "37.  The  overall  position  therefore  is  that  there  is   firm
             linguistic evidence that the appellant is not  from  the  area
             claimed, that his answers in  respect  of  hospital  treatment
             reinforce those concerns to some extent, and there  is  in  my
             view no positive evidence, whether from his knowledge  of  the
             local area or by virtue of his supporting witnesses,  for  the
             reasons already given, which  I  find  affect  that  view.   I
             cannot therefore be satisfied in the  circumstances,  even  to
             the lower standard, that the appellant's  account  is  correct
             that he is from Syria.  It follows that all his  claims  based
             on the risk to return to Syria must be dismissed."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds, in particular that the judge had been wrong to place
    the weight that he did on the linguistic report as the expertise of the
    annalist was not established.  Neither expert purported  to  speak  the
    dialect which would be appropriate for the area  where  he  claimed  to
    live in northeast Syria.  Reliance is  also  placed  upon  the  Supreme
    Court's decision in SSHD v MN and KY [2014] UKSC  30  where  the  court
    considered the weight to be given to  linguistic  reports  produced  by
    Sprakab.

 9. In addition, the grounds  argue  that  the  judge  failed  properly  to
    consider the whole of the evidence, including the points in  favour  of
    the appellant concerning his knowledge and wrongly counted against  the
    appellant matters such that he did not know the place of his birth  and
    that, contrary to the objective evidence, some treatment was  available
    to Maktoumeen in Syria  when  he  had  said  his  mother  had  obtained
    treatment.

10. On 29 March 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Nightingale)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.

11. The respondent filed a rule 24 response  but,  in  form  only,  as  the
    writer did not have the determination available.

Discussion

12. Ms Alban relied on her  skeleton  argument  which,  in  large  measure,
    reflected the grounds of appeal.  She  took  me  through  the  language
    report and  the  background  of  the  analysts  which,  she  submitted,
    demonstrated that they lacked the expertise in the appellant's  claimed
    dialect.  Nowhere in the report was the required  expertise  explained.
    Further, she argued that the report does not  grapple  with  the  point
    that the appellant lived very close to the border with Iraq  and  what,
    if any, impact that might have on his dialect.

13. Mr Diwncyz, who represented the Secretary of  State  acknowledged  that
    the linguistic report was  not  the  strongest  upon  which  the  judge
    principally based his decision.  The negative rating of "-2"  that  the
    language analysis "clearly suggests" the results are "most  likely"  to
    be "inconsistent" with him  speaking  the  dialect  from  the  area  he
    claimed to come, taken together  with  the  "+1"  conclusion  that  the
    analysis "somewhat suggests" that the results  are  "more  likely  than
    not" consistent with him speaking a dialect from Duhok province in  the
    IKR, were results which more might have been hoped for if  relied  upon
    as a primary reason for disbelieving the appellant's place  of  origin.
    Mr Diwncyz, candidly, said he was not making a concession on this point
    relied upon by the appellant, but it  did  make  the  judge's  decision
    questionable given the focus of his reasoning.

14. In MN and KY, the Supreme Court acknowledged that weight could be given
    to expert linguistic analysis produced  by  the  Sprakab  organisation.
    However, central to that view was that the evidence considered  by  the
    Upper Tribunal was "sufficient to demonstrate acceptable expertise  and
    method" (see [51] per Lord  Carnwath).   Here,  the  expertise  of  the
    analysts is to be found in their qualifications and experience at pages
    56 -  59 of the appellant's bundle.

15. The expertise of the analyst dealing with an assessment of whether  the
    appellant speaks the dialect from the area from which he claims to come
    is at page 59 of the bundle.  There analyst "1642" is stated  to  be  a
    "native speaker of Kurdish  (Afrin  variety  of  Kurmanji)  and  speaks
    Arabic (Aleppo City dialect) at mother-tongue level."   His  experience
    is that he has been commissioned by Verified AB  in  language  analysis
    since 2005 and that he has undergone testing to  test  his  ability  to
    assess "other  linguistically  adjacent  varieties  than  their  native
    dialect".  The analyst's place of origin and where  he  was  raised  is
    said to be Aleppo City, Syria with relatives in Afrin.

16. As Ms Alban submitted, it is clear from the report that that linguistic
    background is not that claimed by the appellant himself.  He does  not,
    as is clear from the statement of the "linguistic  community"  in  para
    3.2 of the report (at page 43) purport to speak any dialect or  variety
    of Kurdish referred to as the "Afrin variety".  He  purports  to  speak
    the dialect of SK.  Ms Alban submitted that the  closest  annalist  was
    "1608" but he was the interviewer and did not prepare either section  3
    of the report  (dealing  with  the  appellant's  claimed  language)  or
    section 4 (dealing with an hypothesis that he  spoke  the  dialect  SEk
    from the Duhok province in the IKR).

17. I do not take the view that the report warranted no weight being placed
    upon it.  As the judge pointed out in para 29, the methodology  is  set
    out whereby comparisons are drawn with linguistic communities  adjacent
    to that claimed by the individual.  The evidence of  the  two  analysts
    was, according to  the  information  concerning  their  competence,  in
    particular at page 59 in relation to "1642", entitled to  some  weight.
    However, and Mr  Diwncyz  acknowledged  this,  the  strength  of  their
    conclusions did not fall at the  extremes  of  the  attribution  ranges
    between "-3" and "+3".

18. I am also persuaded by Ms Alban's submission that the expertise of  the
    analyst  is  relevant  in  assessing  what  weight  to  give  to  their
    conclusions.  That follows from what was said in MN and KY.  Ms Alban's
    submission was that their  expertise  was  not  established  since,  in
    particular in relation to analyst  "1608"  to  assess  the  appellant's
    language by reference to  his  claimed  area,  he  did  not  speak  the
    relevant dialect of SK.  The issue  of  expertise  was,  in  itself,  a
    matter of evidence as the Supreme Court pointed out in MN and  KY.   No
    material was put before me as  to  whether  an  analyst,  in  order  to
    function effectively, need be  a  speaker  or  native  speaker  of  the
    relevant dialect.  I am simply unable to reach any conclusion  on  that
    on the material before me.  However, no material was before  the  judge
    either and he placed considerable indeed, on a  fair  reading,  central
    weight upon the conclusions of the report.   Without  further  evidence
    and assistance on the issue of expertise, the judge was not entitled to
    do so.

19. Consequently, for these reasons and in the light of the position  taken
    by Mr Diwncyz on behalf of the Secretary of State, I am satisfied  that
    the judge materially erred in law in giving central importance  to  the
    language report in reaching its adverse finding.

20. I would also add that I accept Ms Alban's submission that  the  judge's
    reasoning in relation to a number of other matters  also  adds  to  the
    unsustainability of his  findings.   In  particular,  he  rejected  the
    supporting evidence of a witness who claimed to know the appellant from
    his  home  village  on  the  basis  that  it  was,  in  effect,  wholly
    implausible that he would have met him in Swansea.  That is simply  not
    implausible.

21. Further, he doubted the reliability of the witness's  evidence  because
    it is claimed, although much  older,  he  became  acquainted  with  the
    appellant who was 11 or 12.   That  fails  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's evidence that the reason  that  he  knew  the  witness  was
    because he was friends with the witness's cousin who was also a  child.



22. Also, in para 37, which I have set out above, the judge  expressed  the
    view that there was "no positive evidence" concerning his knowledge  of
    the local area.  That, with respect to the judge,  is  contradicted  by
    his own finding in para 33 that the appellant's "knowledge of the local
    geography is something capable of supporting his account".

23. Further, doubting the appellant's credibility because he was unable  to
    recall the details  of  his  birth  is,  with  respect,  self-evidently
    impermissible.   As  Mr  Diwncyz  acknowledged,   the   appellant   was
    undoubtedly at his birth, but he could not be expected to know any more
    than his parents had told him.

24. Finally, in relation to the appellant's claim that his parents had been
    able to obtain medical treatment, that was not, in  fact,  contrary  to
    the background evidence since  emergency  treatment  was  available  to
    Maktoumeen.  It is not clear to me precisely why, therefore in para  34
    of his determination,  the  judge  counted  against  the  appellant  in
    assessing his credibility that his mother had been  treated  for  heart
    disease in a state hospital.

25. For all these reasons, the judge materially erred in  law  in  reaching
    his adverse finding in respect of  the  appellant's  claimed  place  of
    origin and therefore in concluding that he was not at risk on return to
    Syria as his country of nationality.  The judge's decision cannot stand
    and is set aside.

Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.   That  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.





26. It was common ground between the parties that if the decision could not
    stand then the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

27. Having regard to the nature and consent of fact-finding  required,  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
    the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo  rehearing  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Fowell.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            7 September 2017








