
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08109/2016
                                                               PA/09067/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 May 2019                        |On 5 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                    Mr AN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, instructed by Wilsons Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan, appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated  11  August
    2016 refusing his application for asylum and humanitarian protection in
    the UK.  His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Loke  in
    a decision promulgated on 14 November 2018  and  he  appealed  to  this
    Tribunal with permission.  On 6 March 2019 the decision was  set  aside
    in its entirety by Upper Tribunal Judge  Rimington,  that  decision  is
    appended hereto.

 2. At the resumed hearing on 1 May 2019 we had the  following  documentary
    evidence before us:

       . Home Office bundle;


       . Appellant's consolidated bundle (979 pages);


       . Respondent's written submissions;


       . Appellant's skeleton argument;


       . Copy of  a  'letter  of  concern'  dated  26  June  2017  from  the
         appellant's solicitors to London Borough of Dagenham and Barking in
         relation to the  age  assessment  carried  out  in  September  2015
         submitted by Ms Foot.


 3. The appellant did not give oral evidence based on advice from  Ms  Foot
    in light of the recommendation by Dr Fairweather. We heard  submissions
    from Mr Melvin and Ms Foot and we reserved our decision.

The background

 4. The appellant arrived in the UK on 11 December 2014. He claimed  to  be
    13 years old with a date of birth  of  approx  May/June  2001.  An  age
    assessment carried out by London Borough of  Barking  and  Dagenham  in
    2015 concluded that his date  of  birth  was  10  December  1998.   His
    application for asylum was refused  on  15  October  2015  but  he  was
    granted Discretionary Leave to Remain as an unaccompanied  minor  until
    11 February 2016. He made an application for further  leave  to  remain
    which was refused on 11 August 2016 and is the subject of this  appeal.
    The appellant's  appeal  was  heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 14 November 2017, however that decision was set aside by
    the Upper Tribunal and remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  the
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Loke whose  decision  was
    set aside on 6 March 2019.

 5. The appellant's claim for asylum is based on  his  fear  of  return  to
    Afghanistan because of his imputed political opinion as the  son  of  a
    prominent Taliban member.  He claims that his father is a high  ranking
    member of the Taliban who told the appellant that he would force him to
    fight in 'jihad' against the Afghan  security  forces  and  becoming  a
    Mujahedeen. His mother was present when this  conversation  took  place
    and later told him that she did not want him to die so she was going to
    take him to a safe place. He says that he was taken to the home of  his
    maternal uncle to hide from his father and the next day he was taken to
    an agent who organised his journey. He claims that he  cannot  relocate
    within Afghanistan on return as his father would find  him  because  he
    has a network of connections in the area. He also claimed that he would
    be at risk of recruitment generally by the Taliban as a  young  Pashtun
    male of fighting age.  He further claimed  he  faced  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm contrary to Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive
    2004/83/EC in Logar which suffered  from  indiscriminate  violence  and
    that his removal would breach his rights under Articles 2, 3 and  8  of
    the ECHR.  The appellant claims that he has no relatives in  Kabul  and
    has been unable to trace the whereabouts of any of his relatives  owing
    to the suspension of activities in Afghanistan by the  Red  Cross.  The
    Secretary of State disputed his account of events  in  Afghanistan  and
    submits that there is a sufficiency of protection for the appellant  in
    Afghanistan and that he could internally relocate.  The respondent does
    not accept that the appellant's return to Afghanistan would  give  rise
    to a real risk of serious harm or a breach of his rights under  Article
    8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The Law

 6. The burden of proof in all these matters is  upon  the  appellant.   He
    must show that there is a real risk of:

    (a)    being persecuted for one of the five reasons set out in the 1951
         Refugee Convention.  A refugee is defined in Article 1A (2) of  the
         Convention as any person  who  owing  to  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality,  membership
         of a particular social group or political opinion, is  outside  the
         country of his/her nationality and is unable, or owing to such fear
         is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country;


    (b)     suffering  serious  harm  if  returned  to  Afghanistan   under
         paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules.  A  person  will  not  be
         granted Humanitarian Protection where s/he qualifies as a refugee.


 7. Article 2 of the  ECHR  protects  the  right  to  life  and  Article  3
    prohibits  torture,  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment.
    Article 8 provides that everyone has a right to respect for his private
    and family life, his  home  and  his  correspondence.  It  is  for  the
    respondent to demonstrate that  any  interference  with  the  right  to
    private and family life under Article 8 is in accordance with the  law,
    corresponds to a pressing social  need  and  is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim pursued.

The hearing

 8. At the outset of the hearing Ms Foot submitted the letter from Wilsons'
    solicitors in relation to the age assessment  conducted  in  2015.  She
    accepted that there had been no formal challenge to the age  assessment
    but referred to a complaint made to the appellant's  former  solicitors
    about how the case was handled. She accepted that  the  starting  point
    for the appellant's age must be the age assessment and that the  appeal
    must proceed on the basis that the appellant is now  20  years  old  in
    accordance with that age assessment. However she submitted that the age
    assessment should be given very limited weight.

 9. The appellant did not give oral evidence at the hearing, Ms  Foot  said
    that this was in light of  the  recommendation  of  Dr  Fairweather  at
    paragraph 8.11.3 of her report dated 10 October  2018  where  she  said
    that in a Tribunal hearing the appellant will 'inevitably present in an
    anxious and emotionally overwhelmed state' and that in this  state  'he
    cannot give reliable evidence and therefore,  it  would  be  preferable
    that his paper submissions are relied upon'. Ms Foot accepted that this
    means that less weight can be given  to  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    general as he would not be subjected to cross-examination. However  she
    submitted that the probative value of oral evidence is likely to be  of
    limited weight in this case. In these circumstances she said  that  she
    had decided not to call the appellant to give oral evidence.

10. Ms Foot outlined the appellant's case. She said that he is  from  Logar
    province; he claims that his  father  was  a  member  of  the  Taliban,
    although he is not sure of his father's position she submitted that  it
    is not reasonable to expect him to be clear about this.  She  submitted
    that it is the appellant's account that his father  threatened  him  to
    join the Taliban and that, on the advice of  his  mother  and  maternal
    uncle, he fled to the UK for his own safety. She submitted that  if  he
    returned to his home area he will be forcibly recruited  or  harmed  by
    the Taliban or his father and that he is at risk from  the  Afghanistan
    authorities because  of  his  association  with  the  Taliban.  In  her
    submission he is also at risk as a  vulnerable  young  person  with  no
    family  members.  She  submitted  that  the  Red  Cross  has  suspended
    operations in Afghanistan (see p360 of the appellant's bundle) and that
    the appellant is afraid for his family if tracing  is  undertaken,  the
    appellant claims that he has had no contact from his family in his home
    area. She said  that  the  appellant's  family  cannot  offer  him  any
    protection from recruitment by the Taliban. She highlighted that he was
    a child when the material events occurred and that his case  should  be
    assessed in the round and on the basis of the background evidence.  She
    submitted that the appellant's account is credible in light of his PTSD
    symptoms, the difficulties he faces, his age at the  time  of  material
    events and the expert evidence.  She  submitted  that  his  account  is
    plausible and any apparent minor inconsistencies can be  explained  and
    the core his account is  credible.  She  submitted  that  any  apparent
    inconsistencies should be resolved in the appellant's favour. In  terms
    of risk she submitted that the appellant is at risk of  recruitment  by
    the Taliban because of his father and the fact that he is a  young  man
    of fighting age. She submitted that he is at risk of harm as  a  result
    of indiscriminate violence in his home area.

11. Ms Foot submitted that the  appellant  cannot  relocate  internally  in
    light of the factors in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT
    00118 (IAC).  She highlighted the appellant's mental health  struggles.
    She said that the case of AS is under consideration  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal and that she understands that it is likely that the decision  in
    AS will be reheard. She cautioned against making any adverse inferences
    from the findings in the previous two decisions as both  had  been  set
    aside.

12. Mr Melvin relied on his written submissions and  the  two  Reasons  for
    Refusal letters. He submitted  that  this  case  turns  on  the  expert
    reports. He took issue with the medical reports from Dr Fairweather and
    the expert report from Dr Foxley. He submitted that the  appellant  has
    had no medical treatment in the UK. He submitted that Dr  Fairweather's
    conclusions were based  on  what  the  appellant  told  her  about  the
    domestic violence in his home and his traumatic journey to the  UK.  In
    his submission the Tribunal should be wary of the assertions made by Dr
    Fairweather as the conclusions were based  purely  on  the  appellant's
    immigration status which caused him anxiety when he attended her office
    and the solicitors' offices. In  his  submission  the  later  diagnosis
    changes little from the first. He submitted that little  weight  should
    be given to the medical evidence as it stands alone in this appeal.  He
    submitted that it is difficult for the Tribunal to assess the  evidence
    in these circumstances where the appellant is not giving  evidence  and
    where Dr Fairweather says that the appellant's previous evidence cannot
    be relied on in circumstances where the burden is on the  appellant  to
    prove his case. He submitted that the Tribunal is being asked  to  find
    that the appellant's evidence is broadly plausible. However in terms of
    credibility he submitted that the appellant gave the impression in  his
    witness statement that  his  father  made  a  sudden  choice  that  the
    appellant would be a fighter with him and that  his  mother  and  uncle
    quickly raised the funds and arranged for him to leave the country. Yet
    in his submission this conflicted with the appellant's account that  he
    had never been allowed to attend mainstream school,  only  attending  a
    Madrassa, and he had  been  taught  to  handle  weapons  and  in  these
    circumstances it was not a surprise that he was expected  to  become  a
    fighter, the appellant's account that this was a sudden decision is not
    credible. He submitted that there is a  further  inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's account as to when and how he was taken from home. Further,
    he pointed out that the there is no indication as to  how  the  finance
    was raised to fund his journey. He submitted that it would be  expected
    that the appellant would have had contact with his family to  let  them
    know that he had arrived safely in the UK. Mr Melvin submitted that the
    appellant's claim that his father was a Commander  in  the  Taliban  is
    undermined by the fact that the expert could not find  anyone  of  that
    name nor could he find  the  appellant's  village.  He  relied  on  his
    written submissions  in  relation  to  the  medical  evidence  and  the
    expert's report.

13. Mr Melvin accepted that the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  AS  is
    under challenge in the Court of Appeal but submitted that the  Tribunal
    should rely on it as the current country guidance. He submitted that it
    is safe for the  appellant  to  return  to  Afghanistan  based  on  the
    following factors - he is now aged 20, he misled the Home Office as  to
    his age on arrival; he did not challenge the age assessment; he  is  in
    relatively good health; he has been living independently for at least 2
    years; according to his last witness statement he was engaging  with  a
    mechanics course at a local college and was learning English,  this  is
    inconsistent with Dr Fairweather's assertion that he  is  not  engaging
    with education; as considered in AS there is no risk  as  a  result  of
    Westernisation or recruitment to the Taliban.  He  submitted  that  the
    appellant could return to his home area and  to  the  family  who  paid
    substantial funds for his journey to the  UK.  He  submitted  that  the
    appellant would be eligible for funds from the UK authorities to enable
    him to reintegrate and settle on return to Afghanistan.

14. In response Ms Foot submitted that, although she accepts that there are
    resettlement packages available, there is no  evidence  from  the  Home
    Office as to what resettlement package is available to this  appellant.
    She submitted that Dr Fairweather's report explains the apparent  minor
    discrepancies in the appellant's account and that it  is  necessary  to
    ask whether any apparent discrepancies are explained by the appellant's
    PTSD symptoms. She relied on paragraph 8.10 of Dr  Fairweather's  first
    report where she describes the effects of psychological distress on the
    appellant's ability  to  recall  exact  dates.  In  her  submission  Dr
    Fairweather's assessment does not mean that  everything  the  appellant
    has said to date cannot be relied on, instead it  means  that  what  he
    would say in the court environment would be of limited probative value.
    In her submission the asylum interview and witness statements should be
    read together and consideration should be given  to  assessing  whether
    any inconsistencies are material and whether they could be explained by
    the appellant's symptoms. She submitted that weight should be  give  to
    Dr Fairweather's report as evidence of  the  appellant's  symptoms.  Ms
    Foot submitted that it is not relevant whether the appellant's father's
    decision that the appellant should join the Taliban came as a surprise,
    the issue is that this is the point at which he was  at  risk  and  his
    family arranged for his departure. In her submission  little  turns  on
    his account that he has not been in contact with his family to  confirm
    his safe arrival. She submitted that  it  is  understandable  that  the
    appellant would be afraid that tracing  through  the  Red  Cross  would
    place the appellant at risk. In any event, in her submission  there  is
    no evidence of contact with the family and in 2017 the Red  Cross  were
    not tracing in Afghanistan (page 361 appellant's bundle), she  accepted
    that there is no evidence as to whether that is still the case.

15. In Ms Foot's submission the appellant says in his most  recent  witness
    statement that he attends college but that he cannot cook and  that  he
    finds  it  difficult  to  study  due  to  intrusive  thoughts.  In  her
    submission this is consistent with Dr Fairweather's assessment that  he
    is likely to struggle on a  daily  basis.  She  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant is living in supported accommodation  under  Pathfinder  care
    (page 353). She accepted that there has been no challenge  to  the  age
    assessment but submitted that the assessment is not Merton-compliant as
    it placed a lot of weight on his demeanour  and  she  referred  to  the
    letter of complaint and submitted that little weight should  be  placed
    on the report insofar as it is relevant to the asylum appeal.  Ms  Foot
    accepted that there is limited weight to be attached to  the  issue  of
    Westernisation as set  out  in  AS.  However  she  submitted  that  the
    appellant is at risk from the Taliban in Logar province  (page  231-233
    appellant's bundle), she  also  submitted  that  there  is  a  risk  of
    exploitation from criminal gangs. In light of the security situation in
    Logar the appellant is at risk from 15(c) harm there. If it is accepted
    that the appellant is at risk in his home area Ms Foot  submitted  that
    it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  him  to  relocate  internally   in
    Afghanistan, she relied on head note (iii) in AS and  highlighted  that
    the appellant has no family support in Kabul; he  is  vulnerable  as  a
    result of PTSD symptoms and the likely worsening of those  symptoms  on
    return without support; the fact that  he  did  not  go  to  school  in
    Afghanistan. In the alternative she submitted that the appellant  comes
    within paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules in  that  that
    there are very significant obstacles to his reintegration in  his  home
    area and in Kabul.

Our Findings

16. We have taken account of the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  on  Child,
    vulnerable  adults  and  sensitive  appellants.    In   assessing   the
    appellant's evidence we take account of the fact that he  was  a  minor
    when the alleged events occurred and  when  he  travelled  to  the  UK,
    entered the UK and when he was  interviewed  by  the  Home  Office.  He
    turned 18 in December  2016.  We  also  take  account  of  the  medical
    evidence and the fact that the appellant has been diagnosed  with  PTSD
    symptoms and mood symptoms (8.2.1 of  Dr  Fairweather's  report  of  10
    October 2018). In assessing the credibility of his account we also take
    account of Dr  Fairweather's  assessment  that,  as  a  result  of  his
    symptoms, the appellant would be unable to give reliable oral  evidence
    at a Tribunal hearing.

17. We take account of the age assessment as  determining  the  appellant's
    age. We note the letter from the appellant's solicitors dated  26  June
    2017 raising concerns about the assessment. However  Ms  Foot  accepted
    that  the  age  assessment  has  not  been  challenged.  There  is   no
    alternative evidence before us addressing the appellant's claimed  age.
    Accordingly in our view it  is  appropriate  to  accept  that  the  age
    assessment determines the appellant's age. However,  in  light  of  the
    concerns raised about some of the issues raised in the  age  assessment
    we do not take account of the report in our assessment  of  credibility
    in relation to the appellant's asylum claim.

18. In assessing credibility we have  considered  the  appellant's  account
    given in his interviews and witness statements. We have not  considered
    the determinations of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Moore  or  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Loke in reaching our decision.  We  also  disregard  the
    part of the witness statement of 16  May  2017  dealing  with  the  age
    assessment and the section of the appellant's witness  statement  dated
    10 October 2018 addressing the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Moore.

19. In her report of 21 June 2017 Dr Fairweather described the  appellant's
    account of witnessing domestic violence  at  home  perpetrated  by  his
    father against his mother as well as against him and his  siblings.  He
    described how he suffered from headaches. She said that objectively the
    appellant 'seemed a little low' (para 7.9.3). According to  the  report
    the appellant's key worker  told  Dr  Fairweather  that  those  at  his
    supported accommodation had no concerns about  the  appellant's  mental
    health  but  were  aware  that  he  was  at  risk  of  presenting  with
    difficulties, he observed that the appellant was able  to  get  up  for
    college as needed and  he  did  not  identify  any  concerns  with  the
    appellant's mood (paragraph 7.10.2). In the 2017 report Dr  Fairweather
    concluded that the appellant presented with  a  number  of  psychiatric
    symptoms which caused him a 'low level of impairment and distress'  and
    the symptoms were post traumatic in nature (8.2.1). She  said  that  he
    did not meet the  full  diagnostic  criteria  for  PTSD  but  that  the
    symptoms cause him subjective distress particularly at night.  Although
    it is said that he reported a number of mood symptoms, which would  not
    meet the threshold for a  diagnosis  for  a  depressive  disorder,  but
    seemed persistent  in  nature  and  meant  that  he  is  vulnerable  to
    developing a depressive disorder if he experienced stressors, and, that
    these are also relevant when  considering  his  ability  to  cope  with
    significant changes in his circumstances, such as  enforced  return  to
    Afghanistan.

20. In her 2017 report  Dr  Fairweather  considered  that  the  appellant's
    'qualifying exposure to trauma in his reported history is  the  chronic
    exposure to domestic violence he witnessed between his parents  from  a
    child'; he also reported being beaten on his journey to the UK (8.2.2).
    She went on to conclude that the most likely cause of  the  appellant's
    PTSD symptoms are the traumatic events in  his  history  including  the
    reported chronic  domestic  violence  in  his  childhood,  a  difficult
    journey to the UK and the development disruption of his adolescence  by
    these events and not being cared for by close family now  (8.3.1).  She
    considered that a significant perpetuating factor for his current  PTSD
    symptoms is his uncertain immigration status with the threat of  return
    to Afghanistan (paragraph 8.3.2). We note that she  did  not  attribute
    his symptoms to a fear of recruitment to the Taliban.

21. In her report of 10 October 2018 Dr Fairweather  concluded  again  that
    the appellant seemed 'a little low' (7.8.3)  and  considered  that  the
    current psychiatric diagnosis remained similar to that in  her  earlier
    report in that he  presented  with  PTSD  symptoms  and  mood  symptoms
    although there appeared to be an increase in PTSD symptoms. However  he
    remained sub-diagnostic threshold but if there was any deterioration in
    his state it  was  more  likely  than  not  that  he  would  meet  full
    diagnostic criteria for PTSD. She said that his worsened state  related
    to his perceived increased threat of return following his  unsuccessful
    appeal in the First-tier Tribunal in June 2017 (8.2.1). Dr  Fairweather
    again said that the factors relevant to her assessment were the chronic
    domestic violence he witnessed between his parents as a child  and  the
    physical abuse he suffered from his father as well as  the  reports  of
    beatings on his journey to the UK (8.2.2).

22. We find it significant that the  appellant  did  not  mention  domestic
    violence in his witness statement of 16 May  2017.  He  said  that  his
    father beat him outside and inside the home but made  no  reference  to
    him  beating  his  mother  or  siblings  (paragraph  46-48).  This   is
    particularly significant given that the witness statement is  extremely
    detailed, running to 72 paragraphs, it was  taken  by  his  solicitors,
    therefore it is presumed that he was relaxed and able to  give  a  full
    statement, and it was translated to him.

23. In his SEF interview on 17 June 2015 the appellant said that before  he
    left Afghanistan he asked his mother what his father does and she  told
    him that he was a member of the Taliban (Q76) but he  went  on  to  say
    that when he was growing up he knew that his father was going to  fight
    other people and that he was a member of the Taliban.  In  his  witness
    statement dated 16 May 2017 the appellant said that he saw  his  father
    congregating with other Taliban members in an area by his home and that
    his father was always armed and that he thought his father was  a  high
    ranking  officer  because  he  seemed  to  be  addressing  the   others
    (paragraph 15).

24. In his witness statement dated 9 February 2015 the appellant said  that
    his father is a member of the Taliban. He said that his  father  has  a
    high position and that he would take the appellant to become a jihadist
    when he was older (paragraphs 12, 16). In his interview  he  said  that
    his father had said this to him recently (Q81). There is some  conflict
    in the appellant's account as to when his father told him this. However
    in his SEF statement the appellant said that he saw his father training
    and that he told the appellant about it.

25. However Dr Foxley was unable to locate the appellant's village in  Azra
    district or any specific reference to the appellant's father (paragraph
    44, 46 report of 4 March 2017). He said  that  the  appellant's  father
    'looks to be a local, low-level member of a small unit of local Taliban
    fighters. As such he plausibly has some standing within the  community,
    particularly if there is some support for  the  Taliban  in  the  local
    village'.  In his report of 10 October 2018 Dr Foxley said that  it  is
    possible that the appellant's father is prominent in his local area but
    largely unknown across the country and beyond and he found it plausible
    that the appellant believed his father to be more powerful  within  the
    Taliban than the reality (paragraph 34).

26. We take account of all of the  evidence  before  us  in  light  of  the
    appellant's  age  and  mental  health  symptoms.  We  accept  that  the
    appellant is from the Logar province as claimed. There is a conflict in
    his evidence as to domestic violence within  the  family  home  but  we
    accept to the  lower  standard  that  it  did  occur  as  claimed.  The
    appellant's account as to his father's activities with the  Taliban  is
    lacking in detail. However he has been largely consistent in his  claim
    that his father was involved with the Taliban. We take into account the
    evidence from Dr Foxley and we find that  the  appellant's  father  may
    have been a local, low-level member of a small unit  of  local  Taliban
    fighters and that the appellant may have thought he was more  prominent
    than he was.  We  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  that  his  father
    expected him to join the Taliban and that he may have been  under  some
    pressure or expectation from his father to join  the  Taliban  locally.
    However there is limited evidence of forcible or coerced recruitment to
    the Taliban and it is not the appellant's account that  he  refused  to
    join or that  his  father  threatened  him  if  he  refused  to  become
    involved.

27. It is unclear what  the  consequence  would  be  to  the  appellant  of
    refusing to join the Taliban. Dr Foxley based his assessment as to  the
    appellant's risk of recruitment initiatives on the assumption that  the
    appellant's father is a local Taliban commander (paragraph 40 report of
    10 October  2018).  However  this  is  inconsistent  with  his  earlier
    conclusion that the appellant's father is likely to  be  a  local,  low
    level member of a small unit.  We also note Dr  Foxley's  opinion  that
    coercion is not the Taliban's  preferred  method  of  recruitment.  The
    appellant is now an adult who has lived in the UK for  five  years,  he
    has received education and support here, he is no longer na�ve, lacking
    in education or vulnerable to suggestion as  set  out  in  Dr  Foxley's
    report (paragraph 48). Looking at all of the evidence we do not  accept
    that the appellant is at risk of coerced recruitment in his  home  area
    where his father may be a low level member of the Taliban,  or  further
    afield.  There was no evidence that the father, as a low-level  member,
    had extensive reach. We do not accept the submission that he is at risk
    from local Taliban members, and any suggestion by Dr Foxley  that  this
    may be the case is speculative and based on the assumption that he  had
    left the area and Westernisation may place the appellant at risk.

Sufficiency of protection

28. In any event we consider that there is a sufficiency of  protection  in
    the appellant's home area. The appellant said in his witness  statement
    of 16 May 2017 that he believes the police in his area would  not  help
    him as he is the son of a Taliban member and that, even if they did not
    know this, they would not be willing to help him. However the appellant
    did not seek the protection of the police in his home area in  relation
    to his father's violence or the expectation he would join the  Taliban.
    Dr Foxley discusses protection at paragraph 76-81 of the report  of  10
    October 2018. This sets out improvements  in  the  police  service.  He
    talks about the focus of the police  being  on  fighting  the  Taliban,
    accordingly it could be expected that they would offer some  protection
    to the appellant from the Taliban.



Internal relocation

29. In the event that we are wrong in our conclusions as to the risk to the
    appellant in his home  area  we  have  considered  the  feasibility  of
    internal relocation to Kabul. We take account of  the  guidance  in  AS
    (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018]  UKUT  00118  (IAC)  as  it  is
    current country guidance. Albeit, as Ms Foot submitted  that  AS  under
    consideration  in  the  Court  of  Appeal,  AK  remains  in  force  and
    unaffected by AS. The Tribunal's conclusions are summarised in the head
    note as follows:

         "Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban


          i) A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban  (i.e.
             not a senior government or security services  official,  or  a
             spy) is not at real risk of persecution from  the  Taliban  in
             Kabul.


         Internal relocation to Kabul


         ii) Having regard to the security and  humanitarian  situation  in
             Kabul as well as the  difficulties  faced  by  the  population
             living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other
             returnees, which are not dissimilar to  the  conditions  faced
             throughout may other parts of Afghanistan); it  will  not,  in
             general be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  a  single  adult
             male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not
             have any specific connections or support network in Kabul.


        iii)  However,  the  particular  circumstances  of  an   individual
             applicant must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of
             conditions in the place of relocation,  including  a  person's
             age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections  with
             Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
             language, education and  vocational  skills  when  determining
             whether a person falls within the  general  position  set  out
             above.


         iv) A person with a support network  or  specific  connections  in
             Kabul is likely to be  in  a  more  advantageous  position  on
             return, which may counter a  particular  vulnerability  of  an
             individual on return.


          v)  Although  Kabul  suffered  the  highest  number  of  civilian
             casualties (in the latest UNAMA figures  from  2017)  and  the
             number of security incidents is increasing, the proportion  of
             the population directly affected by the security situation  is
             tiny.  The current security situation in Kabul is not at  such
             a level as  to  render  internal  relocation  unreasonable  or
             unduly harsh.


         Previous Country Guidance


         vi) The country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
             [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive remains unaffected by this decision.


        vii) The country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
             [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to the (un)reasonableness of
             internal relocation to Kabul (and other  potential  places  of
             internal relocation) for certain categories of  women  remains
             unaffected by this decision.


       viii) The country guidance in AA (unattended  children)  Afghanistan
             CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) also  remains  unaffected  by  this
             decision."


30. Applying this guidance to the appellant we take into account that he is
    at most of lower level interest to the Taliban  locally  and  therefore
    not at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul.

31. In his witness statement of 16 May 2017 the appellant said that  he  is
    scared that the Taliban would find him and that he  believes  that  his
    father is a powerful member of the Taliban so he would have links  with
    the Taliban in Kabul. He also said that his father will  be  angry  and
    vengeful and he will kill the appellant or make him join  the  Taliban.
    He said that he will be arrested and tortured when the authorities know
    his father's name or that the Taliban will kill him  for  running  away
    (paragraph 19-26).

32. However this view is not supported by Dr Foxley. At paragraph 50  -  60
    of the report of 4 March 2017 Dr Foxley said  that  the  main  risk  of
    recruitment to the Taliban for the appellant is from a  return  to  his
    home area. However he did not consider it likely that the Taliban would
    have any interest in the appellant  outside  his  immediate  home  area
    unless he fell into the hands of the Taliban in  Kabul  or  some  other
    city and his background became known he would likely  be  at  a  higher
    risk than an average citizen (paragraph 62). At  paragraph  54  of  the
    report of 10 October 2018 Dr Foxley said that  the  circumstances  that
    befell the appellant 'look quite localised and his circumstances  quite
    specific so it is very hard  to  give  a  judgement  either  way  about
    immediate risks upon arrival in Kabul'. Given  that  his  father  is  a
    local low level member of the Taliban we  do  not  accept  that  it  is
    likely that he will be at risk from the Taliban in Kabul.

33. The appellant said in his witness statement of 16 May 2017 that he  has
    not had any contact with his family since leaving Afghanistan and  that
    he is afraid to trace them because he is worried about the danger  that
    could come to his mother and maternal uncle if he tries to trace  them.
    In his witness statement of 10 October 2018 he said that the Red  Cross
    told him that they could try to find his family but he said no  because
    he is scared that his mother and uncle will get into trouble when it is
    discovered that he has spoken to the  authorities  in  another  country
    about what he has been  through  (paragraph  31).  The  appellant  also
    submitted evidence  that  the  Red  Cross  had  suspended  all  tracing
    activities  in  Afghanistan  (page  360-361  appellant's   consolidated
    bundle). However there is no evidence as to how  long  this  suspension
    lasted. There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Red  Cross  have  currently
    suspended tracing services. We do not accept that the  appellant  would
    be unable to seek the support of his family, which could be remote,  in
    particular his maternal uncle who funded his journey to the UK. We find
    that the appellant's decision not to give  consent  to  the  Red  Cross
    casts doubt on the credibility of his claim that he  is  no  longer  in
    contact with his family. In our view it is likely that the appellant is
    in fact in contact with his mother and his maternal uncle.

34. Nonetheless we have considered whether the appellant could relocate  to
    Kabul without family  support.   The  appellant  said  in  his  witness
    statement of 10 October 2018 that he intended to seek  medical  support
    from his GP for his mental health issues. However there is no  evidence
    before us that he has sought advice from his GP and no evidence that he
    is undertaking any ongoing  therapeutic  intervention  or  that  he  is
    taking any medication. One of the potential difficulties in  relocating
    identified by Dr Foxley is the lack of availability of medical support.
    However, the appellant has not been receiving any  medical  support  in
    the UK where it is available to him.  Whilst  Dr  Fairweather  suggests
    that his symptoms may worsen if he  is  returned  to  Afghanistan  this
    assessment is somewhat speculative and based at least in part on a lack
    of family support (which we have not accepted) accordingly  we  do  not
    accept that he is likely to need support with mental health  issues  in
    Afghanistan. Although he has some mental health  issues  these  do  not
    affect his ability to  follow  his  studies  in  the  UK  and  are  not
    sufficient to lead  to  any  formal  diagnosis  of  any  mental  health
    condition. He receives no treatment in the UK. Accordingly we find that
    he is in relatively good health.

35. In terms of his ability to look after himself upon return to  Kabul  we
    take into account a number of further factors. For the past  two  years
    the appellant ahs been living in supported accommodation where  he  has
    been receiving support to enable him to acquire life skills needed  for
    independent living (page 353 appellant's consolidated  bundle).  He  is
    now 20 years old. He has been studying English and  is  enrolled  in  a
    mechanics course (page 135 appellant's consolidated  bundle)  therefore
    he has acquired skills which may  enable  him  to  seek  employment  in
    Kabul. As accepted by Ms Foot, the  appellant  may  be  entitled  to  a
    resettlement package from the UK authorities to help him to reintegrate
    and settle on return to Afghanistan.

36. In all of these circumstances we find  it  reasonable  and  not  unduly
    harsh to expect the appellant to relocate to Kabul.

Humanitarian Protection

37. In light of our findings above we are not satisfied that if he  returns
    to Afghanistan the appellant is at real risk of suffering serious  harm
    under paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.

Articles 2 & 3

38. In this appeal Articles 2 and 3 stand or fall with the asylum claim. In
    light of our findings above we are not satisfied that if he returns  to
    Afghanistan the appellant may  be  subjected  to  torture,  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment or face death in breach of Articles 2
    or 3 of the ECHR.

Private and Family life

39. Ms Foot submitted that the appellant is entitled to remain in the UK on
    the basis of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules,  the  relevant
    provision is paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) which provides:

         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:


         ...


         (vi)     subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,
         has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
         significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into the
         country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."


40. In light of  our  findings  above  as  to  the  appellant's  return  to
    Afghanistan in general and to Kabul in particular we do not accept that
    there would be 'very significant obstacles' to his reintegration there.
    We do not accept that the  appellant  has  not  had  contact  with  his
    family. He has not given any adequate explanation for  his  refusal  to
    engage with the Red Cross to trace his family.  There  is  no  evidence
    that the Red Cross have currently suspended tracing services and we  do
    not accept that the appellant would be unable to seek  the  support  of
    his family, in particular his maternal uncle who funded his journey  to
    the UK. Whilst he has some mental health  difficulties,  the  appellant
    does not currently receive any treatment for his mental  health  issues
    in the UK. Further, many of the stresses referred  to  in  the  medical
    reports relate to the appellant's journey to  the  UK,  his  separation
    from his family and the uncertainty of his situation in the  UK.  These
    issues would be largely resolved by his return to Afghanistan based  on
    our findings above.

41. Although it is said that the appellant has a girlfriend in the UK there
    is inadequate evidence as to that relationship and no  submission  that
    he meets the requirements of Appendix FM. No argument was advanced that
    his removal would breach his right to a family life here.

42. Accordingly we find that the decision does not breach  the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 as put forward in the skeleton argument.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum and on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date: 31 May 2019

A Grimes
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal




To the Respondent
Fee Award

The appeal has been dismissed therefore there is no fee award.


Signed      Date: 31 May 2019

A Grimes
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal



APPENDIX

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08109/2016
                                                               PA/09067/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th March 2019                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     A N
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H foot, instructed by Wilsons Solicitors LLP
or the Respondent:     Mr T Melvin Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appealed against the  decision  of  First  Tier  Tribunal
    Judge Loke promulgated on 14th November 2018 dismissing his appeal.

 2. The appellant's appeal was previously heard and dismissed by FTTJ Moore
    in 2017 but that decision was overturned by the Upper Tribunal  on  6th
    March 2018 owing to a failure to  apply  the  appropriate  guidance  on
    vulnerable witnesses (Joint Presidential Guidance Note No  2  of  2010:
    Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance).

 3. There have been two decisions from the Secretary of State  in  relation
    to this appellant; one dated 15th October 2015 (refusal  of  an  asylum
    claim) and the appellant was granted permission to appeal out of  time.
    The second decision was taken  on  11th  August  2016  in  relation  to
    refusal a human  rights  claim.   This  decision  referred  to  matters
    initially unchallenged by  the  first  decision.    In  the  event  the
    challenge to both decisions  have  been  subsumed  into  an  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, claimed asylum  based  on  his
    fear of return because of his imputed political opinion as the son of a
    prominent Taliban member.  Further the appellant claimed he had a  fear
    of persecution on the basis of his status as a vulnerable unaccompanied
    young person in Afghanistan.  He  asserted  that  he  was  at  risk  of
    recruitment by his father in the province of Logar and that he would be
    at risk of recruitment generally by the Taliban as a young Pashtun male
    of fighting age.  He further claimed he faced a real  risk  of  serious
    harm  contrary  to  Article  15(c)  of  the   Qualification   Directive
    2004/83/EC in Logar which suffered  from  indiscriminate  violence  and
    that his removal would breach his rights under Articles 2, 3 and  8  of
    the ECHR.  It was adumbrated that the appellant  had  no  relatives  in
    Kabul and had been unable to  trace  the  whereabouts  of  any  of  his
    relatives owing to suspension of activities in Afghanistan by  the  Red
    Cross (A/B 137) (see Skeleton Argument dated 18th October 2018)

 5. The Secretary of State disputed his account of  events  in  Afghanistan
    and submits that the appellant could relocate.

 6. The appellant in turn disagreed with the age  assessed  by  the  London
    Borough of Dagenham (date of birth given as 10th December  1998).   The
    appellant asserts he was born on 10th December 2001.  There has been no
    judicial review challenge on the age  assessment.  Nonetheless  it  was
    asserted that there was no 'bright line rule'  whereby  risk  owing  to
    minority disappear when a child reaches  majority  KA  (Afghanistan)  v
    Secretary of State [2012] EWCA Civ 1014.  Even  on  the  basis  of  his
    alleged age he was a minor when he claimed asylum and was interviewed.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. The grounds advanced that:

    (i)    the judge  unlawfully  relied  on  her  own  view  of  what  was
         plausible or reasonable to expect an Afghan woman to do and  failed
         to take into account material evidence  and  misread  the  evidence
         before her.  At [27] and [28] the judge  rejected  the  appellant's
         claim that his mother was instrumental in arranging his escape from
         his father, because she was the victim of  domestic  violence.  The
         judge asserted this did not  chime  with  the  objective  evidence.
         Whilst this was correct as a general summary country  position  the
         judge relied unlawfully on her  own  view  of  what  was  plausible
         contrary to MM (plausibility) (DRC) [2005] UKIAT00019,  HK  v  SSHD
         [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 and Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223.  There  was
         no evidential basis for the judge finding  the  appellant's  mother
         would face severe repercussions from her husband as a result of the
         role in enabling  the  appellant's  departure  and  the  judge  had
         misread the evidence.

    (ii)   the distinctions in the evidence drawn  by  the  judge,  between
         evidence accepted and rejected specifically for discrepancies,  was
         unsustainable.  Further  the  distinctions  drawn  arose   from   a
         misreading  of  the  evidence  which  could  not  be  said  to   be
         inconsistent. At q [80]-[82] of the  AIR  the  appellant  confirmed
         that his mother was present, (not absent as the  judge  cited)  and
         his witness statement of 9th February 2018  was  not  at  variance.
         Further the appellant stated he had not traced because of his fears
         for his  family's  safety  but  the  evidence  showed  tracing  was
         impossible even if the appellant had not had those fears.  This was
         ignored at [29].  These were material legal errors.

    (iii)   the  judge  placed  unlawful  reliance  on  previous   Tribunal
         findings. At [26] and [29] the judge relied on  evidence  given  at
         the previous hearing, but the determination was set  aside  in  its
         entirety. The record of the evidence contained in the determination
         was unsafe not least in the light of the psychiatric evidence of Dr
         Fairweather as to the appellant's mental state.  It  was  for  this
         reason that the appellant did not give evidence.

    (iv)   The judge failed to address all grounds (heads of  risk)  namely
         that the appellant was in fear  not  only  of  recruitment  by  his
         father but also in relation to the Taliban  per  se  and  on  route
         home. Paragraph [31] of the decision was inadequate.

    (v)    there were errors in relation to internal relocation. The  judge
         failed  to  give  proper  consideration  to  the  reports   of   Dr
         Fairweather and Dr Foxley in the assessment of his PTSD and ability
         to return to Kabul.  The findings in relation to the whereabouts of
         the family, as argued above, were unlawful because of  the  failure
         to take into account the evidence on the Red Cross,  and  thus  the
         assessment on relocation was unsustainable and inadequate

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Davey
    who found only grounds (i)(ii)(iv) arguable.

The Hearing

 9. Grounds (iii) (v) and (vi) were renewed before me on the basis that the
    grounds intertwined and overlapped.  In ground  (iii)  Ms  Foot  argued
    that the judge had  made  references  to  the  evidence  given  in  his
    previous hearing for  example  at  [26]  but  that  decision  had  been
    overturned.  In addition, the fact that the  Red  Cross  had  suspended
    operations and tracing in the area was not  taken  into  account.    Mr
    Melvin  rejoindered  that  this  was  evidence  given  rather  than  an
    assessment.

10. I gave permission to  argue  grounds  (iii)  and  (v).    The  evidence
    referred to in ground (iii) at [26] and  [29]  was  approached  without
    apparent consideration of the  vulnerable  witness  guidelines  or  the
    psychiatric report of  Dr  Fairweather.   Further,  there  was  clearly
    evidence that had not been taken into account with regard  to  the  Red
    Cross.

11. Ground (v) in part overlapped with ground (ii) on which permission  was
    given and it was arguable that the evidence of  Dr  Foxley  as  to  the
    appellant's ability to care for himself in the light of  his  PTSD  was
    not fully addressed.

12. On the face of it I was not persuaded that the assessment of Article  8
    was defective but clearly further findings in relation to the  evidence
    may affect any assessment thereto  and  I  reserve  the  position  with
    regards Article 8.

13. At the hearing before me Ms Foot in relation to  ground  (i)  submitted
    that the uncle was the mother's brother.  The judge was right in citing
    the background evidence, but it was not uncommon for a mother to play a
    role in their children's departure. At p149 of the Consolidated  Bundle
    ('C/B'), the appellant stated it was a secret arrangement. The  failure
    by Dr Foxley to comment on the mother being instrumental was at best  a
    neutral factor.

14. With respect to ground (ii) the appellant had been diagnosed with PTSD.
     The answers in the asylum interview were  not  inconsistent  with  his
    witness statement and yet it was stated as being so.  As  to  who  took
    the appellant from the home the inconsistency was drawn  only  from  Dr
    Fairweather's report.  Separately as explained above the Red Cross (see
    p 360 of the  C/B)  had  suspended  tracing  operations  and  this  was
    material.

15. Ms Foot did not repeat her previous submissions  on  Ground  (iii)  but
    relied on those given when seeking permission.

16. On ground (iv) I  was  referred  to  paragraph  18.1  of  the  skeleton
    argument presented to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  set  out  the
    various ways in which the appellant claimed he was  at  risk  from  the
    Taliban both in the form  of  recruitment  and  punishment  for  having
    rejected them.  Paragraph [31] was insufficiently reasoned  to  address
    this point.

17. On ground (v) Ms Foot argued  that it was never the  appellant's  claim
    that he had relatives in Kabul;  he would be returning  alone  and  the
    reference to 'support network' at [35](b) did not take into account the
    Fairweather report as to independent living (p181,  para  8.91  of  the
    C/B) and p 210 of the C/B).  Nor did the  decision  address  Dr  Foxley
    report (at p 65 C/B).  There was no freestanding assessment.

18. Mr Melvin referred me to the Rule 24 response and submitted that  there
    was no merit to the grounds of appeal.  It was open  to  the  judge  to
    make the findings she did.  There were discrepancies in the evidence on
    which the judge was entitled to rely.  The judge applied the vulnerable
    witness guidelines.  There were discrepancies as  to  who  was  in  the
    house during the conversation about whether the appellant should  fight
    for the Taliban, and who took the appellant when he departed in flight.



19. With reference to ground (iii) the previous determination findings were
    in fact evidence given by the appellant and it is  open  to  judges  to
    refer to such evidence recorded in a previous determination.

20. In ground (iv) the objective evidence did not indicate risk of  Taliban
    recruitment  for  young  Pashtun  males  or  risk  to  returnees   from
    Westernisation.  His home was  not  a  hotspot  for  kidnapping.   With
    respect to the tracing point the  evidence  of  the  appellant  himself
    should be considered regardless of whether the IRC had stopped tracing.
     The findings were against the appellant's  own  evidence.  Translation
    problems were not part of his evidence and the appellant was relying on
    the psychiatric evidence to fill the holes in his case.  There  was  no
    evidence of treatment and indeed at [35] a finding was  made  that  any
    return would not interrupt treatment.

21. With regards ground (v) and internal  relocation  the  account  of  the
    appellant  himself  was  found  wanting  and  AS  (Safety   of   Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) was current guidance such that a
    healthy male could return to Kabul.

Conclusions

22. Many of the strands within the grounds of appeal  are  overlapping.  At
    the heart of the decision  is  the  adverse  credibility  finding  made
    against the appellant.  With regards ground (i) the judge did take into
    account the background evidence, but it is not possible to  assume  any
    particular behaviour on the part of the mother  in  this  instance.  As
    pointed out in Y at [25] on the approach a judge should  adopt  to  the
    evidence

         'The fundamental one is that he should be cautious  before  finding
         an  account  to  be  inherently  incredible,  because  there  is  a
         considerable risk that he will be over influenced by his own  views
         on what  is  or  is  not  plausible,  and  those  views  will  have
         inevitably been influenced by his own background  in  this  country
         and by the customs and ways of our own  society.  It  is  therefore
         important that he should seek to view  an  appellant's  account  of
         events, as Mr Singh rightly argues, in the context of conditions in
         the country from which the appellant comes'.

23. The judge was entitled at [27]  to  consider  the  background  evidence
    which she rightly did.  To conclude, however that the background  of  a
    patriarchal society and the  violent  attitude  of  the  father,  would
    preclude the mother from assisting the appellant with her  own  brother
    (the  appellant's  uncle),  characterises  the  evidence  in  an   over
    restrictive manner and introduces an element of assessment outside  the
    remit  of  the  judge.   That  Dr  Foxley  failed  to  comment  on  the
    credibility of the appellant's mother being instrumental in the  escape
    is at best a neutral factor rather than one undermining the appellant's
    case.

24. Taken together with ground (ii) where it appears the judge misread  the
    evidence in relation to the witness statement and the asylum interview,
    the overall credibility assessment is materially flawed.  For  example,
    at Q80-84 of the appellant's substantive asylum interview, contrary  to
    paragraph 24 of the decision, the appellant did state that  his  mother
    was in the house.  As pointed out the timescale  point  was  not  taken
    against the appellant with regards other evidence and yet  was  weighed
    at this point without any real explanation  for  the  distinction.   Ms
    Foot referred to the evidence which suggested that the appellant  moved
    to three differing  venues  during  his  departure  and  this  was  not
    addressed in the evidence.  That did not feature in the assessment when
    making key credibility findings.  On the one hand the  judge  permitted
    difficulties with the timescale but when assessing  other  sections  of
    the evidence the judge refused to accept deficiencies in the  timescale
    without further explanation.

25. In addition, as per ground (iii) when assessing the account, the  judge
    relied on evidence given in the previous hearing.   That  determination
    was set aside in its entirety.  I take Mr Melvin's point that this  was
    evidence recorded not a finding by the judge but the  observations  and
    use of the same was not qualified by the realisation that that previous
    determination had been set aside because of the failure to observe  the
    vulnerable witness guidelines, the psychiatric evidence  given  of  the
    appellant's PTSD and the acknowledgement that in the second hearing the
    appellant did not give evidence. That must again undermine the  overall
    credibility findings.

26. Mr Melvin submitted that the  appellant's  own  evidence  itself,  (his
    fears) on the Red Cross tracing was the focus of the judge's  criticism
    rather than the impossibility of  there  being  any  tracing  but  that
    assessment of the appellant's comments in his witness  statement  (10th
    October 2018 paragraph  [31])  did  not  explore  the  context  of  the
    psychiatric evidence and further does not  allude,  when  referring  to
    paragraph [27] of the earlier witness statement of 16th  May  2017,  to
    the fact that the appellant knew and identified in his  statement  that
    Red Cross tracing was suspended.

27. There was a concentration within the determination on the risk from the
    father which in turn led to an inadequate assessment of  all  heads  of
    risk.  Paragraph [31] does not encompass all parts of  the  appellant's
    protection claim including his claimed risk from the Taliban and danger
    to him of travelling to his home area.

28. With regard internal relocation and ground (v) the judge  proceeded  on
    the basis that the appellant could  access  family  support  in  Kabul.
    Having found against the appellant for reasons which have been outlined
    above (and found deficient), in  relation  to  the  availability  of  a
    return home, there was no engagement with the  evidence  that  the  Red
    Cross had suspended searches for family; there was no reference to  him
    being supported remotely.  There were no findings as to the ability  of
    the appellant to cope in Kabul without family support bearing  in  mind
    the reports of Dr Fairweather and Dr  Foxley.   AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) confirms in the headnote

         'it will not, in general be unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  a
         single adult male in good health to relocate to Kabul  even  if  he
         does not have any specific connections or support network in Kabul'

29. The judge appears to conclude that the appellant would have  a  support
    network see [35]  (b)  as  she  states,  'the  appellant  will  not  be
    returning to Kabul without any support network'.  This is on the  basis
    that he could return home.   That  presupposes  that  the  findings  in
    relation to his credibility were sound.  I find that there  are  errors
    of law in the decision which are material.  It is trite  law  now  that
    evidence must be viewed holistically and as seen above specific but key
    credibility findings have been tainted by legal errors  and,  in  turn,
    influence the findings regarding relocation.

30. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  I preserve no findings.   Bearing  in
    mind the nature and extent of the findings to be made the matter should
    be retained in the Upper Tribunal and there should be  resumed  hearing
    before me.

Directions

31. Any further evidence should be filed and served no later than  14  days
    prior to the resumed hearing and skeleton arguments should be filed and
    served 3 days prior to any hearing date.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 6th March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

