
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08899/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 November 2018                       |On 26 November 2018                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     A P
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dakora, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He was born on 1 August 1999.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated  29  June  2018  to
    refuse his claim for  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

 3. Judge Griffith (the judge) dismissed the appellant's appeal.  She found
    the appellant was not a credible witness, he would not be  at  risk  on
    return and that the respondent's decision was proportionate.

 4. There are three grounds, failure to take  into  account  relevant  case
    law,  failure  to  deal  appropriately  with   expert   evidence,   and
    misunderstanding of essential aspects of the evidence:

         Failure to take into account relevant case law

         The grounds claim the judge failed to  take  into  account  AB  and
         Others (internet activity - state of  evidence)  Iran  [2015]  UKUT
         00257.  The grounds claim that it is irrelevant  if  a  person  had
         used the internet opportunistically as the Iranian authorities  are
         not concerned with a person's motivation.

         Failure to deal appropriately with expert evidence

         Professor  Joffe's  report  which  postdated  the  current  country
         guidance said that a failed asylum seeker of Kurdish ethnicity  who
         exited Iran illegally was at risk.  The judge failed  to  give  any
         reasons for departing from such an opinion.  It was  argued  before
         the judge that the CG case SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed  asylum
         seeker) Iran CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308  (IAC)  did  not  specifically
         address the risk faced by failed asylum  seekers  who  exited  Iran
         illegally and who were also of Kurdish ethnicity

         Misunderstanding the essential aspects of the evidence

         The judge found the appellant was of no  adverse  interest  to  the
         Iranian authorities because he showed  lack  of  knowledge  of  the
         wider aspects of the Kurdish separatist cause.  The  grounds  claim
         the judge did  not  specify  what  those  wider  aspects  were  and
         accordingly failed to  take  account  of  the  background  evidence
         concerning the anti-government  activities  of  ordinary  Kurds  in
         Iran.  See page 96 of the appellant's bundle.  Kurds are frustrated
         and inclined to join whatever protest that arises.

 5. Judge Ford granted permission to appeal on 18 September 2018.  She said
    inter alia:

         "3.      While the Tribunal does refer to the report  of  Dr  Joffe
             (which can be found at page 174 of the (AB), at  paragraph  34
             of the decision and the  appellant's  Facebook  activities  at
             paragraph 44 to 46, it is not engaged with  the  substance  of
             the report.  The appellant claimed that he was an activist for
             the Kurdish  cause  and  for  clear  and  cogent  reasons  the
             Tribunal did not find him credible in this  claim.   The  only
             aspects of the appellant's account  that  were  accepted  were
             that he is an ethnic Kurd who left illegally.

         4.   It is arguable that the Tribunal did not carry out an adequate
             assessment of the risk to  the  appellant  on  his  return  by
             reason of his ethnicity, his Facebook activity and his illegal
             exit on the basis of  the  country  guidance  and  the  expert
             report of Dr Joffe and why it rejected Dr Joffe's opinion that
             a Kurdish failed asylum  seeker  will  face  a  real  risk  of
             persecution without more and the discrimination against  Kurds
             is so severe that it amounts to persecution."





Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Mr Dakora relied upon the grounds.  The current  country  guidance  was
    arguably inadequate.  Dr Joffe addressed these issues at length but the
    judge refused to engage with the same.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 7. The judge found that the appellant submitted an opportunistic claim  at
    a time of turmoil in the Middle East.  See [43] of the  decision.   She
    also found at [46], that he would not be at risk  because  of  his  sur
    place activities here.

 8. The judge was obliged to  engage  with  the  report  of  Dr  Joffe,  in
    particular his comments on SSH & HR, which she failed to do.  It  might
    well be that given her adverse findings, Dr Joffe's  views  would  have
    made no overall difference to the judge's decision, however, it was  an
    error not to engage with the same.  The issue must be whether it was  a
    material error for the judge not to engage with Dr Joffe's report.   Mr
    Clarke refers me to Dr Joffe's report  at  [17]-[23];  see  appellant's
    bundle P231-232.  Those paragraphs refer to prior analysis all of which
    had been considered in SSH & HR and the expert report of Dr Kakhki.  Mr
    Dakora's position was that given the judge's failure to engage with the
    report of Dr Joffe,  she  inevitably,  materially  erred.  Although  Dr
    Joffe's report was dated August 2016, he was drawing  upon  information
    from 2011 and 2014. Mr Dakora could not refer me to any content  of  Dr
    Joffe's report that had not been previously considered in SSH & HR.  In
    such circumstances, the judge did not materially err  in  not  engaging
    with the report of Dr Joffe and was entitled to place reliance upon SSH
    & HR. See [47] of the decision.

 9. The judge did not err in her analysis of BA (Demonstrators in Britain -
    risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT.  The fact that the  appellant  had
    posted  on-line  opportunistically  was  irrelevant  to   the   judge's
    analysis. See [45]-[46] of the decision.  The grounds fail to   explain
    why it was that the judge was obliged to engage with AB and  Others  in
    the particular circumstances of the appellant's claim. What  the  judge
    said was that the material  claimed  to  put  the  appellant  at  risk,
    appeared to be sharing other people's posts with very  little  original
    material beyond a few  slogans  or  statements  that  he  had  attended
    demonstrations.  She found the appellant's claim wholly incredible. She
    found he had no political profile, he was not a journalist,  a  blogger
    or an activist. He would not be at risk on return. Those were  findings
    the judge was entitled to come to on the evidence before her.

Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 9 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
