
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08498/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 2 October 2019                    |On 23 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                            Mustafa ahmed Mohamud
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, instructed by RP Crawford & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In my earlier decision dated 20 August  2019  I  gave  my  reasons  for
    concluding that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  and  I  also
    made an anonymity direction.  Mr McTaggart has now  acknowledged  there
    is no need for such a direction, and accordingly it ceases.

 2. A copy of my earlier decision is annexed hereto, however, for  ease  of
    reference the following matters can be noted:

    (i)  The appellant is a national of Somalia, from where he left at  the
         age of 4, and thereafter lived in Kenya until February 2017 when he
         entered the United Kingdom unlawfully with  the  assistance  of  an
         agent.

    (ii) His mother obtained a visa in 2003 to join her second  husband  in
         the United Kingdom who is a British citizen.

    (iii)    The appellant and  his  brother  remained  behind  with  their
         grandmother who died in 2010, after which another  female  relative
         took care of them.  The  appellant's  younger  brother  remains  in
         Kenya.

    (iv) The Secretary of State refused the appellant' protection claim  on
         the basis that there was a sufficiency of protection for him in his
         place of origin, Kismayo.

    (v)  The First-tier Tribunal concluded based on the country information
         that the situation in  Kismayo  was  better  than  Mogadishu.   The
         appellant should be able to safely travel there from the airport in
         Mogadishu.

    (vi) The First-tier Tribunal rejected the appellant's claimed fear from
         the Somali Government in the absence of any profile or  reason  why
         he would be targeted.  The claim based on  the  appellant's  Ashraf
         clan was similarly not found to lead to a need for protection.

    (vii)    The tribunal also found the appellant  is  now  an  adult,  is
         educated and enjoys good health.   His  mother  could  continue  to
         support him financially and  there  was  also  the  possibility  of
         support from his relative in Canada who had funded the  journey  to
         the United Kingdom.

 3. I was satisfied that it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to  make  a
    finding of potential financial support from the above sources  as  well
    as an Assisted Voluntary Return package.  The aspect which persuaded me
    to  set  aside  the  decision  related  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusion that the appellant should be able to travel  safely  between
    Mogadishu and Kismayo.  The judge had not explained in  further  detail
    why the appellant would be able to do so in the light of  the  evidence
    at the hearing which indicated he would need to pass through Al-Shabaab
    controlled territory.  I observed that if  there  are  flights  between
    Mogadishu and Kismayo the  appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  if  the
    evidence was still the case that an overland journey  would  trigger  a
    risk of the  kind  identified  in  AMM  &  Others.   In  my  concluding
    paragraph I explained:

         "16. Accordingly, I conclude that  Judge  Farrelly  erred  on  this
             aspect in failing to identify the evidence that supported  his
             finding or to give adequate reasons for that finding.   I  set
             aside his decision  in  relation  to  the  issue  whether  the
             appellant can travel safely between Mogadishu, being the  city
             of return, and Kismayo, the  city  of  resettlement.   If  the
             evidence does  not  show  a  safe  journey  is  feasible  then
             considerations of internal relocation in Mogadishu  will  come
             into play.  The case will remain in the Upper Tribunal  for  a
             further hearing  for  this  limited  purpose.   Otherwise  the
             findings of the First tier Tribunal are preserved."

 4. By way of evidence on the point, Mr McTaggart relied on:

    (i)  A more recent map than that before the First-tier Tribunal sourced
         www.polgonow.com showing approximate territorial control.

    (ii) A report by  Reuters  dated  20  August  2019  with  the  headline
         "Official: Southern Somali State Shutters Main City, Airport  Ahead
         of Election".  The body of the article explains that  the  southern
         Somali state of Jubbaland has blocked access to  the  capital  city
         Kismayo and its main airport ahead of Thursday's vote  to  elect  a
         president of the semi-autonomous region, a senior regional official
         said Tuesday.   The  article  also  comments  on  tensions  between
         Jubbaland authorities and the Federal Government in Mogadishu.

    (iii)     UNHCR  Operational  Update,  August  2019.   This  refers  to
         repatriation flights to Somalia  bringing  the  total  of  refugees
         "facilitated to voluntarily repatriate"  for  the  year  to  1,592.
         Specific reference is made to all return movements both flights and
         road convoy to Kismayo being the biggest return destination  remain
         temporary suspended from 13 July 2019 following explosions and  gun
         attacks in Kismayo and tension in Jubbaland region  linked  to  the
         contested results of the election.  The  focus  appears  to  be  on
         repatriation from Dadaab which is to the south of Kismayo.

    (iv) An extract from the website of Jubba  Airways  timetabling  direct
         flights from Mogadishu to Kismayo at 9 o'clock on Tuesdays  and  10
         o' clock on Mondays.

    (v)  Ms Patterson relied on a download from flightsfrom.com  which  she
         accessed on 26 September 2019.  In response to  a  request  for  an
         economy round trip for one traveller between 9 and 13 October Jubba
         Airways had a flight to Kismayo (KMU).

 5. By way of submissions Mr  McTaggart  accepted  from  the  evidence  his
    instructing solicitors had provided and  the  material  from  the  Home
    Office that there are flights from Mogadishu to Kismayo on Mondays  and
    Tuesdays but nevertheless he contended that it was not  entirely  clear
    that Kismayo was taking flights owing to the  reports  by  Reuters  and
    UNHCR although he accepted the latter relate to movements from  Dadaab.
    He did not have anything more recent following the blocking  of  access
    to Kismayo's airport in advance of the elections.  Given  the  date  of
    the Reuters report it appears that the  elections  were  to  be  on  22
    August and thus the flights affected would be on 19 and 20 August.

 6. Mr McTaggart had been unable to obtain evidence of the  possibility  of
    travel by sea between Mogadishu and Kismayo and he reiterated the risks
    by reference to the more recent map for overland journeys.  If  I  were
    not persuaded that the appellant would be unable to travel by  air,  it
    would be necessary to consider the position of the appellant  remaining
    in Mogadishu.  In this regard Mr  McTaggart  considered  the  following
    factors relevant:

    (i)  The appellant speaks Somali.

    (ii) He left Somalia at the age of 4 for Kenya.

    (iii)    The appellant has no personal connections in Mogadishu.

    (iv) His wife is assumed to be still in Kenya.

    (v)  The appellant is a member of a minority Ashraf clan.

    (vi) The appellant has no job skills or trade.

    (vii)    The possibility of  financial  support  from  the  appellant's
         mother and the relative in Canada was accepted.

 7. By way of response Ms Petterson argued that the burden of proof was  on
    the appellant and the fact of closure of Kismayo Airport in August  did
    not show that this was permanent.  It was her contention that based  on
    the evidence she had obtained the appellant had not  demonstrated  that
    the airport had reopened.  If it were not possible to  fly  to  Kismayo
    this would have been indicated in the flights detail she had  obtained.
    Even if the appellant were unable to travel to Kismayo it was  open  to
    him to remain in  Mogadishu  where  he  would  have  financial  support
    including payment for assisted voluntary return  with  which  he  could
    establish himself, taking account of the lack of employment experience.
     There were no health concerns.

 8. Mr McTaggart had no submissions by way of reply.

 9. I am satisfied on the evidence that the closure of Kismayo  Airport  in
    advance of the August elections was temporary.  Had there been  further
    disruption, this would have been reported particularly in the light  of
    the scale of the returns indicated by UNHCR to Kismayo.  The judge made
    an unchallenged finding that the appellant would be safe in Kismayo and
    accordingly in the light of my finding as to the  availability  of  air
    travel between Mogadishu and Kismayo, the appellant has not established
    that he is in need of international protection.

10. Even if the appellant were held up for a time in Mogadishu  awaiting  a
    flight, in  the  light  of  the  preserved  findings  as  to  financial
    assistance for him, his state of health and age, indicate to me that it
    would not be unreasonable or that it would be unduly harsh for  him  to
    remain in the capital until such time that he can make his way  by  air
    to Kismayo.

11. By way of conclusion therefore the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    is set aside on the limited basis above described.  The decision in the
    appeal against the refusal by the respondent to recognise the appellant
    as a refugee is dismissed.


Signed                                  Dated:  18 October 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

ANNEX

                                    [pic]

IAC-FH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08498/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 9 August 2019                     |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     MAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, instructed by RP Crawford & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an order for anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  disclosure  of  any
    matter that may lead to the identification of the appellant  and  other
    parties  to  these  proceedings.   Any  breach  may  lead  to  contempt
    proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant, a citizen  of  Somalia,  born  1995
    against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Farrelly.   For
    reasons given in his decision dated 16 January 2019 the judge dismissed
    the appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    refusing his protection claim for reasons given in a decision dated  20
    February 2017.  That claim had been on the basis of  risk  if  returned
    because of imputed political opinions and membership  of  the  minority
    Ashraf clan from the Al Shabab, clan related violence  and  the  Somali
    government.

 3. The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  appellant's  citizenship  and
    membership of the Ashraf clan but  contended  that  his  fear  was  not
    objectively well-founded.  As to his immigration history, the appellant
    had left Somalia when he was 4 years old and lived in  Kenya  with  his
    younger brother until he left on 12 February 2017.  In 2003 his  mother
    had been granted a visa to  join  her  second  husband  in  the  United
    Kingdom who had British citizenship.  The appellant and his brother had
    remained behind with their  grandmother  who  died  in  2010  when  the
    appellant was 15 years old.  His mother had arranged for another female
    relative to care for them.  The appellant's younger brother remains  in
    Kenya.

 4. Judge Farrelly concluded the appellant had not established a real  risk
    of persecution if returned to Mogadishu in the light of  the  situation
    having stabilised.  He did not consider that  family  life  within  the
    meaning of Article 8 was engaged.  Having regard to the factors set out
    in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  he
    considered the appellant's return to Somalia  would  not  result  in  a
    breach.

 5. The grounds of challenge argue:

    (i)  A failure by the judge to consider and apply the guidance in MOJ &
         Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC).

    (ii) The judge had erred by finding the  appellant  could  relocate  to
         Kismayo with reference to  AMM  &  Others  (Conflict;  humanitarian
         crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC).

    (iii)    The judge had irrationally ignored  the  evidence  as  to  the
         inability of his mother to support him and the  decision  that  the
         relative in Canada could  assist.   In  addition  the  resettlement
         package was never raised at any  stage  which  indicates  that  AVR
         package assists  monetarily  for  voluntary  returnees,  which  the
         appellant is not.

 6. In granting permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane
    considered the judge had arguably erred by failing to apply the country
    guidance decision in MOJ.  He had also erred by finding the appellant's
    mother could provide him with support in the light of her evidence that
    she would not.

 7. In refusing the protection claim, the Secretary of State had considered
    that there was a sufficiency of protection for the appellant in Somalia
    particularly in Kismayo, his place of origin.  The judge's  conclusions
    on the circumstances the appellant might face are set out  at  [20]  to
    [24] of the decision as follows:

         "20. The country guidance decision of M[OJ] and others returned  to
             Mogadishu Somalia CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442  was  focusing  upon
             Mogadishu  as  the  title  suggests.   It  pointed  out   that
             generally an ordinary citizen, that is, someone not associated
             with the security forces or the government, would not  face  a
             risk of persecution in Mogadishu nor will they be  exposed  to
             an article 15C risk.  It refers to Al Shabab's withdrawal from
             Mogadishu.  It also suggests that the chance of being  injured
             by being in the wrong place could  be  avoided  by  exercising
             caution.  There was no real risk of forced recruitment  by  Al
             Shabab  The country information indicates that  the  situation
             Kismayo is better than that in Mogadishu  and  it  is  to  the
             latter the respondent contemplates the appellant's return  to.
             Country information indicates that Kismayo  is  controlled  by
             the Somali army.  The  appellant  should  be  able  to  safely
             travel from the airport in Mogadishu to Kismayo.

         21.  The respondent also has regard to the appellant's claimed fear
             from the Somali government.  The appellant has no profile  and
             no reason to be seen why he would be  targeted.   His  account
             about difficulties from majority clans was also considered  to
             be vague did not present as a real risk.

         22.  Aspects of the appellants claim are incredibly vague.  He  now
             claims that his benefactor in Canada can no  longer  assistant
             [sic].  His mother is claiming that she can no longer send him
             money because she has a back condition and can only work part-
             time.  However,  she  has  remarried  and  has  indicated  her
             husband is in employment albeit fully paid.  He  continues  to
             assist the appellant's brother.   His  account  of  transiting
             through a 3rd country which does not know is unbelievable.   I
             believe you would have had some awareness to  looking  at  the
             signs and the uniforms on the planes.  In the past he has held
             the Somali passport is account about 9 where his wife is  also
             incredible.  I also find it unbelievable that his  mother  was
             unaware of his marriage.

         23.  Ultimately, I do not find the appellant has established a real
             risk of persecution.  The situation in Somalia has stabilised.
              The inter-clan violence has now subsided  and  shifters  been
             upon coexistence.  The appellant's mother  could  continue  to
             support him as he establishes himself  in  his  home  country.
             There is also the possibility has [sic] benefactor  in  Canada
             can  support  him.   He  will  also  have  the  benefit  of  a
             resettlement package.

         24.  In terms of article 8 the appellant has no wife here  nor  has
             he any children.  He is now an  adult.   He  has  been  living
             apart from his mother  and  sister  for  many  years.   He  is
             educated and enjoys good health.  I do not  see  any  features
             which would suggest that family life  within  the  meaning  of
             article 8 is engaged.  In any event, the respondent's decision
             is proportionate in the interests of immigration control.   On
             a freestanding assessment of article 8 I would be required  to
             have regard to the factors  set  out  in  section  117B.   The
             appellant's mother has been  reliant  upon  public  funds  and
             there is nothing to suggest that if the appellant were here he
             would  not  present  a  drain.   Furthermore,  is  [sic]   not
             demonstrated a command of English.  The public interest is  in
             immigration control.  The intention is for the appellant to be
             returned to Somalia rather than Kenya.  Based upon the country
             information and his personal circumstances I see no breach  of
             his protected rights occurring as a result."

 8. Prior to commencement of the hearing I indicated to the parties my wish
    to hear argument on the Court  of  Appeal  authorities  in  SSHD  v  MS
    (Somalia) [2019] EWCA Civ 1345 and the earlier decision of the Court in
    SSHD v MA (Somalia)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  994.   Time  was  given  to  Mr
    McTaggart to consider these cases.  The respondent's position was  that
    the appellant could resettle in Kismayo  where  it  was  considered  he
    would not be at risk for the reasons  advanced  in  his  claim  and  so
    considerations of internal relocation would not arise.  To  the  extent
    that this raised humanitarian  concerns,  the  two  decisions  were  of
    relevance.

 9. Mr McTaggart began his submissions with the challenge in [4(iii)] above
    focusing on  the  judge's  findings  in  [23]  of  his  decision.   The
    appellant's mother's evidence was that she was on reduced income due to
    her injury and was required to provide support  to  her  other  son  in
    Kenya.  The judge's finding that she  could  continue  to  support  the
    appellant was conjecture and if the judge had rejected  evidence  there
    was a requirement to give reasons for doing so.   In  relation  to  the
    support from the Canadian relative, the appellant  had  given  evidence
    that he did not have contact with them, as  evidenced  in  his  witness
    statement.  In respect of the resettlement package (by the Home Office)
    this issue had not been raised and had only been briefly  mentioned  in
    terms of the refusal letter.  The appellant  would  refuse  to  go  and
    would not return voluntarily.

10. In respect of grounds (i) and (ii) Mr McTaggart  explained  that  these
    were linked.  The judge had not given reasons for his  conclusion  that
    the appellant should be able to  travel  safely  from  the  airport  in
    Mogadishu to Kismayo.  He referred to the country guidance by the Upper
    Tribunal in AMM & Others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;
    FGM)  Somalia  CG  [2011]  UKUT  0045  (IAC)  in  particular  the  risk
    identified in the headnote to those who are reasonably likely  to  have
    to pass through Al-Shabab areas.  My enquiry  whether  there  were  not
    flights from Mogadishu to Kismayo led Mr McTaggart  to  produce  a  map
    dated  2107  from  a  website  giving  an  indication  of  "approximate
    territorial control"  by  the  different  factions  in  Somalia.   This
    indicated the presence of Al-Shabab in a large part of  the  land  area
    between Mogadishu  and  Kismayo  in  the  south.   The  judge  had  not
    referenced his finding as to the ability of  the  appellant  to  travel
    safely.

11. This led to a discussion involving Mr Diwnycz regarding travel  of  the
    kind envisaged by the judge in the CIPN  report  that  was  before  him
    dated July 2017.  I observed to Mr McTaggart that if I  were  persuaded
    the judge had not given adequate reasons for  his  statement  regarding
    travel between the two  cities,  the  issue  would  then  arise  as  to
    internal  relocation  to  Mogadishu.   In  this  regard  Mr   McTaggart
    acknowledged his difficulties in relation to this aspect and  the  best
    that could be made of the point was that it had not been considered  by
    the judge.  Mr Diwnycz's response in essence was that there had been  a
    paucity of reasons but did not consider the judge had materially  erred
    in the light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in MS (Somalia).

12. I make these conclusions on the grounds in the  order  that  they  were
    argued.  The first is a challenge to the  fact  finding  by  the  judge
    regarding financial support from three potential sources.  At [11]  the
    judge surveys the appellant's mother's evidence regarding  her  ability
    to continue to provide financial support.  As will be  seen  from  [22]
    the judge notes that she had been married and that her husband  was  in
    employment and  that  he  supported  the  appellant's  brother.   I  am
    satisfied the judge  was  rationally  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's mother could continue to  support  him  as  he  establishes
    himself, as explained in [23].  Furthermore, I consider the  judge  was
    rationally entitled to observe the possibility  of  the  benefactor  in
    Canada supporting the  appellant  too.   Although  this  is  not  well-
    reasoned the judge noted at  [7]  of  the  extent  of  that  relative's
    support and the appellant's evidence in [8] that he was  no  longer  in
    contact.  In the absence of an explanation why  that  contact  had  not
    been maintained, I consider the judge was  rationally  entitled  to  at
    least observe the possibility of that support being provided.  Finally,
    in connection with the financial assistance from the Assisted Voluntary
    Returns Service, as Mr McTaggart accepted, the point had been raised by
    the Secretary of State in the refusal  letter  in  paragraph  [120]  as
    follows:

         "120.     In  addition,  it  is  considered  that  help  with  your
                reintegration into Somalia would potentially be available to
                you from the Assisted  Voluntary  Returns  Service  (contact
                details are given on page 23 of this  letter)  if  you  were
                minded to return to Somalia voluntarily, and thus avoid  the
                penalties of a relatively longer period  of  exclusion  from
                the UK that your enforced removal  from  the  country  would
                automatically entail."

13. In my judgment good faith requires cooperation by the appellant.  If he
    is unsuccessful in succeeding in this protection claim, he cannot  rely
    on obduracy that might dis-entitle him to  financial  assistance  as  a
    means to underpin a need for protection.

14. It is also questionable whether these evidential aspects of the grounds
    of challenge were of any material relevance even if I were wrong in  my
    conclusions.  As I have explained earlier,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position was that the appellant would be  able  to  return  to  Kismayo
    where he would not be at risk and there is no challenge to the  judge's
    findings in that regard.  Instead, the  challenge  is  focused  on  the
    difficulties it is apprehended the appellant would  face  in  Mogadishu
    with reference to MOJ & Others and  the  anticipated  difficulties  the
    appellant would face in passing through Al-Shabab controlled territory.
     As to the latter I accept the  judge  has  not  explained  in  further
    detail why the appellant would be able to travel safely in the light of
    the evidence contained in the map sourced from  www.polgonow.com  which
    had been submitted at the hearing.  The judge does not explain  whether
    he considered the appellant should be able to travel safely overland or
    by air or sea as an alternative.

15. This is a narrow but important  issue  which  may  however  be  readily
    resolved.  If there are  flights  between  Mogadishu  and  Kismayo  the
    appellant would not be at risk if the evidence is still the  case  that
    an overland journey would trigger a risk of the kind identified in  AMM
    and Others.

16. Accordingly, I conclude that Judge Farrelly erred  on  this  aspect  in
    failing to identify the evidence that supported his finding or to  give
    adequate reasons for  that  finding.   I  set  aside  his  decision  in
    relation to the issue whether the appellant can travel  safely  between
    Mogadishu,  being  the  city  of  return,  and  Kismayo,  the  city  of
    resettlement.  If the evidence does not show a safe journey is feasible
    then considerations of internal relocation in Mogadishu will come  into
    play.  The case will remain in the Upper Tribunal for a further hearing
    for this limited purpose.  Otherwise the findings  of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal are preserved.


Signed                                  Date  20 August 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

