
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08595/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th April 2019                   |On 26th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Hashmi, Mamoon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT"), and no application is made before me, as this a protection
    claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless and until a
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted
    anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    identify him. This direction applies amongst others to all parties.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
    proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a Pakistani national.  Although his immigration
    history is unclear, it appears that he first arrived in the United
    Kingdom in 2010 with the benefit of leave to enter as a student. He was
    granted subsequent extensions, and appears to have last arrived in the
    UK on 22nd July 2013, again as a Tier 4 General student, with leave
    valid until 30th November 2013.  He remained in the UK unlawfully and
    on 10th January 2018, he made a claim for asylum.  The claim was
    refused by the respondent for the reasons set out a decision dated 27th
    June 2018.  The appellant appealed, and his appeal was dismissed for
    the reasons set out in a decision of FtT Judge Chambers promulgated on
    30th January 2019. It is that decision that is the subject of the
    appeal before me.


The decision of FtT Judge Chambers


 3. A brief summary of the appellant's claim for asylum is set out at
    paragraphs [2] to [3] of the decision.  At paragraph [4] of the
    decision, the FtT Judge summaries the respondent's reasons for refusing
    the claim.  The Judge's findings and conclusions are to be found at
    paragraphs [9] to [29] of the decision.


 4. At paragraph [9] of the decision, the FtT Judge refers to the objective
    background material about the "Double Shah" scheme, the exposure of
    that scheme in April 2007, and the arrest and death in prison of Sibtul
    Hasan Shah, the mastermind behind the scheme.


 5. In reaching his decision, the FtT Judge had regard to a number of
    documents relied upon by the appellant.  The Judge noted at paragraph
    [10] of this decision, that the appellant ostensibly came to the UK as
    a student. Having considered the documents before him, the Judge was
    satisfied that the appellant had gained an MBA from the University of
    Northampton. At paragraph [11] of his decision, the Judge considered
    the documents relied upon in support of the claim that the appellant's
    parents were divorced when he was about five, and that his mother had
    remarried.  At paragraph [12] of his decision, the Judge considered the
    documents relating to the death of the appellant's stepfather and
    concluded, at [13], that the appellant's stepfather was murdered.


 6. At paragraph [15] of his decision, the Judge referred to a petition in
    the Lahore High Court in proceedings against two individuals, one of
    whom is the appellant's maternal uncle. At paragraphs [16] to [19] of
    the decision, the Judge considered the connection between the
    appellant's stepfather, his maternal uncle, and Sibtul Hasan Shah, the
    mastermind behind the "Double Shah" scheme. The Judge also considered
    the attack upon the appellant that was said to have occurred in 2009
    when the appellant was travelling on a student bus.


 7. At paragraphs [20] and [21] of the decision, the Judge states as
    follows:


             "20. On the totality of the evidence and mindful of the low
             standard of proof in asylum appeals, it is established that
             the appellant's step father and uncle were involved with the
             "Double Shah" corruption which cheated people out of a large
             sum of money. The appellant's stepfather was killed. A mob
             attacked the appellant. The appellant received injuries.
             Although he came to the UK as a student he had at the time the
             dual intention of studying and escaping the adverse attention
             at home. The appellant is, generally, credible in his account.


             21.  It is not suggested by the respondent that the appellant
             was in any way culpable. He was young and clearly, not
             criminally responsible for his actions. Although on his
             account what he did assisted the furtherance of the fraud by
             the others, the appellant was not acting unlawfully. The
             appellant was never prosecuted by the authorities of his
             country. It is not contended that he is at risk of being
             prosecuted. This is not a case in which the prosecution
             overlaps with persecution. The appellant claims that he is at
             risk from members of the defrauded group of people who lost
             money by investing in the scheme, and will now seek vengeance
             against him."


 8. At paragraph [25], the Judge again noted that it is not suggested that
    the appellant is facing any form of persecution or difficulty with the
    authorities. The Judge referred to the evidence of the appellant that
    the police intervened and made arrests when he was attacked. The Judge
    also noted that the appellant returned to Pakistan after completing his
    studies, and spent about four weeks in Pakistan.


 9. At paragraphs [26] and [27] of the decision, the Judge considered
    whether the appellant could turn to the authorities in Pakistan for
    protection, or internally relocate. The Judge stated as follows:


             "26. Documents the appellant relies upon show that the police
             carried out an appropriate investigation. Looking at the
             objective evidence it is shown that the authorities are
             capable and willing to provide the appellant with protection.
             The police were able to distinguish between the family members
             who had perpetrated the fraud and the appellant who had no
             criminal part in it. Although the police are capable of
             corruption that they were not corrupt in relation to the
             appellant.


             27.  The appellant's alleged fears are based upon the actions
             of non-state individuals. It is not demonstrated that they
             will have any influence over the state. Alternatively, it is
             shown that the appellant would not have a well-founded fear of
             being persecuted on the basis of his relocation to another
             part of the country. The law provides for freedom of movement
             within the country. Pakistan's size and diversity generally,
             allows for reasonable relocation options depending upon the
             individual's circumstances. There is no requirement for the
             appellant to return to his home area. The events the appellant
             complains about are now somewhat stale. Based upon the
             appellant's individual circumstances it would not be
             unreasonable to expect him to return and resettle in a large
             city. It is not demonstrated that the appellant is a refugee
             or that he has become a refugee since being in the United
             Kingdom."


The appeal before me


10. In the grounds of appeal advanced on behalf of the appellant, it is it
    said that in reaching his decision, the FtT Judge failed to have proper
    regard to the matters set out in the appellant's witness statement. In
    particular, at paragraph [21] of his decision, the FtT Judge states
    that the appellant does not contend that he is at risk of being
    prosecuted.  However, at paragraph 16 of his witness statement, the
    appellant claimed that although he was not directly involved, the
    authorities and those affected by the scam believe that he has the
    money as it was transferred abroad and he is "... Now on the top of the
    list ...".  He claimed in his witness statement that he will be at risk
    of torture from the authorities, particularly NAB and the police.
    Similarly in concluding that the appellant's alleged fears are based
    upon the actions of non-state individuals, and that in any event he
    could internally relocate, the FtT Judge failed to have regard to the
    matters set out in the appellant's witness statement and his answers in
    interview.


11. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Blundell on 1st March
    2019. The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of
    the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to
    remake the decision.


12. Before me, Ms Hashmi submits that the FtT Judge erred in his
    consideration of the claim by proceeding upon a mistake as to fact. The
    FtT Judge proceeded upon the premise that the appellant does not
    contend that he is at risk of being prosecuted, whereas at paragraph 16
    of his witness statement, the appellant had stated "... I will suffer
    torture from authorities particularly NAB and the police. They will put
    their every effort to prove that I was one of the main culprits.
    Further to that they would try to recover money from me despite I was
    not the beneficiary.".  She submits that insofar as issues of
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation are concerned, the
    appellant confirmed during his interview (Q.46 and (Q.100) that despite
    police protection, his stepfather has been killed and his attackers
    have not been punished. The appellant explained in his witness
    statement, what he had experienced when he returned to Pakistan but
    there is no reference to those events in the decision of the FtT Judge.


13. In reply, Mr McVeety submits that the appellant was accepted by the FtT
    Judge to be generally credible.  The appellant's maternal uncle
    remained in Pakistan and on the one occasion when the appellant was
    attacked, he was able to seek the protection of the authorities. There
    is no evidence that the appellant is on a watchlist, and it is to be
    noted that the appellant has never been investigated and was able to
    enter and leave Pakistan through the normal entry and exit channels.
    Mr McVeety submits that the FtT Judge carefully considered the
    appellant's claim and gave adequate reasons for dismissing the appeal.
    He submits that the background to the appellant's claim is a very
    highly publicised scam, and that the appellant is not named in any of
    the background material or documents relied upon by the appellant from
    official sources. He submits that on the evidence, it was open to the
    FtT Judge to conclude that there would be sufficient protection
    available to the appellant on return, and that he could in any event,
    internally relocate.


14. Although I accept that at paragraph [21] of the decision, the FtT Judge
    states that the appellant does not contend that he is at risk of being
    prosecuted, that error is immaterial.  It was common ground before the
    FtT, that the appellant was young at the time of relevant events, and
    that he was not in any way culpable.  The Judge correctly noted that
    the appellant was never prosecuted by the authorities.  The appellant
    had provided the FtT with a number of documents issued by the Pakistani
    authorities.  Ms Hashmi accepts that at page 99 of the appellant's
    bundle, there is a document dated 12 June 2007 issued by the National
    Accountability Bureau ("NAB"), which names various individuals against
    who there is an allegation of "Cheating members of public at large and
    criminal breach of trust".  Ms Hashmi accepts that the appellant is not
    named in that document. She accepts that the appellant's name does not
    feature in any of the other documents relied upon by the appellant, and
    there is no evidence to confirm that there are any outstanding
    proceedings against him, or indeed the threat of such proceedings.  The
    appellant's claim in his witness statement that the authorities and
    those affected by the scam believe that the money was transferred to
    the appellant and he is now "... on the top of the list ...", is
    entirely unsupported.  Although I accept that corroborative evidence is
    not always available, here, there is a wealth of evidence, including
    background material to establish those that are under investigation, or
    considered to be responsible for the scam.  The FtT Judge noted the
    evidence in the form of a copy petition in proceedings in the Lahore
    High Court, against individuals including the appellant's maternal
    uncle, that refers to 28 claimants seeking compensation for being
    defrauded. The appellant is not named in that document, as an
    individual against whom anyone seeks compensation.


15. At paragraph [25] of the decision, the FtT Judge noted that the
    appellant was able to return to Pakistan after completing his studies
    for about four weeks and in interview, the appellant had confirmed that
    he did not have any difficulty leaving Pakistan.  Ms Hashmi submits
    that insofar as issues of sufficiency of protection and internal
    relocation concerned, the appellant confirmed during his interview
    (Q.46 and (Q.100) that despite police protection, his stepfather has
    been killed and his attackers have not been punished.  The FtT Judge
    found that the appellant's stepfather had been murdered.  It does not
    follow in my judgement, that there is no sufficiency of protection
    available to the appellant, whose evidence at paragraph 16 of his
    witness statement is that he was not directly involved in the scam.
    The Judge found, at [26], that "... The police were able to distinguish
    between the family members who had perpetrated the fraud and the
    appellant, who had no criminal part in it. Although the police are
    capable of corruption, they were not corrupt in relation to the
    Appellant".


16. In my judgment, having considered the factual background to the
    appellant's claim, and the background material, it was open to the
    Judge to conclude that the authorities are capable and willing to
    provide the appellant with protection.  It was in my judgement open to
    the FtT Judge to conclude that internal relocation is open to the
    appellant. The Judge noted, at [27], that the events the appellant
    claims about, are now somewhat stale.  It was in my judgement open to
    the FtT Judge to conclude that upon the appellant's individual
    circumstances, it would not be unreasonable to expect him to return and
    resettle in a large city.


17. The obligation on a Tribunal is to give reasons in sufficient detail to
    show the principles on which the Tribunal has acted and the reasons
    that have led to the decision.  Such reasons need not be elaborate, and
    do not need to address every argument or every factor which weighed in
    the decision.  If a Tribunal has not expressly addressed an argument,
    but if there are grounds on which the argument could properly have been
    rejected, it should be assumed that the Tribunal acted on such grounds.
     It is sufficient that the critical reasons to the decision are
    recorded.


18. In my judgement, the findings reached by the Judge were neither
    irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or findings that
    were wholly unsupported by the evidence.  The assessment of such
    matters is always a highly fact sensitive task.  The FtT Judge was
    required to consider the evidence as a whole.  In assessing the
    credibility of the claim advanced by the appellant, the Judge was
    required to consider a number of factors.  They include, whether the
    account given by the appellant was of sufficient detail, whether the
    account is internally consistent and consistent with any relevant
    specific and general country information, and whether the account is
    plausible.  He clearly did so.  On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should
    not overturn a judgment at first instance, unless it really cannot
    understand the original judge's thought process when he or she was
    making material findings.


19. In my judgment, the appellant is unable to establish that there was a
    material error of law in the decision of the FtT, and it follows that
    the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


20. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge stands.


21. No aanonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As this is
    a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless
    and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
    granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction
    applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply with this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date          24th May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


22. I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date          24th May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

