
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08829/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 17 January and 21 February 2019   |On 04 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  SAJAD [I]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr T Haddow, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION and REASONS

 1. The appellant sought asylum on arrival in the UK on 21 September  2015,
    claiming to be at risk of  persecution  from  the  Iranian  authorities
    because he had attended a Christian house church.  His  appeal  against
    refusal of that claim was dismissed by FtT Judge Blair  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 2 September 2016 ("the 2016 decision", PA/03449/2015).

 2. The appellant made further representations on 10 August 2017, which the
    respondent refused on 25 August 2017.  The appellant's  appeal  against
    that refusal was dismissed by FtT Judge Agnew in a decision promulgated
    on 8 February 2018 ("the 2018 decision").

 3. On 22 February 2018 the appellant applied to the FtT for permission  to
    appeal to the UT on 3 grounds, headed as (1) failing to properly follow
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 000702; (2) failing to properly follow  Germany
    v X and Y [2012] EUECJ C-71/11 and HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31; and
    (3) procedural unfairness.

 4. In a  decision  dated  7  March  2018,  FtT  Judge  Hodgkinson  refused
    permission on grounds 1 and 3, and went on:

         "In relation to ground 2,  the  judge  considered  the  appellant's
         internet activity at  [77  -  80]  ...  It  is  arguable  that  her
         reasoning in relation to the risk posed ... on return  to  Iran  is
         flawed.  Such does not relate to the  judge's  adverse  credibility
         findings .... Permission is granted on this ground only."

 5. On 5 April 2018 the appellant applied  to  the  UT  for  permission  to
    appeal on the grounds which had been refused (and sought to expand upon
    those grounds).

 6. In a decision dated 29 May 2018, UT Judge Kebede refused permission  on
    grounds 1 and 3.

 7. By application made in writing shortly before the hearing on 17 January
    2019, and orally at the hearing, the appellant sought late admission of
    an application for permission to appeal on a supplementary ground.

 8. The supplementary ground was that the FtT "erred  in  its  approach  to
    assessing the genuineness of  the  appellant's  claimed  conversion  to
    Christianity", under reference to TF and MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 57, 2018
    SLT 1225.

 9. Bearing in mind  that  TF  and  MA  became  available  only  after  the
    procedure outlined above, I allowed  the  application,  and  found  the
    amended ground to be arguable.

10. Mr Govan sought an adjournment to another date  in  order  to  prepare,
    which was reasonable considering the late stage at which the new ground
    emerged, and the limited time remaining available on the day.

11. Directions were issued, dated 16 January 2019, and the case was  listed
    on 21 February 2019.  Submissions on  error  of  law  were  then  made.
    Under  reservation  of  that  issue,  further  evidence  was  led,  and
    submissions heard on remaking the decision of the FtT, if it were to be
    set aside.

12. I find no merit in the original ground  2.   It  implicitly  assumes  a
    series of matters which the appellant failed to establish (or  even  to
    assert), such as that he left Iran illegally; could return  only  as  a
    failed asylum seeker; was likely to be questioned; and  was  likely  to
    make any incriminating answer.  The appellant laid no foundation in the
    FtT for such a case.

13. The appellant's argument on the Christian conversion ground  begins  by
    criticising the 2016 decision.  That is  legitimate,  because  although
    that decision stands as a starting point, it is no more than that,  and
    it may be weakened by reference to authority which was not available at
    the time.  Similarly, the status which the 2018 decision  gave  to  its
    predecessor, on Devaseelan principles, may be open to  criticism,  even
    if with the benefit of hindsight.

14. The following is a distillation of Mr Haddow's submissions  on  TF  and
    MA:- Failure to  properly  take  account  of  independent  evidence  of
    genuineness of conversion, and failure to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    effectively  disregarding  such  evidence,  constitute  error  of  law.
    Evidence of engagement with the church  and  active  participation  was
    likely  to  be  a  powerful  consideration.   Independent  evidence  of
    genuineness of a conversion was not to be assumed  to  be  suspect.   A
    tribunal might regard with suspicion  evidence  from  church  witnesses
    based entirely on what an appellant has told them, but not  when  their
    evidence  is  based  on  observation  of  his  engagement  with  church
    activities.  There is a world of difference between  telling  lies  and
    being able to live a lie over a protracted period without detection.  A
    finding of telling lies does  not  justify  a  leap  to  a  finding  of
    creating a false persona and living a false lifestyle to  dupe  sincere
    witnesses.  There must be some evidence pointing to such a  conclusion.
    Evidence from religious leaders may go to the commitment required,  and
    the extent to which participation tests faith, which  are  relevant  to
    assessment of  their  evidence.   That  may  be  admissible  as  expert
    opinion, particularly when based on  long  experience,  which  is  also
    relevant to how easily such witnesses may be duped.

15. Mr Haddow suggested that the 2016 decision was  inconsistent  with  the
    principles set out in TF and MA, along the following lines:- There  was
    only brief narration of evidence from church witnesses, and  no  proper
    assessment, other than the comment at [25] that those witnesses did not
    have the benefit of seeing and hearing  the  appellant  give  evidence.
    Although their sincerity was accepted, no other  weight  was  given  to
    their opinion on conversion, although that was based on more than  what
    they were told by  the  appellant.   No  account  was  taken  of  their
    advantages such as knowledge of the appellant over time,  opportunities
    to observe him, expert knowledge of his participation,  and  experience
    with similar claimed converts.  In contrast, the  judge  at  [23]  took
    account of his own assessment of the appellant's  religious  knowledge.
    The supportive evidence was tested against other evidence and found  to
    be neutral, of no weight of its own.  The  finding  of  fabrication  of
    events in Iran was  impliedly  taken  as  undermining  the  independent
    evidence.  The FtT failed to acknowledge that for there to be  no  real
    possibility  the  claim  was  genuine,  despite  sincere  evidence   of
    independent witnesses, it had to be in no real  doubt  those  witnesses
    had been duped.  There was nothing in  the  decision  to  justify  that
    implicit finding.  No account was taken of evidence, although  recorded
    at [20], that the witnesses were alert to possible deception.

16. The submission on the 2018 decision was that it carried  forward  those
    previous errors, and showed further  inconsistency  with  TF  and  MA:-
    Evidence from church witnesses was explicitly set  against  credibility
    issues at [61] and [82].  There was nothing to support  the  leap  from
    adverse credibility to sustained fabrication of a persona.  Although TJ
    and MA made the point that such fabrication is not straightforward, the
    FtT assumed at [64] and [66] that it was only  a  matter  of  time  and
    effort, without acknowledging that opinions of church  witnesses  might
    be based on more than frequency of attendance.

17. Mr Govan submitted along  these  lines:-  The  2018  decision  was  not
    influenced to more than the appropriate extent by  the  2016  decision.
    Both decisions were reached in the round.  The 2018  decision  was  not
    based only on rejecting the sur place claim, but on a finding at  [81],
    which was  not  criticised  by  the  appellant,  that  he  had  further
    embellished his other claims.  TF and  MA  emphasised  the  significant
    weight which might attach to evidence of  church  witnesses,  but  both
    judges found those witnesses to  be  sincere,  and  acknowledged  their
    knowledge of the appellant and their place in  the  organisation.   The
    2018 decision was through and careful, and should not be interpreted as
    saying that conversion was easy to fabricate.   It  had  been  for  the
    appellant to establish his case.  The judge  found,  having  considered
    the evidence as a whole, that he failed to do so.  No error of law  was
    disclosed.

18. The case having developed in slightly  unusual  way,  I  find  it  more
    convenient to state my view  on  error  of  law  after  mentioning  the
    further evidence led and the submissions on remaking.

19. The appellant adopted his previous and supplementary statements and was
    briefly cross-examined.

20. Mr Mohsen Rezaey gave evidence.  He came to the UK from  Iran  and  was
    recognised as a refugee, not on grounds of  Christian  conversion.   He
    later met the appellant and through his friendship with him began going
    to the Tron church to meet other Iranians.  He  then  became  drawn  to
    Christianity, and was eventually baptised into another church.

21. Mr Taylor was examined and cross-examined on the  appellant's  part  in
    the Tron church (for the third time in this case;  he  has  also  given
    evidence in  many  similar  cases).   He  spoke  also  to  the  general
    practices and experience of the church.

22. Submitting on why the appellant should be found in any remaking not  to
    be a genuine Christian convert, Mr Govan relied upon  the  respondent's
    refusal letters and on adverse findings in 2016 and 2018.  He said (and
    I accept) that a properly reasoned adverse finding might remain  sound,
    or a similar conclusion might be reached.  The 2016 decision  contained
    2 such points about events in Iran.  The 2018 decision  at  [81]  added
    the point about embellishment, mentioned above.  While  a  false  claim
    about events in Iran did not exclude a good claim based  on  events  in
    the UK, a good claim was not automatically established by evidence from
    church witnesses.  TF and AM did not exclude but rather confirmed  that
    the  correct  approach  was  holistic.    Looking   at   the   evidence
    accordingly, the UT should find that the appellant failed to  establish
    his case.

23. Mr Haddow said that as the only plausible alternative to the claim  was
    a fabrication, the UT would have to be satisfied of that to a  standard
    approaching beyond reasonable doubt, not as  reversing  the  burden  of
    proof but as a  logical  consequence.   He  submitted  further  on  the
    plausibility of the appellant's account about events in Iran,  and  the
    strong independent evidence,  including  expert  opinion  evidence,  of
    genuine conversion.

24. The 2016 decision is based on two adverse matters.  The first is around
    the appellant's evidence of his relationship with a friend, Arman,  who
    initiated his interest in Christianity.  The second  is  a  discrepancy
    over the timing of a  raid  on  a  house  church.   Both  findings  are
    properly reasoned, and it was open to the judge to find the appellant's
    evidence on those matters less than persuasive.  They are  findings  of
    some significance, but not so devastating that the appellant was  never
    likely to be found to be reasonably likely  to  be  telling  the  truth
    about anything else.

25. The embellishment point at [81] of the 2018 decision  amounts  to  very
    little.  It is based on the appellant not accepting that  his  previous
    claim was incredible and adding nothing to it; and on introducing a new
    claim that he is related to political activists, which is a fabrication
    to enhance his prospects of remaining, as are his internet  activities.
    No additional reasons are given.

26. Nothing adverse emerged from the cross-examination of Mr Rezaey, and Mr
    Govan advanced no argument  that  he  should  be  found  an  unreliable
    witness.  The 2018 decision at [43 - 47] declined to find him a witness
    of credit, but for no discernible reason.  It is possible that he might
    have conspired with the appellant in deception, but that would take the
    case into even deeper and more unlikely realms  of  fraud.   I  see  no
    reason to take his evidence  as  anything  but  supportive,  and  quite
    strongly so.

27. The 2016 and 2018 decisions are both conscientious attempts to  resolve
    the  evidence.   The  latter  decision  explicitly  considered  whether
    conversion was no more than an elaborate pose.   Other  than  with  the
    benefit of hindsight through TF and MA,  neither  decision  might  have
    been thought to err on any point of law.  However, with that benefit of
    hindsight, there has been error of approach to the evidence  of  church
    witnesses which has fed through both decisions.  While  only  the  2018
    decision may now formally be  set  aside,  the  evidence  falls  to  be
    assessed on an entirely fresh basis.

28. The  respondent  has  advanced  relatively  weak  reasons  whereby  the
    appellant's account of events in Iran might be rejected.  Those are the
    only criticisms of his credibility.   The  appellant  has  advanced  an
    impressive body of evidence, including  significant  opinion  evidence,
    about his practice of Christianity in the UK.  That does  not  have  to
    carry the day, but if anything further is required, I find  it  in  the
    evidence of Mr Rezaey.

29. The evidence, as a  whole,  shows  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    appellant has genuinely converted to Christianity.

30. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and  the  appeal,  as  originally
    brought to the FtT, is allowed.

31. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]
      27 February 2019
      UT Judge Macleman

