
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08601/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 March 2018                              |On 05 April 2018              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    R. H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq who entered the UK  illegally,  and
    who then claimed asylum on 14 January 2016. That protection  claim  was
    refused on 23 August 2017.  His appeal against that refusal came before
    the First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 3 October 2017, when it was
    heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heatherington.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds in a decision  promulgated
    on 5 October 2017, although no reference was made to  the  humanitarian
    protection appeal that was before him within that decision.

 2. The Appellant's application for permission to  appeal  was  granted  by
    First tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale on 18 November 2017 on all of the
    grounds  advanced.  The  Judge  had  described  the  Appellant   as   a
    "mountebank", but his rejection of his evidence was based simply upon a
    failure  to  claim  asylum  in  France  and  a   failure   to   provide
    corroborative evidence of his account.

 3. Both parties are agreed that once it has been stripped of its recitals,
    this was on any view a very brief decision. It is  however  not  merely
    brief, but deficient in a number of obvious respects. The  Judge  fails
    to engage with the humanitarian protection appeal at all. There  is  no
    analysis of the evidence concerning the disputed  issue  of  where  the
    Appellant had previously lived in Iraq, and no clear findings  of  fact
    upon what his "home area" was. The human rights  appeal  is  dismissed,
    but the decision fails to identify, or to engage with  to  any  degree,
    the nature of the claim advanced.

 4. Whilst the Judge did make  clear  findings  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    evidence, the Appellant is in my judgement  correct  to  criticise  the
    reasons offered for those findings. Only two are offered;  the  failure
    to provide corroboration, and the failure to claim asylum in France. It
    is far from clear what corroborative evidence the  Judge  expected  the
    Appellant to be able to source from Iraq and provide to him. Equally it
    is far from clear what approach the Judge took to section 8 of the 2004
    Act; the reader is left with the distinct  impression  that  the  Judge
    took the view that the failure to claim  asylum  in  France  meant,  of
    itself, that the Appellant was a witness upon whose evidence no  weight
    could be placed. Although the Judge states  [8.14(c)]  baldly  that  he
    also considers the account is "incoherent and implausible", and  [8.12]
    that he considers the  Appellant  a  "mountebank",  "unimpressive"  and
    "inherently unreliable" the decision fails to record  adequate  reasons
    for such conclusions.

 5. In consequence, it is in my judgement plain that  this  is  a  decision
    that is unsafe. I am not satisfied that its content  demonstrates  that
    either of the parties enjoyed a fair hearing of the appeal.

 6. Thus the decision must be set aside and remade. In circumstances  where
    it would appear that  the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
    considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of  law
    has been to deprive the parties of the opportunity for their case to be
    properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the
    Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.  Moreover  the  extent  of  the
    judicial fact finding exercise required is such that having  regard  to
    the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should  be
    remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of  the  Practice
    Statement of 13 November 2014.

 7. To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing  by  a  judge  other
    than Judge Heatherington at the North Shields Hearing  Centre,  with  a
    Kurdish Sorani interpreter booked. The remitted hearing shall be listed
    on the first available date after 16 April 2018.





Notice of decision

 8. The decision promulgated on 5 October 2017 did involve the making of an
    error of law sufficient to require the decision to  be  set  aside  and
    reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing de novo with the directions set out above.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 27 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

