
                                    [pic]

In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08307/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2018                          |On 28 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                   Mr (SS)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Swain of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, a Home Office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 21 March 2000.





The appellant's immigration history and the history of the proceedings

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 8  April  2016,  having  left  Iraq  in
    November 2015  and  travelled  through  a  number  of  safe  countries,
    including France, en route for the UK. The appellant claimed asylum  on
    8 April 2016.

 3. His original claim was that due to an ISIS attack on his home  town  of
    Jalawla, which caused the death of his parents, he had to flee in 2014.
    However, the basis of the appellant's claim before the FTT was that  he
    had been employed by one Sarwar who had effectively adopted  him  as  a
    son. The appellant had started working for him at the young age of 11 -
    12 but he did not have any sons of his own to take over  his  business.
    The appellant's grandmother and the appellant  shared  a  bedroom  with
    Sarwar's daughter, who was only about three - four  years  old  at  the
    time. Sarwar  also  had  elder  teenage  children.  The  appellant  was
    "accused of something he should not do"  because  of  his  relationship
    with Sarwar. He believed the accusations  came  from  Sarwar's  family,
    possibly his brothers. The appellant decided to leave  the  area.  This
    occurred in 2015. The appellant claimed that Kurdish society is  tribal
    in nature and is a lonely  young  man  would  arouse  suspicion  if  he
    returned there.

 4. The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum and humanitarian protection on 18 June 2018. The appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (FTT) came before FTTJ Fox on 31 July 2018  sitting
    at Birmingham. On 17 September 2018 the Immigration Judge's decision to
    dismiss the appeal was promulgated.

 5. The appellant was given permission to appeal against that  decision  to
    the Upper Tribunal (UT) by FTTJ Gibb on  9  October  2018,  because  he
    considered it arguable that the Immigration Judge had failed  to  apply
    the recent country  guidance  case  of  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraqi GC UKUT 00212 (IAC). The appellant's home appeared to
    be outside IKR. This might affect the appellant's ability to internally
    relocate as he would require a CSID card to do so. It was  argued  that
    without relatives who would be able to facilitate an  application,  and
    without a passport, and without having held a passport,  the  appellant
    faced the utmost difficulty in obtaining a CSID card.  Secondly,  Judge
    Gibb considered it to  be  arguable  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had
    ignored certain facts about  the  appellant's  home  area.  Judge  Gibb
    declared the other grounds to be at least arguable. Those grounds (1, 2
    and 3) state that the Immigration Judge had mischaracterised  the  core
    of the appellant's case, misunderstood his  case  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's relationship with his employer's daughter and relied  on  a
    generalised assumption about the conduct of asylum seekers from Iraq by
    suggesting that it was commonplace for Iraqis to hide the  true  nature
    of their ties to their country of origin.

 6.  There was no response by the respondent under rule 24 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





The hearing before the UT

 7. The appellant claimed that his home  area  of  Jalawla  was  unsafe  or
    impossible to live in as it had been destroyed  by  ISIS.  Furthermore,
    the appellant would be destitute if he returned there. It was submitted
    that the Immigration Judge's decision to find that  the  appellant  did
    not come from Jalawla was against the respondent's own finding that  he
    probably did, but Ms Isherwood pointed out that all the respondent  had
    said was that he had  acknowledged  that  the  appellant's  account  of
    having come from Jamala was  consistent  with  the  objective  evidence
    including,  now,  objective  evidence  which   confirms   that   town's
    destruction by ISIS.

 8. It was also essentially argued that to  find  that  the  appellant  had
    family members in Iraq was contrary to the weight  of  evidence,  which
    established that there were no such relatives and that his parents were
    dead (having been killed in the ISIS attack referred to above). It  was
    also  submitted  that  the  appellant's  account  had  been  internally
    consistent as well as consistent with the objective evidence. Mr  Swain
    argued that there were in fact significant obstacles to  the  appellant
    removing to the IKR as he could not get a CSID  card.  AAH,  which  had
    been decided since the respondent's decision, had significantly updated
    the guidance but the Immigration Judge appeared not to take account  of
    this.

 9. The Immigration Judge chose to ignore the respondent's  own  concession
    that the appellant's account as far as his home area was concerned, was
    consistent with the objective  material  and  instead  found  that  the
    appellant had actually come from the IKR. This assessment  appeared  to
    be based on the appellant's adverse  credibility,  as  the  Immigration
    Judge found it  to  be.  However,  that  have  been  based  on  general
    assumptions about Iraqi asylum seekers which were  unjustified  on  the
    evidence. Mr Swain also submitted that it would not be possible for the
    appellant to obtain a CSID card from his home town of  Jalawla  because
    it did not operate any registry office due to its destruction by  ISIS.
    This does not appear to have been part of the evidence before the  FTT,
    but it may well be correct based on objectively verifiable material.

10. Ms Isherwood responded by saying that the suggestion that the appellant
    would be destitute in his home town of Jalawla had not been  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal. She pointed out that  at  paragraph  36  of  the
    decision of the FTT it is recorded that Mr Bedford, who represented the
    appellant at the  FTT,  accepted  that  the  main  issue  was  internal
    relocation and that "it is accepted that  the  appellant's  persecutors
    will not pursue him at another location". Given this  concession,  Miss
    Isherwood argued that the Immigration Judge was entitled to come to the
    decision he came to. She also referred to paragraph 44 of the decision,
    where it is recorded that it was not accepted that  the  appellant  had
    "no male family members" and he can  turn  and  given  the  Immigration
    Judge's adverse credibility finding this was  a  justified  conclusion.
    She also argued that,  as  far  as  the  town  he  had  come  from  was
    concerned, even though the respondent  have  accepted  the  appellant's
    account to be consistent with the objective  material  nevertheless  it
    was open to the  Immigration  Judge  not  to  believe  the  appellant's
    account having heard his evidence. The appellant had failed to  provide
    reliable account and overall the  Immigration  Judge  was  entitled  to
    reject it. Furthermore, the Immigration Judge had referred to the  case
    of A A H and therefore had fully taken it into account.

11. In reply, Mr Swain argued that the Immigration  Judge  did  not  attach
    sufficient weight to the case of A A H. It  seems  that  the  appellant
    made some remark about having an uncle and this had been seized upon as
    indicating that he had relatives in Iraq to  whom  he  could  turn  for
    assistance in relocating to the IKR. This was not in fact the case.

12. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was a material error of law and if so what steps  to  take  to  rectify
    that.



Discussion

13. The parties helpfully assembled in a bundle of documents which  closely
    mirrored those before the FTT. In particular, it included the case of A
    A H. That case bears out a number  of  the  submissions  made  by  both
    sides. For an Iraqi national returnee of Kurdish origin, the key  issue
    was whether the appellant had a  CSID  card.  It  remains  possible  to
    obtain a new CSID but whether or not the appellant will be able  to  do
    so in a particular case within a reasonable timeframe  will  depend  on
    the individual circumstances. Those circumstances  include  whether  he
    has an existing form of documentation such as a  passport,  current  or
    expired, or other form of ID.  There  is  also  to  be  considered  the
    presence or location of the civil registry office - and whether  it  is
    within an area of ISIS control. Is the civil registry operational?  The
    next issue was: whether the appellant had male family members who would
    be able and willing to attend a civil registry with the appellant  with
    a view to obtaining a CSID card? If he did, he could be safely returned
    to Baghdad and travel from there  to  the  IKR  relatively  easily  and
    certainly without a real risk of suffering persecution, serious harm or
    article 3 ill-treatment but without one it would be more  difficult.  A
    key question to ask is: whether the appellant had family members living
    in the IKR? Whether the appellant could obtain employment needed to  be
    appraised on a case-by-case basis.

14. Within the framework set by AAH, the issues therefore were:

      i) Based on the objective and subjective evidence, was the Immigration
         Judge entitled to conclude that the appellant  did  not  come  from
         Jalawla but came from "an area (inside)  the  IKR"  (see  paragraph
         47)?

     ii) Does this matter, given that the  Immigration  Judge  rejected  the
         appellant's evidence as to the  feud  with  Sarwar's  family-  i.e.
         whichever area the appellant was from, his claim was  found  to  be
         false?

    iii) Whether, given the  concession  that  the  appellant's  persecutors
         would not pursue him to "another location"  the  Immigration  Judge
         was entitled to  conclude  that  another  location  was  reasonably
         available to him?

     iv) If that "other location" is inside the IKR but the appellant  lives
         outside the IKR whether there were too many  barriers  to  that  to
         make it practical or realistic having regard to the evidence  given
         before the Immigration Judge?

      v) Was  the  Immigration  Judge  correct  to  record  the  appellant's
         evidence as having been that "he has maternal uncles who may be  of
         assistance" (paragraph 45) to replace the CSID  document  that,  he
         says, his agent chose to take from him (paragraph 46)?

15. I will now consider these issues in turn.



Credit

16. Credibility had to be judged the context of a  vulnerable  elder  child
    /young adult- the appellant being under 18 at the date of the claim but
    by the date of the respondent's decision (18 June 2018)  was  over  18.
    The Immigration Judge had regard Joint Presidential Guidance  at  52  -
    53.

17. It is important to note that the Immigration Judge did not accept  that
    the appellant had a feud with Sarwar or his family and the alleged fear
    of ISIS was no longer made out because ISIS had all but been wiped  out
    in Jalawla. Mr Swain argued that the appellant would be destitute if he
    returned there but, as Miss Isherwood  pointed  out,  this  is  not  an
    argument he had raised previously. Indeed,  it  was  not  a  ground  of
    appeal as such yet alone one he had permission to argue.

18. As the Immigration Judge pointed out, the appellant's case had  shifted
    fundamentally. Since he made his claim for asylum  ISIS  had  left  his
    "home village" - being  a  reference  to  Jalawla.  Therefore,  as  the
    Immigration Judge pointed out at paragraph  36  of  this  decision,  it
    followed that "the appellant's claim is related to the general  country
    conditions". Effectively, the appellant completely changed his case  to
    base it on  alleged  "honour  crimes"  or  the  fear  thereof.  As  the
    Immigration Judge pointed out,  it  was  "an  unusual  feature  of  the
    evidence that the appellant should fail to  mention  the  core  of  his
    claim at the screening interview". Even acknowledging  the  appellant's
    "potential vulnerability" it struck the Immigration Judge as a  strange
    state of affairs that the appellant's  principal  claim  had  not  been
    mentioned.

19. It was important to his findings that the  Immigration  Judge  did  not
    accept the appellant was at risk from  Sarwar's  family,  pointing  out
    that it was likely that Sarwar's family did not believe the  allegation
    against  the  appellant.  There  was  no  reliable  evidence   of   any
    repercussions. Sarwar "did not interpret the  appellant's  presence  in
    his home area as a cause for concern". There was no  reliable  evidence
    the appellant ever engaged in relationship Sarwar's daughter and it was
    reasonable to expect that other people would not accept the allegation.

20. Therefore, the appellant had not established, even to the law  standard
    of proof that applied, that  he  had  been  the  subject  of  malicious
    falsehoods, nor would he be at risk from Sarwar's family. His claim was
    not credible in the round.  Therefore,  although  the  main  issue  was
    identified as internal relocation, it appears from the findings of  the
    Immigration Judge, he decided the case on the evidence over the alleged
    relationship with Sarwar and his  family  and  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation did not arise.

21. The Immigration Judge's adverse credibility findings underline many  of
    his conclusions - if the appellant was not at risk in his home area  it
    followed that he did not need to relocate. Therefore, the  presence  or
    absence of a CSID card or the ability to travel within or  without  the
    IKR were irrelevant.

22. In any event, the adverse credibility findings tended  to  justify  the
    Immigration Judge's findings in relation to having  family  members  in
    Iraq, for example, but I will consider that  issue  in  greater  detail
    below.

23. The Immigration Judge clearly did not  accept  that  just  because  the
    appellant was technically a child when he came into the country that he
    would accept all his account. In particular, the plea that he was under
    an agent's control, who was able to decide where he would claim asylum,
    was not accepted. The Immigration Judge clearly took a dim view of  the
    appellant's account and in particular the assertion that he was able to
    travel to one of the furthest points in Western Europe to claim asylum,
    having travelled through several safe countries including  France,  was
    not accepted by him (see paragraph 43 of  his  decision).  He  did  not
    accept  the  appellant  was  "a  passive  party"  (see  paragraph  43).
    Accordingly, the respondent had been  entitled  to  raise  the  matters
    considered above as matters which harmed the appellant's credit for the
    purposes of Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants) Act 2004.

24. Perhaps more importantly to the  present  appeal,  the  fact  that  the
    Immigration Judge rejected the credibility of the  appellant's  account
    meant that he was not inclined to believe when he gave  evidence  about
    his lack of relatives in Iraq. He said explicitly at paragraph 44  "...
    I do not accept that he has no male family  members  to  turn  to  upon
    return".



Family members

25. Although not a specific ground of appeal, Mr Swain  seemed  to  dispute
    that the appellant had given evidence that he had  family  members  who
    could assist him in gaining a replacement CSID card. This evidence  was
    recorded at paragraph 23. The appellant says there that his parents had
    told him about a paternal aunt, two maternal uncles  and  two  maternal
    uncles. He had asked the social  services  in  the  UK  to  trace   his
    grandmother, the relevance of this being that  his grandmother was  one
    of the persons he said he thought was alive in Iraq, at least  when  he
    was in Iraq (see question 7 in interview).  In any event, this had been
    without success.

26. The respondent did not accept that the appellant's  parents  were  dead
    (see paragraph 58 of the refusal) and it was possible they had fled  to
    village and were still living in Iraq.

27.  Furthermore,  the  appellant's  somewhat  vague  answers  as  to   his
    relationships had to be  seen  in  the  context  of  the  comprehensive
    rejection of his credibility by the  Immigration  Judge,  as  has  been
    discussed above.

28. In the  circumstances  the  Immigration  Judge  had  been  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant had relatives in  Iraq  to  whom  he  could
    turn.



Where the appellant is from

29. The appellant is reasonably likely to be from where he says he is from-
    a village near Jalawla. This is because the  account  he  gave  to  the
    respondent of the details of the village, including where  it  is  near
    and  so  forth,  was  consistent  with  the  known  facts.  Hence   the
    respondent's  accepted  that  the  appellant  was   Kurdish   and   the
    consistency of his account with the objective evidence as  far  as  the
    village of origin was concerned. However, there was no concession  that
    the appellant was actually from the village concerned or  indeed  where
    Iraqi came from other than the fact that he was Kurdish in  origin  and
    that his account had been consistent. The relevance of  this  issue  is
    questionable,  having  regard  to  the  Immigration   Judge's   adverse
    credibility findings, as I have indicated.



Travel to the IKR

30. This went to the alternative case that the appellant feared persecution
    in his home area (be it Jalawla or another town or village outside  the
    IKR) and whether he could travel into the IKR for an adequate degree of
    protection as a homeless Kurd.

31. The Immigration Judge was clearly sceptical about  the  destruction  of
    his former CSID card, apparently by the agent in Turkey. The  appellant
    had taken no steps to try and replace his CSID document.

32. For the issue of internal relocation to be  relevant,  the  Immigration
    Judge would need to have concluded there was  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the appellant was persecuted in his home area.  If  the
    Immigration Judge had found  the  appellant  was  from  Jalawla  as  he
    claimed, and as he probably should have done, I would have  taken  some
    persuading that the appellant decided to  give  his  CSID  card  to  an
    agent. The adverse credibility lend support to the finding that  he  is
    reasonably likely to have retained his CSID card.

33. The issue of relatives, particularly male relatives, who  could  assist
    the appellant in obtaining a replacement card, was shrouded in mystery.
    However, given the adverse credibility findings the  Immigration  Judge
    was entitled to conclude that the appellant did have male relatives  to
    whom he could turn to assist him in obtaining a replacement CSID  card.
    This was Consistent with the respondent's own view that, following  the
    death of his parents the appellant had other relatives in the area  who
    he could turn to in order to obtain a replacement CSID card.

34. Since the core of the appellant's claim related to a family feud  which
    the Immigration Judge found not to have taken place, it  followed  that
    it did not to give rise to any risk on return. But, if I am wrong about
    that, if he were to return to his home area the fact that the feud with
    Mr Sarwar's family had not taken place outside the IKR was  irrelevant.
    If he was from outside the IKR, as appears to have been  the  case,  he
    could move to another part  of  Iraq.  If,  as  the  Immigration  Judge
    thought, he is from  the  IKR,  the  absence  of  e  a  CSID  Card  was
    irrelevant as he would be able to travel to a different area within the
    IKR. Either way, the appellant would not be  at  risk  on  return.  If,
    contrary to this, the appellant were at risk in his home area he  could
    move to a different part of Iraq.



Conclusions

35. In conclusion:

      i) The appellant's alleged  fear  of  Isis  arose  as  Isis  had  been
         occupying his home area. I understand it to be conceded  that  Iraq
         has effectively been crushed at least in that area;

     ii) The appellant's alleged fear of destitution in his  home  area  did
         not arise as it has not been subject of  any  evidence  before  the
         FTT, is not subject grounds of appeal and has only appeared in  the
         oral submissions of  Mr Swain;

    iii) The Immigration Judge's adverse credibility findings underline  his
         overall conclusion that the appellant had not been at risk  in  his
         home area. Therefore, the issue  of  internal  relocation  did  not
         arise;

     iv) In case  it did arise, and in so far as it was appropriate for  the
         appellant to travel from the non- IKR part of Iraq to  the  IKR,  I
         would have decided the appellant came from Jalawla and  could  only
         travel to the IKR with a CSID;

      v) The question whether the appellant could obtain  a  CSID  card  was
         quite finely balanced, but I consider  the  Immigration  Judge  was
         entitled, in the light of his adverse credibility findings, to find
         that there were male relatives to whom the appellant could turn  to
         assist him in making an application if, indeed, his CSID  card  was
         ever taken by the agent.

36. As I have indicated, the internal flight alternative does not arise  in
    fact though.

37. The appeal to the U T is therefore dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal to the UT is dismissed.

The  decision  of  the  FTT  on   asylum   grounds/humanitarian   protection
grounds/human rights grounds stands.

An anonymity direction was made by the FTT and I continue that direction  as
follows.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 21 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable and the Immigration  Judge  made  no  fee  award.
Therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 21 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

