
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08817/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 July 2020                    |On 4 August 2020                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     CB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     T. Hodson, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    M. Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 13  January  2001  who
       entered the UK on 11 January 2019 and claimed asylum  on  19  January
       2019. His asylum application was refused  by  the  respondent  on  30
       August 2019. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, where his appeal
       was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Khawar ("the judge").

    2. In a  decision  promulgated  on  21  January  2020,  the  appeal  was
       dismissed.  The  judge  rejected  the  appellant's  account  in   its
       entirety, finding it not credible.

    3. The appellant sought permission to appeal, arguing, inter alia,  that
       the adverse credibility findings  are  undermined  by  a  failure  to
       consider material documentary evidence and  mistakes  in  respect  of
       some of the evidence that was considered.

    4. On 7 May 2020 directions of Upper Tribunal Judge Smith dated 24 April
       2020 were issued. These gave the provisional review that the error of
       law issue in this appeal could be determined without a hearing.

    5. On 24 June 2020 the respondent submitted written submissions  stating
       that the appellant's application for permission was not  opposed  and
       inviting the Tribunal to determine  the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral
       continuance hearing.

    6. As the appellant's application is unopposed by the respondent, I  set
       aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the  reasons
       summarised in para. 3  above.  Given  credibility  will  need  to  be
       considered  afresh  and  no  findings  of  fact  can  reasonably   be
       preserved, having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement I have decided to remit the appeal to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.




  Decision

    7. The decision is set aside. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to be heard afresh by a different judge.

  Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
  Tribunal) Rules 2008

    8. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
       is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall  directly
       or indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
       direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
       proceedings.

|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |Dated:  24 July 2020               |




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email

