
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08781/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st September 2020                        |On 2nd September 2020         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     BN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Ali, Counsel instructed by Legal Solutions
                    Advocates & Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)


   1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"),
      and as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is
      made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the
      appellant is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall
      directly or indirectly identify her. This direction applies amongst
      others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could
      lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The hearing before me on 1st September 2020 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. The appellant was present throughout
      the hearing and was represented by counsel.  The respondent was
      represented by a Senior Presenting Officer.  Neither party objected to
      a remote hearing, and I was satisfied that it was in the interests of
      justice and in accordance with the overriding objective to proceed
      with a remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions
      against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied
      that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and
      justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case,
      the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


   3. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      ("FtT") Judge M A Khan promulgated on 2nd December 2019.  The
      underlying decision that was the subject of the appeal before FtT was
      the decision of the respondent dated 23rd August 2019 to refuse the
      appellant's claim for international protection.


   4. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. She arrived in the United
      Kingdom in July 2009 with leave to enter as a student. She was
      subsequently granted further leave to remain as a student until August
      2011.  The appellant then made an application for leave to remain as a
      dependent of her mother and that application was refused by the
      respondent in August 2013. Nevertheless, the appellant remained in the
      UK unlawfully, and in October 2015, she made a claim for asylum. That
      claim was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a decision
      dated 26th January 2016. The appellant's appeal against that decision
      was dismissed by FtT Judge Moxon for reasons set out in a decision
      promulgated on 19th December 2016.  Judge Moxon summarised the claim
      for international protection made by the appellant at paragraphs [14]
      to [20] of his decision. His findings of fact and conclusions are set
      out at paragraphs [61] to [93] of the decision. It serves no purpose
      for me to make any detailed reference to the findings in this
      decision.  It is sufficient to note that Judge Moxon made a number of
      adverse credibility findings, and went so far as to reject the
      appellant's claim that she is married and in a genuine and subsisting
      relationship with her partner.


   5. In June 2017 the appellant made further submissions to the respondent.
      The respondent, for reasons set out in a decision dated 23rd August
      2019, considered the further material relied upon by the appellant and
      accepted that the appellant has been in a long-term relationship with
      her partner and that they were married by way of an Islamic marriage
      in 2015.  Although the claim for international protection was refused
      by the respondent, the decision gave rise to a right of appeal before
      the First-tier Tribunal.


   6. The appeal was heard by Judge Khan on 8th November 2019 and he heard
      evidence from the appellant and her partner.  The core of the
      appellant's claim is summarised at paragraph [40] of the decision.  At
      paragraphs [42] and [43], Judge Khan refers to the previous decision
      of Judge Moxon.  He noted that the appellant has now provided evidence
      to establish the relationship between the appellant, her partner and
      their children.  Judge Khan accepted that the appellant and her
      partner are in a genuine relationship and that they are the parents of
      two children.  Having accepted that, at paragraph [43], Judge Khan
      stated ".. The rest of (sic) credibility findings in Judge Moxon's
      decision stand and are the starting point for this Tribunal".


   7. Before me, Mr Clarke confirmed that having had the opportunity of
      considering the decision of Judge Khan, it is accepted by the
      respondent that Judge Khan erred in his assessment of credibility,
      upon the premise that the remaining findings made by Judge Moxon
      stand, and are the starting point for the Tribunal.  He accepts,
      rightly in my judgement, that what is required is a holistic
      assessment of the claim and the credibility of the appellant, in
      circumstances where the credibility findings previously made by Judge
      Moxon, considered in the round, are potentially undermined by the
      material and evidence now available.  Mr Clarke concedes, rightly in
      my judgment, that in the circumstances, the decision of the FtT cannot
      stand.  He concedes that the decision of Judge Khan contains a
      material error of law and should be set aside.  He accepts that none
      of the findings made by Judge Khan can be preserved, and the matter
      should be heard de-novo.


   8. Having carefully considered the decision of the Judge Khan, I am
      satisfied that the FtT Judge fell into a legal error in the appraisal
      of the evidence.  The principles set out in Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT
      00702, applied to the appeal before Judge Khan and the determination
      of Judge Moxon stood as an assessment of the claim that the appellant
      was making at the time of the first determination.  The relationship
      between the appellant and her partner is an important factor that goes
      to the core of the appellant's claim.  The appellant had provided
      evidence regarding her relationship and Judge Khan accepted the
      appellant and her partner are in a genuine relationship.  The
      assessment of such a claim is always a highly fact sensitive task.  In
      view of the evidence now available and the findings made by him, Judge
      Khan was required to consider the evidence as a whole and to consider
      the extent to which the previous findings made by Judge Moxon were now
      undermined and could not be relied upon.


   9. As the Judge failed to properly address the core of the appellant's
      claim, the matter will need to be heard afresh with no findings
      preserved.   I have decided that it is appropriate to remit this
      appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having considered paragraph
      7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September
      2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and extent of
      any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


  10. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.



Notice of Decision


  11. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge M A Khan
      promulgated on 2nd December 2019 is set aside.


  12. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
      with no findings preserved.


  13. I make an anonymity direction.

Signed   V. Mandalia                             Date:         1st
September 2020

      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and remitted the matter to  the  FtT  for  hearing
afresh.  In any event, no fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


Signed   V. Mandalia                             1st September 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





