
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08770/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st April 2019                             |On 29th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 MISS L G L
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Johal (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Asjad, promulgated on 28th March 2018,  following  a  hearing  on
    26th February 2018.  In the  determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Cameroon, was born on 24th July 1992, and
    is a female.  She appeals against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    4th  August  2017,  refusing  her  application  for  asylum,  and   for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that she has  connections  with
    the Southern Cameroon National Council ("SCNC"), such that she would be
    at risk of persecution if returned to Cameroon.  She used to live  with
    her aunt and her mother.  Her aunt was a staunch member  of  the  SCNC.
    The Appellant herself became interested in the goals and objectives  of
    this group in 2008.  She proceeded to become an active  member  of  the
    SCNC in October 2011.  The Appellant claims to have  been  arrested  on
    29th November 2010 and on 1st October 2011.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge concluded, in what was a detailed,  comprehensive  and  well-
    crafted  determination,  that  the   Appellant's   claim   lacked   all
    credibility, on account of internal inconsistencies and contradictions.
     She had arrived in the UK as a student on 14th September 2015, but did
    not claim asylum until 2017.  The Appellant's account of her arrest  on
    1st October 2011 was different from that given  by  Mr  Arrey,  in  his
    affidavit as the "acting national secretary general" of  the  SCNC,  in
    which he does not even claim to know the  Appellant.   The  Appellant's
    account of the earlier incident of 29th November  2010  was  internally
    inconsistent, and the Appellant was not  even  clear  whether  she  was
    arrested  at  all.   Indeed,  the  Appellant  demonstrated  a  lack  of
    knowledge about the SCNC.  As for an expert report  produced  by  Ticky
    Monekosso, the judge gave ample  reasons  for  why  this  evidence  was
    unreliable.  In the end, the  judge  was  left  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant's account and documents in support are contradictory, and she
    had not been able to show she was a member of the SCNC.  She claimed to
    have engaged in sur place activities in the UK, but there was only  one
    attendance at one demonstration in March 2017, and this did not show  a
    risk of persecution upon return.  The Appellant had entirely fabricated
    her claim (see paragraph 47).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  failed  to  ascribe
    appropriate  weight  to  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal;  wrongly
    concluded that the Appellant was not a credible  witness;  ignored  the
    "voluminous evidence of the Appellant's problems";  failed  to  ascribe
    appropriate weight to the circumstances of the Appellant;  and  "failed
    to consider Article 8 outside of the Rules".

 7. On 11th May 2018, permission to  appeal  was  granted.   This  was  not
    without the Tribunal, before  granting  permission,  stating  that  the
    judge had given ample and "cogent reasons" for disbelieving the  claim.
    However, whilst noting at page 1  "of  an  admirably  clear  Record  of
    Proceedings", that there was "no Article 8", the judge had nevertheless
    gone on to conclude (at paragraph 48) that,

          "I therefore dismiss her claim for asylum, humanitarian protection
         as well as Articles 2, 3 and 8.  The Appellant's parents remain  in
         Cameroon.  She has lived and studied there all her life.  She could
         easily  establish  herself  in  Cameroon,  find  work  and  support
         herself".

 8. In granting permission, it was stated that, given that  the  judge  had
    gone on to deal with Article 8, it was incumbent upon her to apply  the
    principles in "Razgar", in order to ensure that it was clear that there
    was no disproportionate interference with  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    rights.

 9. On 11th July 2018, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Secretary  of
    State.  It is detailed and noteworthy.  It  makes  it  clear  that  the
    Appellant had not submitted any Article 8 grounds.  This being so,  the
    fact that the judge went on to deal with them was an  immaterial  error
    on her part.  This was particularly so given  that  the  Appellant  had
    entered the UK as a student  in  September  2015,  and  claimed  asylum
    months after her student  visa  expired  on  9th  February  2017.   The
    Appellant had only been in the UK for two  years,  pursuing  an  asylum
    claim.  It was difficult to see, without any evidence to the  contrary,
    that a private life could be established under paragraph 276ADE.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 1st April  2019,  Mr  Johal,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that he would have to accept that no
    Article 8 claim had been put before the judge.  He would have to accept
    that there was nothing in the Appellant's witness  statement  referring
    to any tangible Article 8 claim.  He would have to accept that no  such
    claim was advanced before the Tribunal  on  the  day  of  the  hearing,
    although he himself was not Counsel representing the Appellant on  that
    day.  Nevertheless, the fact that the judge did  then  proceed,  having
    initially set out that there was "no Article 8"  claim,  to  deal  with
    Article 8, meant that the judge may possibly have fallen into error, in
    not considering everything that ought to  have  been  considered  in  a
    proper manner.

11. For her part, Mrs Aboni submitted that there was no Article 8  argument
    ever raised.  She relied upon her Rule 24 response.  There may be  some
    evidence of a private life,  but  it  was  not  enough  to  lead  to  a
    conclusion that its violation was disproportionate with respect to  the
    Appellant's rights.  The plain fact was that the Appellant could  never
    succeed on Article 8 grounds.  Indeed, no Article 8  grounds  had  ever
    been put.  She had only been in the UK for  about  two  years.   During
    that time she had only pursued an Article 8 claim after  her  leave  to
    remain as a student expired.

12. In reply, Mr Johal submitted that the duration of time  in  the  UK  is
    only one factor.  Nevertheless, he was not in a position to demonstrate
    that there were indeed "very significant obstacles"  to  the  Appellant
    returning back to Cameroon.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

14. In a commendably clear and comprehensive determination, the judge  gave
    entirely sustainable reasons for why this claim could not succeed.  The
    Grounds of Appeal only tangentially refer to Article  8  (at  paragraph
    6(f)), and even then simply state that the judge  "failed  to  consider
    Article 8 outside of the Rules", without at any stage setting out  what
    the Article 8 claim was.  The bulk of the grounds of application relate
    to an expert  report  (paragraph  8),  and  to  the  judge's  findings,
    alleging that no adequate reasons were given for those findings,  which
    is manifestly false.  It is  also  said  that  the  Appellant's  bundle
    showed "a number of documents all  of  which  were  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant's claim that she is at  risk  of  persecution  in  Cameroon",
    (paragraph  11),  without  actually  demonstrating  why   the   judge's
    conclusion that the Appellant herself was not at risk was in error.

15. Before this Tribunal, Mr Johal, to his credit, has  only  focused  upon
    that aspect of the  claim  upon  which  permission  has  been  granted,
    namely, on the Appellant's Article 8.  To his credit also, he has  only
    said that which he is in a position to say, not having appeared  before
    the Tribunal below, and has made  it  quite  clear  that  there  is  no
    evidence that there are "very significant obstacles" to  the  Appellant
    returning back to Cameroon.  That leaves, therefore,  the  question  of
    the judge's own treatment of the Article 8 claim.  I deal with this  as
    follows.

16. First, it is plain that the judge started on the basis that  there  was
    "no Article 8" claim.  This was, as Mr Johal has  submitted  before  me
    today, because there was nothing in the Appellant's  witness  statement
    with respect to the Article 8 claim, and nothing by way of evidence  on
    the day of the hearing, or submissions, before Judge Asjad, in relation
    to Article 8.  In short, Article 8 was simply not raised.

17. Second, insofar as the judge does refer to  this  question  herself  at
    paragraph 48, the findings that she made were entirely open to her, and
    were wholly sustainable.  What the judge has  here  said  is  that  the
    Appellant cannot succeed because she has lived and studied all her life
    in  Cameroon.   She  could  easily  establish  herself   in   Cameroon.
    Moreover, she could find work and support herself there.

18. There is absolutely nothing anywhere before the judge to have suggested
    that these conclusions were not open to  the  judge  to  come  to.   No
    evidence was put before the judge which in any way detracts from  these
    conclusions as being not open to her to make.  There  is,  accordingly,
    nothing in this appeal.  It is hopeless.  I dismiss it.




Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

20. An anonymity direction is made.

21. The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019




