
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/08596/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th March 2018                            |On 12th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           mr khabat abubakir ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq  born  on  1st  January  1983.   The
    Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK on  3rd  February  2016  via
    concealment in a lorry and claimed asylum on the same day following his
    arrest for illegal entry.  The Appellant's application for  asylum  was
    based on purportedly having a well-founded fear of persecution in  Iraq
    on the basis of his uncle threatening his  life  after  he  killed  his
    father and ISIS being  present  in  his  area.   That  application  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 28th July 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Birrell sitting at Manchester on 16th February 2017.   In
    a decision promulgated on 20th February 2017 the Appellant's appeal was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 11th April 2017 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On  8th  September  2017  Acting  Resident  Judge  Appleyard
    refused  permission  to  appeal  stating  that  the   grounds   seeking
    permission amount to no more than a dispute  with  findings  that  were
    open to be made on the evidence  and  that  the  judge  had  adequately
    reasoned her decision which contained no arguable error of law.

 4.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged on 18th September 2017.  On 16th
    October 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted permission to appeal.
     Judge Plimmer in giving her reasons for decision stated:

         "It is arguable that the finding at paragraph 37 that there  is  no
         evidence that the use of a different dialect on  the  part  of  the
         interpreter made any  meaningful  difference  fails  to  take  into
         account the Appellant's own evidence.  When this is  combined  with
         the Appellant's hearing difficulties, it is arguable that the First-
         tier Tribunal  unfairly  drew  adverse  references  from  omissions
         within the interview."

 5. On 7th November 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24 submitting  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    appreciated the Appellant's arguments and rejected them and that it  is
    asserted that the adverse credibility  findings  made  were  reasonably
    open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  As to  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge unfairly drew adverse references from  omissions  within
    the interview it was submitted in the Rule 24  response  that  fairness
    did not decree that every point be put by a judge and it was  contended
    that  the  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  directed  herself
    appropriately.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    solicitor, Mr Howard.  Mr Howard comes to this case afresh.   His  firm
    is not the firm that acted previously for the Appellant and I note that
    the Grounds of Appeal are personally signed  by  the  Appellant  rather
    than by solicitors.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Mr Howard submits that there are errors within  the  fairness  analysis
    carried out by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He takes me  firstly  to
    the judge's findings which begin at paragraph  34.   He  notes  therein
    that the findings have only been  made  having  taken  account  of  the
    evidence as a whole and that the Appellant's credibility is  challenged
    on the basis of some omissions, discrepancies  and  responses  that  he
    completely denies giving.  It is noted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    that she is asked to give these matters no weight in her assessment  of
    his  credibility  because  he  is  hard  of  hearing  and  there   were
    interpretation problems.  He refers to the issues  of  the  Appellant's
    hearing loss at paragraph 36 and at paragraph 37  with  regard  to  the
    concerns expressed  in  the  appeal  with  regard  to  interpretational
    problems.  He further  asked  me  to  consider  paragraphs  40  and  41
    relating to issues with difficulty of  interpretation  and  the  effect
    that this has had upon the judge's analysis of the credibility  of  the
    Appellant's evidence.  He submits that the Appellant is hard of hearing
    and that the findings of the judge at paragraph 37  reflects  that  the
    Appellant has been misunderstood and the question is has the  Appellant
    given a plausible sufficient explanation and whether the judge has gone
    far enough in her findings not to justify an error of law.

 8. Mr Bates in response points  out  that  the  judge  was  aware  of  the
    Appellant's hearing difficulties which are reflected at paragraph 7 and
    that the judge has thoroughly analysed the evidence prior to coming  to
    her conclusions.  He points out that at paragraph 38 the judge has gone
    on to look at the substance of the interview and  considered  if  there
    are problems in interpretation as to what  those  issues  were  in  the
    questions and answers.  The judge has made  findings  at  paragraph  40
    which has given very little weight to the Appellant's claims that there
    were problems with the interpreter; this being a finding that the judge
    was entitled to make.  He points out that the judge has found that  the
    Appellant did understand the questions that were being posed as set out
    at paragraph 41 and made findings for which she has given reasons.   He
    concludes by  submitting  that  the  findings  made  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 45 with regard to the Appellant's  uncle  to  being  findings
    that she was entitled to make.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

 9. In brief submission in response  Mr  Howard  takes  me  again  back  to
    paragraph 38 pointing out that it is a question of  interpretation  and
    the issue which I am asked to consider is whether or not there has been
    one of procedural unfairness of the judge and the level of weight  that
    has been given to the adverse credibility findings.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. The issue that I am asked to adjudicate upon is whether there had  been
    material errors of law constituted as a result of procedural unfairness
    to the Appellant with regard to the purported difficulties that he  has
    had firstly in answering questions due to  his  deafness  and  secondly
    with regard to difficulties he alleges he has experienced in  following
    the interpreter.  As a starting point it is appropriate to make comment
    with regard to his deafness.

13. At paragraph 7 of her decision Judge Birrell sets out the position:

         "The Appellant gave evidence through a Kurdish Sorani  interpreter.
         He indicated that he had a hearing problem and preferred to sit  so
         that  Mr  Hama  the  interpreter  spoke  into  his  right  ear  and
         thereafter there appeared to be no problems."

14. The Appellant has chosen to personally appear  at  this  error  of  law
    hearing accompanied by an interpreter.  It is his appeal  and  that  of
    course is his right.  He purported  to  go  through  exactly  the  same
    process that I envisage he went through  prior  to  the  appeal  before
    Judge Birrell and to ensure procedural fairness I allowed him to  carry
    this out so that the interpreter sat where he  was  asked  to  sit  and
    spoke directly into the Appellant's ear so that he could hear.   It  is
    appropriate to record that the Appellant for the purpose of this appeal
    chose his left ear as being the ear into which the  interpreter  should
    speak as against his right ear as recorded (and not challenged) in  the
    decision of Judge Birrell.  I noted this fact.  It was pointed  out  to
    me by Mr Bates.  Mr Howard  acknowledged  the  situation  but  made  no
    comment/submission upon it.

15. This is a detailed decision well set out and well-reasoned  by  a  very
    experienced judge.  The judge has gone to great lengths to set out  the
    basis upon which she has made her findings  and  at  paragraph  36  has
    specifically stated that she has taken  into  account  the  Appellant's
    claim that he is hard of hearing and the impact that that may have  had
    upon his understanding of the interviews and what is  recorded  in  the
    screening interview and the asylum interview.  She  has  further  noted
    the Appellant's claim that there were interpretational problems at  his
    screening interview and he now makes the assertion that the interpreter
    was a Bardini rather than a Sorani speaker.  These facts are considered
    by the judge and she quite properly notes that  there  is  no  evidence
    before her to suggest the two dialects are mutually  unintelligible  or
    to what degree  they  are  different  and  I  note  that  there  is  no
    submission again made on this specific point by the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives.

16. Having analysed carefully at paragraph 37 and  38  the  allegations  of
    difficulty of interpretation at the screening interview  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 40 and 41  goes  on  to  consider  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's testimony and makes findings that she is perfectly entitled
    to.  A proper approach to credibility will require an assessment of the
    evidence and of the general claim.  In asylum claims  relevant  factors
    would include the internal  consistency  of  the  claim,  the  inherent
    plausibility of the  claim  and  the  consistency  of  the  claim  with
    external factors of the  sort  typically  found  in  country  guidance.
    Whilst I acknowledge that it is  theoretically  correct  that  all  the
    claimant need do is merely state his claim that claim will  still  need
    to be examined for consistency and inherent plausibility  and  this  is
    something that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has gone at great  lengths
    to consider.

17. The judge has gone on to consider and  set  out  the  failings  in  the
    Appellant's testimony at paragraphs 42 through to 45 and made a finding
    with regard to the Appellant's truthfulness about the circumstances  in
    which he left Iraq at paragraph 47 that she was entitled to.

18. In refusing permission to appeal  at  first  instance  Acting  Resident
    Judge Appleyard in considering the grounds seeking permission to appeal
    noted that they amount to no more than a  dispute  with  findings  that
    were open to be made on the evidence and that the judge had  adequately
    reasoned her decision which contained no arguable error  of  law.   The
    oral submissions made on the  Appellant's  behalf  by  both  respective
    legal representatives has done  nothing  to  change  my  view  of  that
    finding.  This is a well-reasoned and well set out determination from a
    very experienced judge.  Submissions made by the Appellant amount to no
    more than  mere  disagreement  with  those  findings.   The  judge  was
    perfectly entitled to make adverse  credibility  findings  against  the
    Appellant none of which disclose any material error of law nor show any
    sign  of  procedural  unfairness.   For  all  the  above  reasons   the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 12 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 12 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris








