
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08401/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th December 2020                         |On 14th January 2021          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE FORDHAM
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     MST
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal comes before us to remake the  Appellant's  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision dated 18 June 2018 to refuse  his  protection
    and human rights claim.  Both members of the panel have contributed  to
    this decision.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 2 June 1983, who first
    arrived in the United Kingdom  on  6  October  2012  with  valid  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) student, with  leave  to  remain  to  6
    November 2013.  The Appellant made an application for leave  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules on 12 November 2014 and following  his
    detention on 18 December 2014, he claimed asylum on 30 January 2015  on
    the basis that he was at risk on  return  to  Pakistan  of  persecution
    because of his sexuality and because his family had disowned  him  (for
    the same reason).

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's protection claim on 23 June 2015
    and an appeal against refusal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Courtney in a decision promulgated on 27 November 2015.  In  that
    decision, the First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  there  was  a  serious
    possibility that the Appellant is gay, but that on return  to  Pakistan
    he would exercise reserve in the expression of his  sexual  orientation
    and that in any event, he would not be at risk of persecution per se as
    a gay man in Pakistan.  Further, it was found that  the  Appellant  had
    not been disowned by his father and that his removal  would  not  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his right to respect for private and
    family life.  The Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 12 January 2016 and by the  Upper
    Tribunal on 3 February 2016.

 4. The Appellant made further  submissions  on  1  June  2018  which  were
    refused by the Respondent but accepted as a fresh claim under paragraph
    353  of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  18  June  2018.    Those  further
    submissions were on the basis that the Appellant was at  real  risk  of
    persecution on return to Pakistan because of his  sexuality,  supported
    by a country expert report and background country information;  further
    information about the Appellant's activities in the United Kingdom; and
    written statements from a number of friends in support.

 5. The Respondent refused the Appellant's fresh claim on  the  basis  that
    the issues raised had already been carefully considered in his  earlier
    claim and appeal, which was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on all
    grounds.  The Respondent  refers  to  and  relied  upon  her  'Pakistan
    country information  and  guidance  -  sexual  orientation  and  gender
    identity' dated April 2016 in which it is concluded that gay men per se
    are  not  at  risk  of  persecution  in  Pakistan,  either  from  state
    authorities or members of the public and in any event it had previously
    been found that  the  Appellant  would  act  discreetly  on  return  to
    Pakistan.  We pause to note at this point that this has been superseded
    by a later version in July 2019.

 6. The Appellant's appeal against refusal was initially dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin in a decision promulgated on 16 August 2018
    and no error of law was found in that decision by the Upper Tribunal in
    a decision promulgation  on  11  September  2019.   The  Appellant  was
    granted permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  on  12  February
    2020, which included the following statement:

         "There is no dispute that the Appellant is a gay man.  Nor is there
         any dispute that gay men who live openly in Pakistan are liable  to
         persecution.  In a nutshell the FTT reasoned that (1) the Appellant
         lives discretely in the UK, where he is not subject to persecution,
         and therefore (2) he would behave in the same  manner  in  Pakistan
         for the same reasons, and therefore (3) he would not have  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution in Pakistan.  Taken at face value, this
         reasoning correctly applies HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31  as  the  UT
         held.  I consider that it is arguable, however, that the basis  for
         this reasoning is flawed, given the FTT's  acceptance  of  evidence
         from four witnesses who are gay men that  the  Appellant  has  been
         open with them about his sexuality  and  that  he  has  attended  a
         variety of events as  a  gay  man.   The  FTT  concluded  that  the
         Appellant only revealed his sexuality to those whom he knew  to  be
         homosexual, and that this demonstrated discretion on his part.   It
         is debatable whether this is necessarily so.  ..."

 7. On 13 May 2020 the appeal was settled by consent on the basis that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in its approach to the discretion point  (and
    thus so did the Upper Tribunal in upholding that decision) and remitted
    to the Upper Tribunal with the decisions  of  16  August  2018  and  11
    September 2019 set aside.  The appeal therefore returns to  us  to  re-
    make.



appeal

Relevant law and background country information

 8. It is for an Appellant to show that he is a refugee.  By Article  1A(2)
    of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person  who  is  out  of  the
    country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a well-founded fear
    of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality or membership
    of a particular  social  group  or  political  opinion,  is  unable  or
    unwilling to avail him or herself of the protection of the  country  of
    origin.

 9. The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to asylum is decided  on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities.   This  was  expressed  as  a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That  basis  of  probability
    not only applies to the history of the matter and to the  situation  at
    the date of decision, but also to the question of  persecution  in  the
    future if the Appellant were to be returned.

10. Under the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006, a person  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
    refugee if they fall within the definition set out in Article 1A of the
    Refugee Convention (see above) and are not excluded by Articles 1D,  1E
    or 1F of the Refugee Convention  (Regulation  7  of  the  Qualification
    Regulations).

11. The test to be applied to claims based on a person's sexuality  is  set
    out in HJ(Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] UKSC 31, at [82] as follows:

         "When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality.

         If so, the tribunal must then ask whether it is  satisfied  on  the
         available evidence that gay people who lived openly would be liable
         to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.

         If so, the tribunal must go on  to  consider  what  the  individual
         applicant would do if he were returned to that country.

         If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby  be  exposed
         to a real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  -  even  if  he  could  avoid  the  risk   by   living
         "discreetly".

         If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes  that  the  applicant
         would in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must  go
         on to ask itself why he would do so.

         If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose  to  live
         discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would  wish  to
         live, or because of social pressures, e.g. not wanting to  distress
         his parents or embarrass his friends, then his  application  should
         be rejected.  Social pressures  of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them.  Such a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.

         If, on the other hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted.  Such a person has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution.  To reject his application on the ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution.  By admitting him to asylum and allowing him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."

12. The Respondent's 'Country Policy and Information Note Pakistan:  Sexual
    orientation and gender identity or express', version 3, dated July 2019
    sets out background country information in  relation  to  Pakistan  and
    concludes as part of the guidance to the Respondent's  decision  makers
    the following:

         2.4.18   Whilst each case must be considered on its own facts, with
         the onus on the person  to  demonstrate  that  they  face  a  risk,
         persons who openly  express  their  sexual  orientation  or  gender
         identity are likely to be at real risk of treatment, which  by  its
         nature and repetition, amounts to persecution and/or serious harm.

         2.5.5         In general, the state appears able but  unwilling  to
         offer effective protection and the person will not be able to avail
         themselves of the protection of the authorities.

         2.6.2          Given  that  homophobic  attitudes   are   prevalent
         throughout the  country  and  state  protection  is  not  generally
         available there is unlikely to be any place, in Pakistan, to  which
         an  LGBTI  person  could   reasonably   relocate   without   making
         fundamental  changes  to  their  behaviour.   Each  case  must   be
         considered on its individual merits.

13. The Appellant has also submitted a  country  expert  report  from  Usma
    Moeen dated 5 March 2018  which  is  consistent  with  the  conclusions
    directly  above  and  the  contents  of  which  were  not  specifically
    challenged by the Respondent.

The Appellant's claim

14. The Appellant's claim is, in summary, that he is a gay  man  who  would
    not be able to live openly as such in Pakistan for fear of  persecution
    if his sexuality became known.  The Appellant's claim is set out in his
    screening interview, substantive asylum  interview,  written  statement
    made with his further submissions and two written  statements  for  the
    purposes of this appeal.

The evidence

15. In his statement signed and dated 27 July  2018  (which  is  materially
    very similar to his fresh claim statement made on  22  May  2018),  the
    Appellant sets out his family and immigration history and describes his
    life in Pakistan, where he did not live  openly  as  gay  man  and  was
    beaten by his father because of it; and in the United Kingdom where  he
    does live openly, telling friends, attending gay clubs,  having  casual
    encounters with men and being a member of the Croydon Area Gay Society,
    Rainbows  Across  Borders  and  the  UKLGIG,  also  attending   Croydon
    Unitarians Church LGBT meetings.  The  Appellant  refers  to  suffering
    from depression and anxiety for which he has  received  medication  and
    counselling.

16. In his final written statement, signed and dated 23 November 2020,  the
    Appellant states that he has continued to live openly as a gay  man  in
    the United Kingdom and is still a member  of  the  same  clubs;  albeit
    Covid-19 has restricted his normal life in the United Kingdom  in  this
    regard.  The Appellant expressly states in paragraphs 7 and  8  of  his
    statement that he would have to hide his sexuality in Pakistan  because
    it is forbidden there and  he  would  be  killed  because  of  it.   He
    describes Pakistan as a Muslim country which does not accept gay people
    and that he wants to continue to express  himself  as  he  has  in  the
    United Kingdom.

17. The Appellant describes mental health problems which were worse at  the
    initial peak of Covid-19, with concerns that he would not survive if he
    caught the disease and he was worried that he would not get a dignified
    Islamic burial.  In this time of stress, which  included  concern  that
    his father was particularly at risk due to his age and he wanted to see
    him one last time,  the  Appellant  applied  for  voluntary  return  to
    Pakistan, out of fear of Covid-19 rather than because  he  had  stopped
    fearing persecution on return due  to  his  sexuality.   The  Appellant
    spoke to friends, realised he was making a mistake and did  not  pursue
    the application further.

18. The Appellant attended the oral  hearing,  confirmed  his  details  and
    adopted his three written statements dated 22 May 2018,  27  July  2018
    and 23 November 2020.  He gave oral evidence through a Court  appointed
    Urdu interpreter.

19. In cross-examination the Appellant confirmed  that  he  had  previously
    lived in Lahore  and  Kasur  city  and  did  not  publicly  reveal  his
    sexuality in either place.  When asked if this was to conform to social
    norms in society, the Appellant stated that it was because  people  did
    not like it.

20. The Appellant stated that he was Muslim  and  had  previously  made  an
    application on 23 March 2020 to voluntarily return to Pakistan  because
    he was depressed and very concerned that if he died during the Covid-19
    pandemic, he would not get a proper Islamic  burial.   After  about  14
    days, the Appellant felt more comfortable, thought he would stay  alive
    and no longer wanted to return to Pakistan.  He denied withdrawing  the
    application because he was unable to provide the  travel  documentation
    requested by the Respondent on 25 March 2020.

21. In the United Kingdom, the Appellant lives openly as a gay man and  his
    friends know his is gay.  On return to Pakistan he would not  do  this,
    other people get upset, it comes back to they gay  community  and  they
    are not liked.  The Appellant stated that there is danger  in  Pakistan
    for him, serious danger if his sexuality is exposed and he  fears  that
    he would be killed if he lived openly.

22. Within the evidence before the Upper Tribunal were  written  statements
    from a number of the Appellant's friends;  made  at  the  time  of  the
    further submissions, for the First-tier Tribunal hearing  and  for  the
    hearing before us.  Four of these individuals attended the  hearing  to
    adopt their written statements and give evidence;  with  an  additional
    witness who would have  attended  but  for  the  need  to  self-isolate
    awaiting a test for Covid-19.  At the hearing, Mr Tufan confirmed  that
    he did not wish to cross-examine any of the  additional  witnesses  who
    had attended and we therefore accepted their evidence  as  unchallenged
    and released the witnesses without the need to formally call each one.

23. In summary, those statements consistently describe the Appellant has an
    openly gay man in the United Kingdom who is involved  in  a  number  of
    groups and organisations including  Rainbows  Across  Borders  and  the
    Croydon Gay Area Society; and with whom the  Appellant  socialises  and
    attends gay clubs.

Closing submissions

24. In closing on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tufan set out  the  relevant
    questions in HJ (Iran) and confirmed that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is gay and that those who live  openly  as  gay  in  Pakistan
    would be at risk of persecution in accordance with the Respondent's own
    country information.  As to the third question, it was  submitted  that
    the Appellant had not previously revealed  his  sexuality  in  Pakistan
    because he was conforming to social norms  and  not  wanting  to  upset
    anyone and had strong religious beliefs.  On return, Mr Tufan submitted
    that the Appellant would do the same,  not  living  openly  solely  for
    religious and societal norm reasons.  It was however accepted  that  if
    the Appellant would not live openly because of a fear  of  persecution,
    as long as a material reason, his appeal should be allowed.

25. The Appellant had not claimed that he would be at risk  of  persecution
    from the state and in any event the background country information  did
    not suggest any such fear would be  well-founded,  in  particular  that
    prosecutions were rare and there was no state targeting or persecution.
     Further parts of the guidance referring to a gay scene in Pakistan and
    certain members of society identifying as LGBT; as well as a very  high
    proportion of men who have sex with men, were highlighted.

26. Finally, there had been no further evidence or submissions  as  to  the
    Appellant's relationship with his family and his  claim  to  have  been
    disowned by them was  not  found  to  be  credible  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in 2015; a finding which should therefore stand  and  as  such
    the Appellant would not be at risk on return to his home area from  his
    family.

27. On behalf of the Appellant, Ms Sanders relied on her skeleton  argument
    and submitted that this was a clear  case  on  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant was entitled to refugee status.  The only issue in this  case
    is why the Appellant would conceal his identity on return  to  Pakistan
    and it  is  enough  that  a  material  reason  is  due  to  a  fear  of
    persecution.  It is the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  would  be  in
    serious danger if his sexuality was exposed and he may be  killed.   It
    is relevant, although not determinative, that the Appellant lives as an
    openly gay man in the United Kingdom, on which there  was  unchallenged
    evidence.

28. Although it is accepted that the finding that  the  Appellant  was  not
    disowned by his family stands; that does  not  affect  the  Appellant's
    claim to fear persecution from  non-state  actors  and  the  background
    country information shows that there is no sufficiency  of  protection.
    The same issues arise as to concealment of  the  Appellant's  sexuality
    throughout the country  such  that  there  is  no  option  of  internal
    relocation.

29. Finally, in response to the parts of the background country information
    referred to by Mr Tufan, it was submitted that there was  only  limited
    evidence of gay events, no evidence of an openly gay community and that
    there is a substantive difference between men who have sex with men and
    men who identify as homosexual or have  homosexual  relationships;  the
    latter not being acceptable in Pakistan.



Findings and reasons


 1. By the end of the hearing before us, there  was  no  dispute  that  the
    Appellant is gay; that he lives openly as  a  gay  man  in  the  United
    Kingdom (his and the other evidence on this being unchallenged  by  the
    Respondent); that openly gay men in Pakistan are  at  a  real  risk  of
    persecution; and on return to Pakistan the Appellant would conceal  his
    sexuality.  The only issue before us is as to why the  Appellant  would
    conceal his sexuality on return to Pakistan, whether solely because  of
    societal and religious norms or whether at least in part it was due  to
    fear or persecution.  If the latter, there is no  dispute  between  the
    parties that the Appellant's appeal should be allowed on asylum grounds
    having satisfied the test in HJ (Iran).

 2. We had before us clear and consistent  statements  from  the  Appellant
    that he would conceal his sexuality on  return  to  Pakistan  not  only
    because it upset other people who  didn't  like  gay  people  but  also
    because he feared serious harm and/or being killed if his sexuality was
    exposed.  The Appellant  maintained  this  in  cross-examination  which
    involved only a relatively limited challenge to his  evidence  on  this
    point and without any broader challenge to the Appellant's credibility.
     Although there have been adverse findings  against  the  Appellant  on
    specific matters in the past, including as to his family  situation  by
    the First-tier Tribunal in  2015;  much  of  his  claim  has  now  been
    accepted and the majority  of  his  evidence  is  unchallenged  by  the
    Respondent.  There is nothing before  us  at  this  time  to  doubt  or
    undermine the Appellant's evidence on his reasons  for  concealing  his
    sexuality on return to Pakistan.

 3. Whilst we find that a significant part of the reason for the  Appellant
    concealing his sexuality on return are societal  and  religious  norms,
    homosexuality  (as  opposed  to  men  having  sex   with   men)   being
    unacceptable in Pakistan, we also find that a material reason for doing
    so is fear of persecution.  In so finding we have taken account of  the
    fact that such a fear is,  in  accordance  with  the  Respondent's  own
    background country evidence and guidance, objectively well-founded.

 4. In these circumstances, the Appellant's appeal  is  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds on the basis that he would be at real risk  of  persecution  on
    return to Pakistan as an openly gay man and because  he  would  conceal
    his sexuality on return in part  for  fear  of  such  persecution.   In
    accordance with the Respondent's own background  country  evidence  and
    guidance, there is no sufficiency of protection and the  no  option  of
    internal relocation because the Appellant would face the same issues of
    concealing his identity anywhere in the country.


Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out by the Court of Appeal in the decision dated 13  May
2020, the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
making of a material error of law and that decision was set aside.

The appeal is remade as follows: the appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed    G  Jackson                            Date          21st  December
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

