
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08753/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2018                               |On 27 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                              mr mehmet yildrim
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel instructed by
     Montague Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey, born on  20  December  1999,  who
    claimed asylum on arrival in the UK on 19 January 2016.  The  appellant
    appealed, to the First-tier Tribunal, a decision dated 29 July 2016  to
    refuse his application for asylum.  In a  decision  promulgated  on  14
    September 2017, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cassel  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal with  permission  from  the
    Upper Tribunal on the following (limited) grounds that it was arguable:

    Ground  1  That  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  factored  in  the
                clandestine nature of the appellant's return at [35];

    Ground  2  That  the  First-tier   Tribunal   failed   to   take   into
                consideration, in the findings at [32], that  the  appellant
                had a past history with  the  police,  and  the  credibility
                findings in relation to the police raiding his home;

    Ground 3 That given that the First-tier Tribunal accepted the appellant
                was a supporter of HDP, that  he  had  purportedly  attended
                protests and that his family all supported the HDP and  that
                he was detained in  2015,  arguably  the  decision  did  not
                accord with the country guidance case  of  IK  (Returnees  -
                Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.

Error of Law Discussion

 3. For the reasons that I have outlined I am not satisfied that  an  error
    of law has been identified and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    shall stand.

Ground 1

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge,  at  [31]  and  [35],  referred  to  the
    appellant being able to enter Turkey without difficulty when his  first
    attempt to reach the UK had not been successful  and  he  had  returned
    with the aid of an agent.  The judge noted, at [31], that  in  evidence
    the appellant had stated  that  he  had  no  fear  on  return  on  that
    occasion.  In addition at [35] the judge took into  consideration  that
    the appellant was "able  to  re-enter  Turkey  following  the  previous
    failed attempt to reach the UK without difficulty" and went on  to  say
    that there was no evidence of past persecution.  I  do  not  accept  Ms
    Panagiotopoulou's submissions that  the  judge  erred  given  that  the
    appellant had re-entered Turkey clandestinely.  That  is  evident  from
    the face of the Tribunal's decision including that the judge notes that
    the appellant, at [31], "returned to Turkey with the aid of an  agent".



 5. Read as a whole the judge's consideration of  the  appellant's  return,
    although  it  mentions  re-entering  Turkey  'without  difficulty',  is
    concerned rather with the  appellant's  ability  to  return  to  Turkey
    without  persecution.   This  is  further  underlined  by  the  judge's
    recording of the evidence at [15] where he stated  that  the  appellant
    had "encountered no problems on returning to Turkey and  did  not  have
    any fear of return on that occasion".  I am not satisfied that there is
    any error, material or  otherwise,  in  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    appellant's return to Turkey and the judge was entitled  to  take  into
    consideration the lack of difficulty that  he  experienced  there.   No
    error of law is disclosed in ground 1.



Ground 2

 6. Equally the judge was entitled to take into consideration that  it  was
    not credible that the  police  had  attended  the  appellant's  address
    within one to two hours after the appellant leaving the  demonstration,
    bearing in mind that the demonstration  took  place  some  fourteen  or
    fifteen hours' distance from his home.

 7. The Tribunal was aware of the evidence including the appellant's claims
    that he had been frequently stopped by  the  authorities  and  this  is
    recorded in the decision, including where the appellant's  evidence  is
    recorded in some detail from [7] to [19] and lists a number of  claimed
    difficulties including his claim that the  authorities  had  previously
    detained him.  There was no error in  the  conclusion  reached  by  the
    Tribunal.  Notwithstanding that the appellant's evidence  was  that  he
    had previously  been  frequently  taken  to  the  police  station,  the
    Tribunal provided adequate reasons for not finding it credible that the
    police would attend his house so soon after the demonstration.

 8. In any event, any error the Tribunal is said to have made  in  relation
    to this finding cannot be  material,  given  the  alternative  findings
    made, at [32]: that even if the police had attended his  home  and  the
    judge was wrong in concluding that they had not,  the judge found  that
    there was no credible evidence in relation to what enquiry  they  would
    have been making (and the judge took into account  that  the  appellant
    remains in contact with his mother who has remained in the family  home
    and would be in a position to provide evidence, for example in a letter
    or statement about the nature of the  police  enquiries,  yet  no  such
    evidence had been provided) and that it was equally  likely  that  this
    had nothing with membership of the HDP or  political  activity.   There
    was no challenge to those findings in the alternative.  The appellant's
    ground 2 discloses  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    reasoned findings.

Ground 3

 9. In relation to ground 3 it is not properly arguable that the judge  did
    not  adequately  properly  consider  the  various  risk  factors   with
    reference to the country guidance of IK.  The judge considered this  in
    light of the fact that the judge did not find the appellant's  evidence
    credible in a number of aspects, including in relation to his  father's
    claimed disappearance.  The Tribunal properly directed itself, at [33].
    that notwithstanding that lack of credibility it was incumbent  on  the
    tribunal to consider the appellant's risk on return.

10. The judge identified, at [35] that the risk factors were referenced  by
    Ms Panagiotopoulou in her skeleton argument and  the  judge  referenced
    the particular paragraphs of the skeleton argument, from  paragraph  19
    onwards.  The appellant's representative's skeleton argument  submitted
    that the appellant was likely to be at risk due to his involvement with
    suspected separatist activities and pro-Kurdish organisations  and  his
    ethnicity and the fact that  he  had  been  absent  from  Turkey.   The
    Tribunal went on to consider, at [35] and [36] the appellant's risk  on
    return in line with IK.

11. The judge accepted at [30] that the appellant was a  supporter  of  the
    HDP and at [35] that he had had some involvement in the distribution of
    leaflets.  The judge also accepted that his family  supported  the  HDP
    (at [30]).  It was abundantly clear that the  Tribunal  had  all  these
    issues in mind, and in addition considered that  the  country  guidance
    evidence showed a  deterioration  in  the  situation  for  the  Kurdish
    community in Turkey, at [35], but that there was nothing  disclosed  in
    the evidence that would place the appellant  at  any  particular  risk,
    compare to other Kurdish nationals of Turkey.

12. In so finding the judge took into consideration that the appellant  had
    been detained in 2015 but that there was no  arrest  warrant  or  court
    proceedings and that he was warned not to distribute leaflets  and  had
    abided  by  this  warning.   The  judge  took  into  consideration  the
    appellant's previous return to Turkey and that he had lawfully attended
    a  demonstration  with  many  other  Kurds  but  did  not  "misbehave".
    Therefore the Tribunal's  subsequent  conclusion,  that  there  was  no
    evidence of past persecution and that although his Kurdish  connections
    may  be  discovered  on  return  there  was  no  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution, was a finding that was  open  to  the  judge  and  clearly
    encompassed  all  of  the  relevant  factors,  including  his  personal
    situation  (encompassing  his  absence  from   Turkey),   the   country
    situation, his family background, support of the HDP  and  his  limited
    level of involvement as found by the Tribunal.  Ground 3  discloses  no
    material error of law.

Conclusion

13. The grounds in general disclosed no more than a disagreement  with  the
    judge's carefully and closely reasoned decision.  The decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error of law and shall  stand.



Notice of Decision

14. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  23 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson








