
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08483/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 15 September 2020                 |On 07th October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S Panagiotopoulou, Counsel, instructed by
                    Immigration Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Bowler ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 23 December 2019 by which the
appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse to
grant her international protection was dismissed.

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin granted permission to appeal on
all grounds by a decision dated 5 February 2020.

Hearing

The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing room at Field
House. The hearing room and the building were open to the public. The
hearing and its start time were listed in the cause list. I was addressed
by the representatives in exactly the same way as if we were together in
the hearing room. I am satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open
court; that the open justice principle has been secured; that no party has
been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.

The parties agreed that all relevant documents were before the Tribunal.
The video and audio link were connected between the representatives and the
Tribunal throughout the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing both
parties confirmed that the hearing had been completed fairly.

The appellant did not attend the hearing. I confirmed with Ms.
Panagiotopoulou that I took no adverse point on the appellant's non-
attendance, as there was no obligation that she attend, she was not
required to give evidence and was represented by counsel.

Anonymity

The Judge issued an anonymity direction, and the parties did not request
that it be set aside. I confirm the direction pursuant to Rule 14 of the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 at the conclusion of this
decision.

Background

The appellant is an ethnic Kurd and a national of Iraq. Prior to travelling
to this country, she resided in the Kurdistan Region. She states that she
met a man via Facebook, and they began to regularly contact each other. She
felt forced to send culturally inappropriate photographs of herself. After
they met, the appellant decided not to continue with the relationship. The
man threatened that if she did not continue to send him photographs then he
would make public those she had previously sent. She extended the
relationship for approximately two further weeks because she was scared but
after this time decided that she no longer wanted to remain in contact with
him. The man then created a false Facebook account in her name and added
her two brothers, university friends and relatives as 'friends' to the
account before making her pictures available on the account. The
appellant's brothers saw the photographs and assaulted her. They were aided
by her parents. She was then imprisoned in a room in the house, whilst her
brothers threatened to kill the man. She was subsequently able to escape
from the family home and with the aid of the father of a friend she
travelled to Turkey and then onto the United Kingdom, arriving in December
2018 two days after she left her home.

She claimed asylum on arrival and had a screening interview on the same
day. Her substantive asylum interview was held on 14 August 2019. The
respondent refused the application for international protection by a
decision dated 21 August 2019.

Hearing before the FtT

The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Hatton Cross on 3 December
2019. The respondent was not represented. The appellant was represented and
gave evidence. She relied upon an expert report from Dr Kaveh Ghobadi, a
Kurdish academic and independent researcher residing in the United Kingdom,
dated 17 November 2019. As to the report, the Judge noted in a section
entitled 'the appellant's case', at [15]:

         '15. ... The expert report from Dr Ghobadi confirms that it is
             plausible that the appellant would have been allowed a
             Facebook account despite coming from a strict family and that
             her mother would have been able to persuade her brothers to
             permit her to continue education. Dr Ghobadi also confirms
             that the appellant's account of being beaten by her brothers
             and imprisoned in her room is consistent with external
             information. He states that any perceived deviation from
             social and sexual boundaries is likely to attract some form of
             retribution or punishment and the honour codes are deeply
             embedded in Kurdish society.'

The Judge addressed several inconsistences in the appellant's account of
her personal history, as well as observing vagueness arising from her
recounting of such history at [24] - [42] of the decision. An example of
the approach adopted is identifiable at [25] - [33], which is quoted in
full as it is subject to challenge by means of ground 4 of the appellant's
grounds of appeal:

         '25. In the appellant's asylum interview the appellant said that
             she had a Facebook account, met Darin through a group chat and
             sent him photographs of herself within the hijab via the
             Facebook messenger system. Her account of the background to
             her use of Facebook significantly altered at the hearing. For
             the reasons I now explain, the accounts are inconsistent, and
             I find that the new evidence was an attempt by the appellant
             to deal with apparent problems with her initial account.

         26.  The appellant said in her interview that Darin created a fake
             account in her name when she refused to continue sending him
             photos and that he posted the previously sent photographs of
             her to that account and joined her brothers as friends so that
             they would see what she had sent. She says at question 78 that
             her brother reported her Facebook account, and it was disabled
             or removed. She claims at question 81 that both the genuine
             and the fake Facebook accounts were disabled or cancelled.
             When asked why she could not reinstate her genuine account she
             said at question 82 that she could not remember the password
             and that once an account was cancelled it could not be
             reinstated. She said at question 83 that she could not take a
             screenshot of the account showing that [it] had been disabled
             because her brother had damaged her mobile phone. When asked
             why she could not attempt to login with another device she
             simply said that the account had been cancelled and she could
             not log on again. When asked why she was unable to show her
             brothers the messages on her genuine account and threats from
             Darin (which at question 100 she confirmed he had sent through
             Facebook messenger) immediately the issue arose and before her
             account was disabled the appellant said that she had deleted
             all her chats and messages.

         27.  At the hearing the appellant's claim was different. I
             specifically asked for clarification of how the Facebook
             account was set up and removed, given that I was aware that it
             would not ordinarily be possible for other people to disable
             or cancel a person's Facebook account as the appellant claims
             her brother had. It was only at that point that the appellant
             claimed that around the time of starting university she had
             told her brother that she needed to open a Facebook account
             and he used his own email account and mobile phone to do that
             for her. At the hearing she said that she did not even know
             the password.

         28.  The circumstances described at the hearing were therefore not
             described by the appellant at the asylum interview. For
             example, when asked why she could not reinstate her genuine
             account she said that she did not remember the password. She
             did not say that she had never known it because it was set up
             by her brother.

         29.  At question 98 she was asked whether her brothers were aware
             that she had a Facebook account, and her answer was simply
             yes. That would have been an obvious time to say that in fact
             one of her brothers had set up the account for her.

         30.  I asked the appellant to clarify how she was able to access
             Facebook given that she had told me that she did not have a
             mobile phone. The appellant said that her brother gave her a
             mobile phone without a SIM card and without telling her the
             number. She said that her brother set up a Facebook [account]
             on the phone for her and as she never logged out, she did not
             need to use a password. She accessed her account using the
             internet at home. Again, this was not the situation described
             by the appellant at the interview. Instead, she said that she
             could not log on to her account because it had been cancelled;
             not that she never knew the password.

         31.  The version of events described at the hearing raised further
             potential inconsistencies. Clearly, if one of the appellant's
             brothers had set up the Facebook account and knew the
             password, the appellant would have been sending messages to
             Darin knowing that her brother could access those messages at
             any time and see the photographs sent by her at any time.

         32.  Given the appellant's description of her family and, in
             particular, her brothers being strict and controlling she
             would have been taking a significant risk chatting with the
             unknown man Darin and sending him photographs. I therefore
             asked the appellant whether she knew that her brother could
             access Facebook using the password. The appellant's initial
             response was that she did not know he could do so as she had
             not used Facebook before. I clarified with her that she was
             telling me that her account and password were only known by
             her brother, but she did not know that he could access her
             account. At the point her evidence changed to say that of
             course she realised that he could access the account, but she
             did not know how he would.

         33.  The appellant is an intelligent, well-educated young person
             and was aged 22 when the events she described took place. I do
             not find it credible that she would not have realised that her
             brother could access an account which she claims he set up and
             for which he alone knew the password.'

The Judge further found, at [35(c)]:

         '35.

         c.   even if the accounts had in some way been deleted, the
             appellant would have been able to provide some evidence of
             that through logging on via another device when she made her
             claim for asylum less than a week after the events are said to
             have happened. The appellant was asked at the asylum interview
             why she could not take a screenshot to show that her account
             had been disabled. She said that her mobile phone was damaged
             by her brother and when the interviewer put it to her that she
             could login with any device the appellant provided an evasive
             response. She said at question 84 that the account had been
             cancelled, but that would not have prevented her taking a
             screenshot to show that it had been disabled. When the
             interviewer pressed this point the appellant simply said that
             she did not remember 'it', by which it must be assumed that
             she meant the password. (Again, this undermines the additional
             elements regarding her brother's control of the password
             introduced at the hearing.'

The Judge made several other adverse findings of fact such as the appellant
not having sought to find the public on-line chat group through which she
met Darin, observing that the appellant could open another Facebook account
whilst in this country and reconnect with the group so as to secure
evidence to support her claim. The Judge further found the appellant
incredible as to the circumstances in which she fled the family home and
secured support from the father of a friend who bought her a ticket to fly
to Turkey and provided her with a small mobile phone to remain in touch so
that he could secure an agent for her onward travel.

The Judge concluded at [52] - [54]:

         '52. Considering the numerous issues identified with the evidence
             above I have made an adverse credibility finding in relation
             to the appellant. I find that she has fabricated the claim to
             be at risk from her family in Iraq.

         53.  The appellant came to the UK with her CSID. She is therefore
             able to travel home to her family.

         54.  I therefore find for all these reasons that the appellant has
             not discharged the burden of proof of showing entitlement to
             the protection of the Refugee Convention, the ECHR or to
             humanitarian protection.'

Grounds of Appeal

The grounds of appeal were drafted on behalf of the appellant with a high
level of care and precision by Ms. Panagiotopoulou who represented her at
the hearing before the Judge. They are concise and elegant, running to 1 �
pages. At their core, the grounds challenge the assessment of credibility
as follows:

      i) The Judge failed to reach findings on the expert evidence.

     ii) The Judge failed to take into account the expert evidence and other
         background evidence, placing undue emphasis upon purported
         inconsistencies between the appellant's evidence at the hearing and
         evidence presented during her Home Office interview.

    iii) The Judge attached undue weight to the absence of evidence from the
         appellant's sister.

     iv) The Judge made a factual error of significance in relation to the
         appellant's Facebook account.

The respondent filed a rule 24 response, dated 18 February 2020 and
authored by Mr. A McVeety. The core of the response is that the grounds of
appeal amount to no more than a disagreement with the Judge's findings of
fact. At paragraph [4], the respondent observes:

         '4.  The respondent is surprised by a grant of permission that in
             part relies on a claim that undue weight has been given on
             inconsistencies between the oral evidence and the evidence
             given at the Home Office interview. As consistency is one of
             the indicators of a credible account, an account riddled with
             inconsistencies is evidently not a credible one.'

Decision on Error of Law

The appellant's strongest ground is ground 4 where she challenges the
assessment of her evidence conducted at [27] of the decision. She takes
issue with the Judge's observation that 'it was only at that point', namely
following a question posed by the Judge, 'that the appellant claimed that
around the time of starting university she had told her brother that she
needed to open a Facebook account and he used his own email account and
mobile phone to do that for her'. The appellant observes that she detailed
the same in her witness statement, prepared prior to the hearing. The
statement details:

         'When I say my brother reported the Facebooks accounts, what I mean
         is [that] he reported the fake one. He simply deactivated mine as
         it was on his mobile number. I believe he reported the fake one as
         I heard that in snatches of conversation I heard the family
         having.'

Before me Ms. Panagiotopoulou submitted that the factual error featured
heavily in several paragraphs of the decision. I am satisfied that the
Judge erred in fact in finding that the appellant first referred to her
brother having activated the Facebook account with his own phone number at
the hearing, as it was detailed in her witness statement.

When considering materially, I note Ms. Panagiotopoulou's request that I
consider the grounds cumulatively and observe that she was correct to so
request as, ultimately, they are challenges to the assessment of
credibility.

There are no merits to the first ground of challenge. The Judge did make
findings as to Dr. Ghabadi's evidence, as can be seen at [15] of the
decision. Indeed, the problem for the appellant in respect of this ground
is that the Judge further considers Dr Ghabadi's evidence without adverse
comment at [41]-[43] and [45]-[47]. The Judge's observation at [44] is not
critical of Dr. Ghabadi, rather it is an observation that he interchanged
the words 'indecent' and 'nude' in respect of the photographs. The Judge
clearly had the evidence of the expert in mind.

Ground 2 can be appropriately broken down into two separate challenges. The
first asserts that the Judge reached her credibility findings in isolation
from the evidence of Dr. Ghabadi, or indeed without any reference to the
other country background evidence before her. Ms. Panagiotopoulou did not
place too great a reliance upon this challenge before me, and she was
correct to adopt such an approach. The Judge's concern as to the
appellant's credibility relates to internal inconsistency as to her
personal history, particularly as to the Facebook account and her flight
firstly from the family home and then from Iraq. On such issues neither the
expert nor the objective background material could aid the appellant as she
was referring to personal events. Dr Ghabadi could not claim to hold
expertise on the issue of whether the appellant's brother did or did not
open the Facebook account and withhold the password from his sister, or as
to why a father of a friend would at short notice, and with no warning, buy
her a ticket to fly to Turkey and arrange for an agent to help arrange her
onwards travel from that country.

The second limb of ground 2 is a complaint that the Judge placed undue
emphasis on claimed inconsistencies between the appellant's evidence at the
hearing and her evidence during her substantive asylum interview thereby
failing to have regard to the totality of the evidence in her assessment of
credibility. I am satisfied that there is no merit to this ground of
challenge. On two occasions, at [35] and [50], the Judge recognised that a
person may embellish a genuine claim, that they may be incredible on
certain elements of their stated history whilst being credible on others,
and that a claim may lack plausibility but still be credible. In this
matter, several adverse credibility findings were made, to which there have
been no discrete challenges. This is particularly noticeable as to the
finding that the appellant was not credible as to how she fled the family
home, secured support from the father of a friend and was able to travel
from Iraq to the United Kingdom via Turkey, reaching this country 2 days
after she fled the family home.

Ground 3 is a complaint as to [49] of the decision, which details:

          '49.    The appellant's sister did not attend the hearing and
             there was no letter of support or witness statement from the
             sister. While I recognise that the appellant's sister would
             not be an independent witness, and as a result the weight
             given to her evidence would be reduced, that does not mean
             that no weight would be given to it. The appellant's sister
             would be in a good position to confirm the strictness of the
             family in Iraq. There are no rules in the tribunal preventing
             the reliance on hearsay evidence and the appellant's sister
             would be able to confirm what she had been told by the
             appellant. The appellant is legally represented and there is
             therefore no reason why she should not be aware that the
             evidence from her sister could be of assistance.'

Ms. Panagiotopoulou submitted that the Judge erred in attaching undue
weight to the absence of evidence from the appellant's sister, someone who
had not witnessed the appellant's problems as she was residing in the
United Kingdom at the relevant time, and so would be unable to give direct
evidence regarding the incident that led to the appellant fleeing Iraq.
However, the Judge expressly accepted that the sister could not give direct
evidence as to the incident in late 2018 but was a witness to the family
dynamics. It is long-established that a Judge will not err in law when
relying upon the fact in their assessment of credibility that an appellant
could secure independent supporting evidence and has given no credible
account for its absence: TK (Burundi) v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2009] EWCA Civ 40, [2009] Imm. A.R. 488. This ground of
challenge enjoys no merit.

I therefore return to the error of law identified by ground 4. The question
is whether it is material. Ms Panagiotopoulou has appropriately observed
that the error permeates paragraphs beyond [27]. However, I am satisfied
that there are several other adverse findings made by the Judge that are
not infected by this error of fact, which have not been discretely
challenged and which individually and severally significantly undermine the
entire basis of the appellant's claim for international protection. One
example is the adverse finding at [31], made in the alternative and
accepting that the brother opened the Facebook account and knew the
password, as to the appellant sending messages to Darin knowing that her
brother could access the messages at any time and see the photographs she
was sending. The Judge has given cogent and lawful reasons for finding that
the appellant would not have taken such risk.

In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.



Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
material error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 23 December 2019 is upheld
and the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly
identify the appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, the
appellant and the respondent. Any failure to comply with this direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 1 October 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appellant did not pay a fee and her appeal has been  dismissed.  No  fee
award is made.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 1 October 2020
