
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08641/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2019                     |On 20 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     KM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr sills, instructed Judge D Spicer Zeb, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 6 February 2019, I found that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell  to  be  set
    aside. My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  the
         respondent as the appellant (as they appeared  respectively  before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, KM, is a citizen  of  the
         Democratic Republic of Congo ("Congo") born in 1972.  He arrived in
         the United Kingdom in February  2012  and  claimed  asylum.   By  a
         decision dated 27 July 2016, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the
         appellant asylum.  He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Robson) which, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7  February  2018,
         allowed the appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights  (Articles  2/3)
         grounds.  At issue before the First-tier Tribunal was  whether  the
         appellant was excluded from asylum by the operation of Article 1(F)
         of the Refugee Convention. Judge Robson found  that  the  appellant
         was not excluded from asylum protection and  it  is  that  decision
         which the Secretary of State challenges before the Upper  Tribunal.
         In addition the Secretary of State argues that the judge  erred  in
         his treatment of the documentary evidence.

         2.   In support of his appeal, the appellant had  produced  several
         documents.  The judge addresses the documents  and  how  they  came
         into possession of the appellant at [68].  There seemed  to  be  no
         clear reason for the delay  in  the  production  of  the  documents
         (which the appellant claimed had been produced in 2012).  The judge
         also noted that "it was not said [by the Secretary of  State]  that
         the documents themselves were forgeries".  The Secretary  of  State
         argues that the judge did not  have  "the  benefit  of  any  expert
         evidence as to the provenance and credibility of the documents  and
         he did not seem to question  the  fact  that  the  authorities  [in
         Congo] clearly knew  of  the  appellant's  whereabouts  between  20
         January 2012 and 4 February 2012."  The respondent argues that  the
         chronology  revealed  by  the  documents  in  the  context  of  the
         appellant's account  of  what  happened  in  Congo  undermines  the
         finding that the appellant had "deserted"  his  post  as  a  senior
         police officer and was still wanted by the Congolese authorities.

         3.   In a Rule 24 response, the appellant submits that "in relation
         to [the second ground of appeal] no issue was raised in  any  point
         by the respondent or anyone else prior to or at the  hearing  about
         the dates on the documents referred to in the grounds".   As  such,
         the judge's failure to address that issue  did  not  amount  to  an
         error of law.  I agree.  That there is no evidence that the  points
         now raised in the second ground of appeal  were  put  before  Judge
         Robson at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  The judge's analysis at
         [68] appears to be factually accurate and  the  judge  has  reached
         findings in respect of the documents which were open to him on that
         evidence.  He has, of course, not addressed  the  concerns  of  the
         respondent now articulated in the grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
         since  those  concerns  were  never  made  known  to  him  in   the
         submissions of the Presenting Officer.

         4.   The first ground of appeal concerns  exclusion  under  Article
         1(F).  The  appellant  claimed  to  have  served  with  the  Legion
         Nationale Police d'Intervention Rapide (PIR).  He had risen to  the
         rank  of  brigadier  within  the  PIR.   In  January  2012,  at   a
         demonstration against the President of  Congo,  the  appellant  was
         given  orders  to  fire  mustard  gas  rather  than  tear  gas   at
         demonstrators.  He refused to  do  so.   He  claims  to  have  been
         detained and  assaulted  during  his  detention  and  escaped  from
         hospital on 4 February 2012 and fled to the  United  Kingdom.   The
         judge found [72] that the appellant was a middle ranking officer in
         the PIR and accepted  also  that  he  had  been  detained  and  had
         suffered severe physical abuse whilst in detention.  The judge  had
         the benefit of a medical report upon which he placed  "considerable
         weight".  In the light  of  the  report,  the  judge  accepted  the
         appellant's claim that he had been detained and abused (the medical
         report details a number of scars on the appellant's body).  At [66]
         the judge wrote:

             "If, as appears to be the case, the respondent  accepted  that
             the appellant was in the  PIR  and  did  have  some  level  of
             command,  the  only  plausible  reason  I  can  find  for  his
             detention would be disobedience of orders."

         5.   Earlier in the decision at [23-24], the  judge  had  discussed
         the UNHCR Guidance in respect of Article 1(F).  At [24]  he  quotes
         from that guidance as follows:

             "The specific role played by the person concerned  within  the
             organisation needs to be assessed to determine whether  he  or
             she carries individual responsibility for an act which reaches
             the level of seriousness required  under  Article  1F(b).   It
             must be shown that the requirement  of  "serious  reasons  for
             considering" that the individual engaged in  and  intended  to
             commit  the  excludable  act  or  knowingly  made  substantial
             contribution to it, is fulfilled."

         6.   At [59] the judge found that it was not credible that a middle
         ranking officer in the PIR such as the  appellant  would  not  have
         known what would happen to people whom he arrested and handed  over
         to other agencies within  the  Congolese  state  authorities.   The
         judge found as a fact that "the  appellant  would  have  known  the
         consequences of handing demonstrators for whom he  was  responsible
         for arrest to the Office."

         7.   At [69], the judge concluded:

             "I have considered the evidence in its totality in  the  light
             of the UNHCR Guidance and in view of my findings  above  I  do
             not consider that  individual  responsibility  exists  on  the
             appellant (sic) for committing acts which  would  exclude  him
             from the protection of the Refugee Convention and,  therefore,
             I find that Article 1F(a) does not apply in his case."

         8.   Grounds of appeal challenge that conclusion:

             "Nowhere does the FtT explain why the fact that the  appellant
             (as accepted by the FtT) had deserted  and  been  detained  in
             2012 by the authorities as a result made any difference to his
             behaviours  and  actions  in  the  preceding  thirteen  years,
             including  many  promotions,  such  that  he  did   not   have
             individual responsibility  for  the  acts  committed  when  he
             arrested people and handed them over to the  authorities.   On
             the findings of fact, given the appellant's history,  the  FtT
             has materially erred in the finding on exclusion."

         9.   The Secretary of State notes that the judge had found that the
         appellant did arrest protestors and hand them over the  authorities
         [58].

         10.  I agree that the judge's reasoning is  far  from  clear.   The
         decision is difficult to read  because  of  the  judge's  habit  of
         combining  findings  with  his  summary  of   the   evidence.    In
         particular, what the judge says  at  [59]  (see  above)  represents
         something of a non sequitur.  It is not at all clear why the  judge
         should reach that  conclusion  having  categorically  rejected  the
         appellant's claim that  he  did  not  know  what  would  happen  to
         detainees whom he handed over to the  Office.   I  agree  with  the
         Secretary of State that it appears to be the judge's  finding  that
         the appellant was detained and abused  that  has  somehow  led  the
         judge to  conclude  that,  because  he  disobeyed  orders  and  was
         detained as a consequence, he should not be excluded under  Article
         1(F).  As the grounds point out, the judge  has  wholly  failed  to
         address the appellant's conduct prior to his detention  at  a  time
         when, as an officer of middling  rank,  he  knowingly  handed  over
         those whom he had arrested for detention and  physical  abuse.   In
         the circumstances, I set aside the judge's decision.

         11.  I see no reason to interfere  with  the  judge's  findings  in
         respect of Article 3 ECHR.  Only the question of possible exclusion
         under Article 1(F) need be considered by the Upper  Tribunal  which
         it will deal with at a resumed hearing at Bradford before me  on  a
         date to be fixed.  The judge's findings in respect of the documents
         produced in evidence shall stand as  shall  his  finding  that  the
         appellant was detained and abused in detention and that he  escaped
         from detention.  I also preserve the finding that the appellant did
         know what was likely to happen to individuals he handed over to the
         Office following arrest.  On the basis of that factual matrix,  the
         Upper Tribunal will remake the decision.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  7
         February 2018 is set aside.  The findings of fact shall  stand  (as
         detailed in paragraph 11 above).  The  only  issue  which  will  be
         considered at the resumed hearing is whether the  appellant  should
         be excluded from refugee status on  account  of  the  operation  of
         Article 1(F) of the Refugee Convention.  The resumed  hearing  will
         take place at Bradford on the  next  available  date  before  Upper
         Tribunal  Judge  Lane  with  a  time  estimate  of  2  hours.    An
         interpreter in the Lingala language will be available to assist the
         appellant.  Both parties may produce additional  evidence  provided
         they send copies of any documents upon which they intend to rely to
         the other party and to the Tribunal no less than 10 days  prior  to
         the resumed hearing."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford I was again assisted by Mr Sills and
    Mr Diwnycz who appeared for the appellant and respondent  respectively.
    Mr  Sills  very  helpfully  provided   a   note   containing   relevant
    jurisprudence.

 3. I preserved the following finding from the First-tier Tribunal decision
    [59]:

         "I do not find it credible that having attained a middle  seniority
         rank in the PIR, the appellant would not have known what, in  fact,
         would happen to people whom he arrested and heard was  subsequently
         detained and I  find  that  the  appellant  would  have  known  the
         consequences of handing demonstrators, for whom he was  responsible
         for arrest, to the Office."

 4. The question is whether the appellant's conduct as  described  in  that
    finding exclude him from protection as a refugee under  the  provisions
    of Article 1F of the 1951 Convention:

         'Article 1F of the 1951 Convention states that  the  provisions  of
         that Convention "shall not apply to any person with respect to whom
         there are serious reasons for considering" that:

         (a)  he [or she] has committed a crime against peace, a war  crime,
         or a crime  against  humanity,  as  defined  in  the  international
         instruments drawn up to make provision in respect of such crimes;

         (b)  he [or  she]  has  committed  a  serious  non-political  crime
         outside the country of refuge prior to his [or  her]  admission  to
         that country as a refugee; or

         (c)  he [or she] has been guilty of acts contrary to  the  purposes
         and principles of the United Nations.'

 5. Article 25 of the Rome Statute  of  the  International  Criminal  Court
    provides:

         '3.  In accordance with this Statute, a person shall be  criminally
         responsible and liable  for  punishment  for  a  crime  within  the
         jurisdiction of the Court if that person:

             (a)  Commits such a crime, whether as an  individual,  jointly
             with another or through another person, regardless of  whether
             that other person is criminally responsible;

             (b)  Orders, solicits or induces  the  commission  of  such  a
             crime which in fact occurs or is attempted;

             (c)  For the purpose of facilitating the commission of such  a
             crime, aids, abets or otherwise assists in its  commission  or
             its attempted commission, including providing  the  means  for
             its commission;

             (d)  In  any  other  way  contributes  to  the  commission  or
             attempted commission of such a crime by  a  group  of  persons
             acting with a  common  purpose.  Such  contribution  shall  be
             intentional and shall either:

                  (i)  Be made with  the  aim  of  furthering  the  criminal
                  activity or criminal purpose  of  the  group,  where  such
                  activity or purpose involves the  commission  of  a  crime
                  within the jurisdiction of the Court; or

                  (ii) Be made in the knowledge  of  the  intention  of  the
                  group to commit the crime;

             (e)  In  respect  of  the  crime  of  genocide,  directly  and
             publicly incites others to commit genocide;

             (f)  Attempts to commit such a crime  by  taking  action  that
             commences its execution by means of a  substantial  step,  but
             the crime does not occur because of circumstances  independent
             of the person's intentions. However, a person who abandons the
             effort  to  commit  the  crime  or  otherwise   prevents   the
             completion of the crime shall not  be  liable  for  punishment
             under this Statute for the attempt to  commit  that  crime  if
             that person completely and voluntarily gave  up  the  criminal
             purpose.

         4.   No provision in this Statute relating to  individual  criminal
         responsibility shall affect  the  responsibility  of  States  under
         international law.'

 6. Mr Sills submitted that the appellant's conduct could only fall  within
    the definition  of  subparagraph  (d)  above.  The  appellant  had  not
    committed the crime individually or jointly  with  others  nor  had  he
    ordered, solicited or induced the  commission  of  a  crime  nor  aided
    abetted or otherwise assisted  in  its  commission.  I  find  that  the
    appellant's  conduct  falls  for  consideration  under  (d)  (ii):  the
    appellant  contributed  to  the  commission  of  the  mistreatment   of
    detainees by intentionally passing those whom he had arrested into  the
    custody of individuals who the appellant was aware would ill-treat  the
    detainees. I accept that the appellant did not directly ill-treat those
    whom he had  arrested  nor  did  he,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the
    expression, actively join in their ill-treatment by aiding and abetting
    such treatment. In reaching that finding I acknowledge that Article  25
    (3) (d) 'captures 'lesser' contributions to a  crime  than  aiding  and
    abetting' as the Court found in Ezokola v Canada [2013] 2  SCR  687  at
    [63].

 7. The mental element is considered in the Statute at Article 30:

         'Article 30

         Mental element

         1.   Unless  otherwise  provided,  a  person  shall  be  criminally
         responsible and liable  for  punishment  for  a  crime  within  the
         jurisdiction of  the  Court  only  if  the  material  elements  are
         committed with intent and knowledge.

         2.   For the purposes of this article, a person has intent where:

             (a)  In relation to conduct, that person means  to  engage  in
             the conduct;

             (b)  In relation to a consequence, that person means to  cause
             that consequence or  is  aware  that  it  will  occur  in  the
             ordinary course of events.

         3.   For the purposes of this article, "knowledge" means  awareness
         that a circumstance exists or  a  consequence  will  occur  in  the
         ordinary  course  of  events.  "Know"  and  "knowingly"  shall   be
         construed accordingly.'

 8. I find that the appellant did possess knowledge  because  he  had  full
    awareness that the consequence passing those whom he had arrested  into
    the custody of the Office would, in the ordinary course of  events,  be
    likely to lead to their ill-treatment.

 9. As regards the appellant's claim that he was  carrying  out  orders,  I
    note the decision of the Upper Tribunal in CM (Article 1F(a) - superior
    orders) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00236(IAC):

         "In the context of deciding  whether  a  person  is  excluded  from
         Refugee Convention protection by virtue of  having  committed  acts
         contrary to Article 1F(a), the  effect  of  Article  33(1)  of  the
         Statute of the International Criminal Court ("the Rome Statute") is
         that whilst obedience to superior orders can be a defence  if  each
         of its three requirements - as set out at (a), (b) and  (c)  -  are
         met, by virtue of Article 33(2) the  Article  33(1)(c)  requirement
         can never be met in cases where the order was to commit genocide or
         a  crime  against  humanity.  Such  cases  are  always  "manifestly
         unlawful". For a person alleged to be  criminally  responsible  for
         crimes against humanity the defence of obedience to superior orders
         is unavailable."

10. Article 33 provides:

         'Article 33 Superior orders and prescription of law

         The fact that a crime within the jurisdiction of the Court has been
         committed by a person pursuant to an order of a Government or of  a
         superior, whether military or  civilian,  shall  not  relieve  that
         person of criminal responsibility unless:

             (a)  The person was under a legal obligation to obey orders of
             the Government or the superior in question;

             (b)  The person did not know that the order was unlawful; and

             (c)  The order was not manifestly unlawful.

         For the purposes of this article,  orders  to  commit  genocide  or
         crimes against humanity are manifestly unlawful.' [my emphasis]

11. If the appellant has committed  a  crime  against  humanity,  then  the
    defence of superior orders is not available to him.  In  respect  of  a
    lesser crime, the defence may be available. The document  Understanding
    the International Criminal Court which is an  official  publication  of
    the Court issued with the intent to 'enhance understanding of the Court
    and its procedures' states that 'The mandate of the  Court  is  to  try
    individuals (rather than States), and to hold such persons  accountable
    for the most serious crimes of concern to the  international  community
    as a whole, namely the crime of genocide, war  crimes,  crimes  against
    humanity, and the crime of aggression,  when  the  conditions  for  the
    exercise of the Court's jurisdiction over the  latter  are  fulfilled.'
    Crimes against Humanity are defined as:

         '"Crimes against  humanity"  include  any  of  the  following  acts
         committed as part of a widespread  or  systematic  attack  directed
         against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack:

         .    murder;

         .    extermination;

         .    enslavement;

         .    deportation or forcible transfer of population;

         .    imprisonment;

         .    torture;

         .    rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy,
             enforced sterilization, or any other form of  sexual  violence
             of comparable gravity;

         .     persecution  against  an  identifiable  group  on  political,
             racial,  national,  ethnic,  cultural,  religious  or   gender
             grounds;

         .    enforced disappearance of persons;

         .    the crime of apartheid;

         .    other inhumane  acts  of  a  similar  character  intentionally
             causing great suffering or serious bodily  or  mental  injury'
             [my emphasis]

12. I find that the appellant falls within the provisions  of  the  Statute
    because the consequences of delivering those whom he  had  arrested  to
    the Office involved the commission of acts of imprisonment and  torture
    which  performed  part  of  a  systematic  attack  against  a  civilian
    population, in this instance the demonstrators who  the  appellant  and
    his officers had arrested. Because the crimes involved fall within  the
    definition of 'crimes against humanity' the appellant cannot rely  upon
    the defence of superior orders.

13. Mr Sills submitted that the appellant did not  know  for  certain  that
    each and every individual whom he handed over to the  Office  would  be
    tortured. The appellant could not, therefore, have  had  the  knowledge
    required to render him liable to exclusion. I disagree.  I  have  found
    that the appellant knew that at least some of the individuals  whom  he
    handed over would become victims of crimes against humanity. It did not
    matter that all should suffer in the same way.  Indeed,  the  appellant
    had no control over what happened to any particular individual after he
    had handed him or her over to the Office. In my opinion, it was  enough
    that the appellant knew that every individual could become a victim  of
    torture, indeed that they were likely to become a  victim  even  if  he
    knew that, while some might not may not, others  certainly  would.  The
    operation involving the appellant and  his  officers,  the  arrests  of
    demonstrators and their transfer to the Office may not have been  on  a
    large-scale but it did, in my opinion, represent  a  systematic  attack
    upon a civilian population. The threshold which must be reached for the
    conduct  in  which  the  appellant  was   involved   to   be   properly
    characterised as a crime against  humanity  has  been  crossed,  in  my
    judgement, in this instance. Further, I find  that  the  appellant  was
    possessed of the required intent and  knowledge.  Accordingly,  I  have
    concluded that the appellant should be excluded from refugee protection
    by the operation of Article 1F. For the avoidance of doubt, I find that
    the  appellant's  conduct  excludes   him   from   refugee   protection
    notwithstanding his subsequent disobeying of  orders,  detention,  ill-
    treatment and flight to obtain protection in the United  Kingdom.  That
    subsequent conduct cannot absolve him from participation in conduct  in
    the Democratic Republic of Congo for which exclusion from protection is
    the appropriate response.




Notice of Decision

14. The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights  grounds  (Article  3
    ECHR). The appeal is dismissed on  asylum  grounds;  the  appellant  is
    excluded from protection as a refugee by the operation of Article 1F of
    the 1951 Convention.


Signed   Date 12 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

