



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/08875 /2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 25 September 2017                  |          On 11 October 2017         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                           REkawt husamadin jalal
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mrs F Mustapha of Wai Leung Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity from Kirkuk
         born on 29 February 2000 who left Iraq in January 2016 and  claimed
         asylum here in May 2016. Although the application was refused on  9
         August 2016, he was granted limited leave until 1 August 2017 as an
         unaccompanied minor. His 'upgrade' appeal was dismissed  by  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese by way of a determination  promulgated
         on 13 February 2017.


      2. The appellant challenged the decision on the basis that  the  judge
         had arguably (1) failed to properly consider the issue of  risk  on
         return in accordance with  the  country  guidance  in  AA  (Article
         15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) (now overtaken by the  Court
         of Appeal's decision)  particularly  as  he  had  no  Civil  Status
         identity document (CSID) and (2) erred  in  his  finding  that  the
         applicant would be able to  relocate  to  the  IKR.  Permission  to
         appeal was granted by Judge Page on 25 May 2017 and the matter came
         before me on 14  July  2017.  Having  heard  submissions  from  Mrs
         Mustapha (who has ably represented  the  appellant  throughout  his
         appeal proceedings) and Mr Clarke who both agreed  that  the  judge
         had not adequately dealt with the issue of  whether  the  appellant
         would be able to obtain a CSID card, I set aside the decision. Full
         reasons are set out in my  determination  promulgated  on  25  July
         2017.



         The hearing

      3. One of the complaints made about the proceedings before the  First-
         tier Tribunal was that the appellant's foster carer, Mr Calder, had
         not been permitted to  give  oral  evidence  with  respect  to  the
         appellant's  attempt  to  contact  the  Red  Cross  to  locate  the
         whereabouts of his relatives in  Iraq.  Mr  Calder  was  unable  to
         attend the substantive hearing before me due to various commitments
         but he submitted a letter in which he confirmed his  reliance  upon
         his earlier statement and  explained  that  the  appellant  was  no
         longer in foster care.


      4. Mrs  Mustapha  informed  me  that  the  appellant  lived  in  semi-
         independent accommodation and was still supported  by  Kent  Social
         Services.


      5. The appellant was present and gave oral evidence in Kurdish  Sorani
         through an interpreter whom he confirmed he  understood.  A  social
         work  assistant  was  present  throughout  the   hearing   as   his
         responsible adult.


      6. The appellant confirmed his name, date of  birth  and  address.  He
         confirmed the contents of two witness  statements  and  the  asylum
         interview were accurate  and  truthful  and  adopted  them  as  his
         evidence in chief. He was referred to  the  letters  from  the  Red
         Cross contained in the evidence. He stated that the letter dated 14
         June 2017 was the last one he had received. He said he had not  had
         any contact with (Jamal) the friend of his father  who  had  helped
         him to leave the country. He stated that  his  parents  had  passed
         away. The only relatives he  had  in  Kurdistan  were  two  younger
         brothers. He had provided the Red Cross with the address of Jamal's
         cousin, Azad, because that was  the  only  address  he  knew.  That
         completed examination in chief. He  was  then  tendered  for  cross
         examination.


      7. In reply to Mr Staunton's questions, the appellant said that  after
         the death of his parents he had gone to live with Jamal  who  lived
         in Topzawa, a village  about  half  an  hour's  drive  from  Mullah
         Abdullah,  his  home  village.  He  thought  there   were   150-200
         households in Jamal's village. He had not told the Red Cross  about
         his home village because he thought  it  had  been  bombed  and  so
         assumed no one still lived there although he conceded  he  did  not
         know for certain.



      8. The appellant stated that he had left Jamal's village to work at  a
         petrol garage about 25-30 minutes away by car.  He worked there for
         9-10 months as an assistant/handyman. Initially he  lived  in  some
         disused metal shelter but was then given a room in the garage.  His
         friend (Hiwa) who found the job for him would  come  to  visit  him
         from time to time. The appellant was not in contact  with  him.  He
         lived in Kirkuk but the appellant did not know  where.  Jamal  took
         the appellant and the friend to the garage. When asked why  he  had
         not mentioned this friend at interview or that Jamal had taken them
         to the garage, he said he had not been asked. He denied having said
         at interview that he had gone to Jamal's mother's house.

      9. The appellant stated that his brothers had been born  in  2002  and
         2005. When asked where  they  had  been  when  he  left  Iraq,  the
         appellant said they were supposed to go and stay with a  neighbour.
         He did not know where. When he was pressed  further,  he  said  the
         person had been a neighbour of his grandparents and had  known  his
         (the appellant's)  father.  He  confirmed  that  his  grandparents'
         village was Mullah Abdullah but when asked  whether  the  neighbour
         lived there, he  said  she  did  not.  She  had  been  a  neighbour
         "before". His grandparents had died before he was born. He did  not
         know who took his brothers to her. He  knew  they  had  gone  there
         because he had spoken to them  on  the  phone  a  few  days  before
         leaving Iraq with Jamal's help. He said one of three  people  could
         have taken them to the neighbour - Jamal, his cousin Azad or Salam,
         a family friend. The appellant said he had not asked  his  brothers
         who had helped them when they spoke. He said they were children. He
         did not speak to the person they were living with.  They  mentioned
         where they were living but he had forgotten.



     10. The appellant was asked whether his  brothers  had  used  a  mobile
         phone to take the call. The appellant replied Jamal had  said  they
         were safe. The question was repeated. The appellant said Jamal  had
         told him he needed to leave. The question was put a third time  and
         the appellant was reminded he needed to answer the questions put to
         him. He confirmed that it had been a mobile phone. He was asked how
         he had left Iraq without making a note of their number. He said  it
         was not easy and he had not wanted to  leave.  At  this  point  the
         appellant became  distressed  and  a  short  break  was  taken.  On
         resuming the appellant confirmed he was happy to continue.

     11. The appellant stated that Jamal was a family friend. He  had  known
         the appellant's father since they were  children.  Jamal  had  been
         beaten up. He did not know the details but it was because  of  him.
         He left Iraq about 3 days later.

     12. The appellant was asked whether  Jamal  had  sold  the  appellant's
         father's car to fund his journey. He replied: "that is  what  I  am
         told". He said it was a new Nissan pick up. Jamal had been using it
         before it was sold. When asked whether Jamal had told him  who  had
         bought it, the appellant said that he had been with Jamal  when  it
         was sold. They went to a place in Kirkuk that sold cars. This  took
         place between the time Jamal was beaten and the appellant left.  At
         the time the car was sold, the appellant had returned  to  live  in
         Jamal's house. He had run away from his place of work because "they
         had come to get me at work". The appellant was asked to clarify his
         evidence as at interview he had not made reference to anyone coming
         to his place of work. He said that the  men  had  gone  to  Jamal's
         house and beaten him up.  They  then  called  the  appellant  using
         Jamal's mobile phone and made threats. Jamal was at  home  when  he
         had been beaten. The appellant was afraid they would come  for  him
         so he left work and went to Jamal's house where he  stayed  in  the
         basement. He said he did not think they would come back  there  and
         he did not stay there long.


     13. The  appellant  stated  he  had  suffered  from  thalassemia  since
         childhood. He had received treatment in Iraq. He now  went  to  the
         hospital every three weeks.  In  Iraq,  it  had  been  every  three
         months.

     14. The appellant said he was studying English, Maths, citizenship  and
         computing at college which he attended three times a week. He lived
         in accommodation which he shared with a Moroccan and an Afghani  or
         Egyptian. He did his own washing but did not cook much,  preferring
         to buy food outside.  That completed cross examination.

     15. In re-examination, he  was  asked  again  about  the  call  to  his
         brothers. He said the conversation lasted a few minutes. They  were
         crying. They did not know he was going to leave Iraq.  He  did  not
         ask Jamal for the telephone number so that he could call them. When
         asked why, the appellant said: "Can you understand  how  I  felt?".
         The matter was pursued and he said that he had been threatened  and
         he ran away and slept in  the  woods.  His  brothers  had  been  at
         Jamal's mother's house but the house  had  been  shot  at.  He  was
         worried about them and wanted to know they were safe.  He  said  he
         had called Jamal from the woods and Jamal had come to collect him.

     16. I then put questions to the appellant for  clarification.  I  asked
         him to describe what happened during his  visits  to  hospital.  He
         said that he would be there all day. They took his blood  pressure,
         examined his blood and then gave him a transfusion.

     17. I asked for the name of Azad's village. The appellant said  it  was
         in a district of Kirkuk called Shoraw.


     18. The appellant said that his brothers had lived with Jamal's  mother
         until they were taken to the neighbour's  house  some  9-10  months
         later. He never visited them.  When  asked  why,  he  said  it  was
         because the Kurds would know him and he would be recognised thereby
         placing his brothers at risk. He had been 14-15 when  he  had  been
         seen and recognised by those who were now after him.

     19. The appellant said that he had gone with his  brothers  to  Jamal's
         mother's house but after a few hours they said he should  not  stay
         so his friend, Hiwa, told him he would take him  to  his  place  of
         work and Jamal took them there. The appellant confirmed  that  Hiwa
         worked at the same garage. The appellant was given work.

     20. The appellant said he was given a mobile phone so that Jamal  could
         call him. He did not know how to make out going calls so the  phone
         was only used to receive calls. Those were my questions.

     21. Mr Staunton then put some questions arising  from  mine.  He  asked
         whether the phone had been taken away from him  at  any  time.  The
         appellant said Jamal had taken it when  they  left  the  woods.  He
         broke the phone and the sim card. The agent then gave the appellant
         another phone. Jamal, Azad and Salam arranged the  agent  and  Hiwa
         might have helped.



     22. The appellant said his brothers would  not  be  recognised  because
         they were younger than him. He said  he  had  been  seen  with  his
         father. He knew this because his mother had told him to be  careful
         when he went out whereas  his  brothers  went  out  and  to  school
         without problems. The appellant said that he left school at 7 after
         a year because he did not like his teacher.



     23. Mrs Mustapha had no questions arising and that completed  the  oral
         evidence.



     24. I then heard submissions. Mr Staunton  relied  on  the  credibility
         issues raised in the refusal letter.  Areas  of  concern  were  the
         claim of threatening phone calls,  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
         brothers and why they would not be at risk if the appellant was and
         the evidence of their whereabouts. There were also  inconsistencies
         between the oral  evidence  and  the  evidence  at  interview  with
         respect to being at Jamal's house, being collected from the  woods,
         over the sale of the car, how he found work and whether Hiwa worked
         at the garage or just came to visit him there. Taken  cumulatively,
         these  inconsistencies  demonstrated  that  the  claim   had   been
         falsified.

     25. With respect to the risk on return, Mr Staunton submitted that  the
         situation had changed since AA had been heard by the Tribunal.  The
         Court of Appeal's judgment in AA made  changes  to  the  Tribunal's
         determination and there was no longer  any  risk  in  the  IKR,  no
         danger in Kirkuk and CSID documents were not required in  order  to
         enter. The issue of a likelihood of employment was fact  sensitive.
         The appellant had family there. He had been able to receive medical
         treatment when in Iraq.   The appeal should be dismissed.

     26. Mrs Mustapha relied on the  skeleton  argument.  She  asked  for  a
         finding that the appellant was an orphan,  pointing  out  that  the
         respondent had not taken issue with this part  of  the  claim.  She
         submitted that Kirkuk had been under the control of Daesh in  2014-
         2015 and so the appellant's claim of the village being  raided  and
         his parents being killed was credible. The claim  of  having  found
         work was credible as the  country  evidence  confirmed  there  were
         child workers. He had to work  to  support  himself  and  help  his
         brothers. With  respect  to  the  claim  of  his  father's  enemies
         pursuing him, he could only repeat what he had been  told.  He  did
         not know all the details as  he  was  a  child  at  the  time.  Mrs
         Mustapha referred me to the Home Office policy on children and  the
         difficulty in obtaining evidence from a young person. The appellant
         had returned to Jamal's house as he had nowhere else to go. It  was
         plausible. He had gone with  Jamal  to  sell  the  car.  He  was  a
         credible witness and he had explained why he  would  be  recognised
         more easily than his brothers. The evidence was consistent and  the
         core claim stood.



     27. Mrs Mustapha submitted that there were  still  concerns  about  the
         situation in Iraq. Daesh still operated in some areas. There was no
         guarantee that Iraq was safe. It would be unduly  harsh  to  expect
         the appellant to return to Iraq. He was not from  the  IKR  and  so
         could not be returned there. If returned to Baghdad,  he  would  be
         sent there as a child with no family and no knowledge of Arabic. He
         would need CSID documents to work and to access  services.  He  did
         not know what had become  of  his  birth  certificate  and  had  no
         documents to use to obtain identity documents.  I  should  consider
         the  practicalities  of  getting  from  Baghdad  to  the  IKR.  The
         appellant had no sponsor there and so could not get  pre-clearance.
         His medical condition added to his vulnerability. He was an orphan.
         The Red Cross had been unable to locate his brothers but  enquiries
         were ongoing. His appeal should be allowed. There was  no  reliance
         on article 8.



     28. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give.



         Discussion and conclusions

     29. I have considered all the evidence with  care.  This  includes  the
         written and oral evidence, both before this court  and  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal, and the submissions of  the  parties.  I  also
         bear in mind that the appellant is not yet 18 years old and I  have
         regard  to  the  practice  directions,  the  UNHCR  guidelines   on
         unaccompanied children and the Home Office policy on  young  people
         when assessing the evidence. I appreciate that  the  appellant  was
         even younger when the alleged events took place. I accept  that  he
         suffers from thalassemia and  that  this  is  an  added  factor  of
         vulnerability. I have assessed  all  the  evidence  in  the  round,
         applying the lower standard of proof  and  I  reach  the  following
         conclusions which I list in no order of priority.


     30. Although the appellant was  unable  to  answer  detailed  questions
         about Kurdistan at interview, the respondent noted  that  he  could
         answer some and that he spoke Kurdish Sorani so his  ethnicity  was
         accepted. It follows that it has also been accepted that he is from
         Kirkuk. Although his date of birth  of  29  February  2000  differs
         significantly from the date of 16 July 1995  given  to  the  German
         authorities when he claimed  asylum  there  in  January  2016,  the
         respondent has not sought to challenge it and I, therefore, proceed
         on the basis that the appellant is not yet 18 years old. I am  also
         prepared to accept that he is an orphan as again the respondent has
         not taken issue with the claim that his parents were  killed  in  a
         Daesh attack on the village in January 2015.



     31. The appellant claimed in his statement of 21 July 2016 that he  had
         never used a passport (at paragraphs 3 and 18) and he gave evidence
         to Judge Abrebese that he had not used any  passport  or  documents
         for his journey from Iraq to the UK (at paragraph 22). According to
         the German authorities, however, the appellant has a passport which
         is held by their office in Erding.



     32. The appellant claimed in the same statement that he could not apply
         for asylum in Greece or Germany because he was under the control of
         the agent (at paragraph 5).  However,  the  evidence  from  Germany
         shows that he made an asylum application there on 28 January  2016,
         within three days of leaving Iraq. Quite how he got to  Germany  so
         fast when his long journey was by lorry  and  on  foot  (July  2016
         statement; paragraph 18) is unexplained.



     33. Contrary to what Mrs Mustapha submitted, the appellant does have  a
         basic knowledge of Arabic which he learnt from his father who spoke
         Arabic (July 2016 statement; paragraph 6).



     34. The  appellant  claimed  in  his  July  2016  statement  that  when
         Daesh/ISIS attacked his village and killed his parents, he and  his
         brothers were visiting Jamal in Topzawa. After  a  two  day  visit,
         they heard that their parents  had  perished  in  the  attack.  The
         bodies  were  brought  to  them  by  Kurdish  peshmergas  and  they
         conducted a funeral. The appellant and his brothers  then  remained
         with Jamal for several weeks until Jamal received a telephone  call
         from two brothers who threatened him. They  had  lost  their  whole
         family  some  years  earlier  and  held  the   appellant's   father
         responsible.



     35. The appellant claimed Jamal  took  him  and  his  brothers  to  his
         (Jamal's ) mother's house on the other side of the same village (at
         14). At the hearing, the appellant said he did not know  where  the
         mother lived. Whilst he had also confirmed at his interview that he
         had gone to Jamal's mother's house, at the hearing he denied having
         made  such  a  claim.  No  explanations  were  offered  for   these
         contradictions.



     36. The appellant claimed in his statement that he was afraid to remain
         at Jamal's mother's house for fear of being recognised by  the  two
         brothers so he found a job at a petrol station (at  14)  where  his
         friend Hiwa came to visit and took money from him for  the  support
         of his brothers (at 15).  At interview, he confirmed  that  he  had
         found the job himself (Q.89).  In  evidence  to  me,  however,  the
         appellant said that Hiwa had found him the job. The appellant  told
         Judge Abebrese that he worked at the garage for two months (at  22)
         but he told  me  that  he  worked  there  for  9-10  months.  These
         inconsistencies remain unresolved.



     37. In his statement, the appellant said that on  19  January  2016  he
         received a call informing him that Jamal had  been  killed  and  he
         then left the workshop as he was afraid (at 15). The following  day
         he was called by Jamal who was alive and made arrangements for them
         to meet at a house (at 16). The appellant told me he had hidden  in
         some woods and Jamal had collected him from the main  road  nearby.
         At the asylum interview the appellant said that  when  he  received
         the phone call he had been told his two brothers had been killed as
         well as Jamal (Q.62). I would not expect the  appellant  to  forget
         such a distressing piece of news. Yet it was not mentioned  in  his
         statement or in evidence when he gave details about the call.



     38. In his statement, the appellant said that when he  met  Jamal,  his
         father's  car  had  already  been  sold  to  raise  funds  for  the
         appellant's departure (at 16) but he told me that he had gone  with
         Jamal to Kirkuk after he returned to Jamal's house  and  they  were
         together when the car was sold. Earlier  in  evidence  to  me,  the
         appellant said he had been told the car had been sold. In his  July
         statement, he said he believed his  father's  belongings  had  been
         sold to raise funds for his journey (paragraph 19).



     39. The appellant said in his statement that he  was  told  he  had  to
         leave immediately and that Jamal would make  sure  the  appellant's
         brothers were safe (at 17). He claimed that he did not  know  where
         Jamal sent his brothers (at 17). There is no mention  at  all  that
         the appellant spoke to them as he told me, that they  were  with  a
         neighbour or that the house had been targeted and shot at.



     40. The appellant confirmed the accuracy of the statement at the asylum
         interview and in evidence  to  me.  He  also  adopted  his  witness
         statements.



     41. At interview, the appellant stated he went to Kirkuk hospital every
         18 days by car or taxi (Q.21, 22, 24 and 40). In evidence to me  he
         said he went every 3 months. He was able to  continue  his  regular
         trips throughout his time at the garage.



     42. It may thus be seen that there have been numerous contradictions in
         the evidence and that there are no explanations for  any  of  these
         matters. I have borne in mind that the appellant is a young man and
         that he was even younger on arrival and when he gave his  statement
         and interview but even making  allowances  for  his  youth,  it  is
         difficult to understand how he can be so contradictory over so many
         key elements of his claim.



     43. Turning to the specifics of the application, I deal first with  the
         claim that the appellant would be at  risk  on  return  because  he
         would be pursued by his father's enemies; i.e.  those  who  accused
         him of  co-operating  with  Saddam  Hussain  and  specifically  two
         brothers who held him responsible for the loss of their relative.



     44. The appellant gave a very confusing answer to the question  of  why
         his father was suspected of co-operating with  Saddam  Hussain  (at
         57). If the appellant's  father  and  grandfather  had  helped  the
         Kurdish fighters and had been arrested as a  result,  it  makes  no
         sense that they would be suspected of collaboration with the  Iraqi
         regime against the Kurds.



     45. Given that Saddam Hussain was executed in 2006 when  the  appellant
         would have been 6 years old, it is  not  credible  that  these  two
         brothers would make threats some 16 years after  any  possible  co-
         operation could have taken place and after the  appellant's  father
         was dead. Nor was it explained why they would attack Jamal  several
         months after the appellant had left his house.



     46. The appellant stated at interview that his father had  been  killed
         by those seeking revenge (Q.64) but in his  statement,  he  claimed
         they died in a attack on  the  village  by  ISIS.    Later  in  his
         interview he admitted that he  was  not  sure  about  his  parents'
         deaths and that they might have been killed during  the  ISIS  raid
         (Q.97).



     47. The appellant claimed he would be recognised if he went  to  Kirkuk
         and would then  be  at  risk  but  notwithstanding  that  claim  he
         accompanied Jamal to Kirkuk to sell the car. Given that  there  was
         no need for him to go with Jamal, the journey would appear to be an
         unnecessary risk and undermines the  claim  that  he  would  be  in
         danger if he showed his face there. His regular visits to  hospital
         in Kirkuk also appear to have caused him no problems. Moreover,  as
         he  claimed  it  was  his  appearance  that  would  lead   to   his
         recognition, changing his name whilst he worked at  the  garage  in
         Kirkuk (for some ten month)s  would  have  offered  little  if  any
         protection.



     48. The appellant gave contradictory evidence over whether  the  people
         allegedly seeking him out  came  to  his  place  of  work  or  made
         telephone calls to him there. He  also  contradicted  himself  over
         where he had been reunited with Jamal; whether they had met up at a
         pre-arranged house or  on  the  roadside  by  the  woods.  He  gave
         discrepant evidence over whether Jamal's mother's  house  had  been
         targeted, over whether he had ever been there and whether  he  knew
         where the house was situated.  He was also contradictory over where
         he had been living in the year prior to departure. At his screening
         interview, he claimed to have lived in his home village until  2016
         (he left Iraq in January 2016) but he later claimed at  his  asylum
         interview that he had been living away from home since the death of
         his parents a year earlier. His claim that he only attended  school
         for a year as a very young child is undermined by  his  ability  to
         attend a college in  the  UK  and  study  IT,  English,  Maths  and
         Computing.



     49. Even allowing for  the  appellant's  youth,  his  alleged  lack  of
         education, cultural differences and any difficulties arising  as  a
         result, there are  simply  too  many  serious  contradictions  over
         simple maters which the appellant could be  expected  to  remember.
         All these inconsistencies lead me to conclude that the  claim  over
         being sought to two enemies of his father is a  fabrication.  I  do
         not, therefore, find that there would be any risk to the  appellant
         from these unknown men. The claim of imputed political opinion  has
         not been made out.



     50. There are also serious inconsistencies over the appellant's account
         of his departure and events immediately leading up to it.



     51. At interview, the appellant claimed that the agent who  helped  him
         leave was arranged the same day that he  (the  appellant)  received
         the call from Jamal to meet him (Q.98). In his evidence to  me,  he
         said it was about 4 days after he got back  to  Jamal's  house.  He
         gave inconsistent statements about when and how the funds  for  his
         travel were raised and he contradicted himself about whether or not
         he used a passport or travel  documents  during  his  journey.  His
         claim that he had been under the control of the agent is undermined
         by the evidence from the German authorities that he made an  asylum
         application in Germany  and  that  he  had  a  passport  which  was
         retained.



     52. I also have concerns over whether the appellant has told the  truth
         about having no contact with his brothers. He was very evasive when
         questions were put to him about them (see paragraphs 9, 10 and  15)
         and questions had to be repeated several times but  still  achieved
         little in the way of coherent answers. It is  difficult  to  accept
         that the appellant would have forgotten  where  his  brothers  said
         they were living when they are, according to his evidence, the only
         living relatives he has. It is also difficult to accept that during
         the 10 months they were living apart  from  each  other  after  the
         death of their parents that they would make no contact particularly
         when the appellant was working in order  to  send  them  money  for
         support and when they both had access to  mobile  phones.  Although
         the appellant claimed not to know how to use one to  make  outgoing
         calls, this is difficult to believe especially when he was used  to
         making calls for a taxi to take him to and from hospital  every  18
         days and when he obtained a "better phone" for his  journey  so  he
         could use the internet.  Even more inexplicable is the  claim  that
         although the appellant and his brothers did eventually speak before
         the appellant left Iraq, he did not keep a  note  of  their  mobile
         telephone number or ask Jamal for it.


     53. I take account of what has been said about  contact  with  the  Red
         Cross and I have had regard to Mr Calder's  evidence  and  the  Red
         Cross letters. The fact remains, however, that the appellant  could
         have been much more expansive in the information  provided  to  the
         Red Cross. He only gave them the name of Jamal's  cousin's  village
         but for reasons which he could not satisfactorily  explain  he  did
         not provide the details of the home village or Jamal's village.  He
         claimed this was because he only "knew" the cousin's address but as
         it transpired that the address amounted to no more than the name of
         the village, it is not explained why Mullah  Abdullah  and  Topzawa
         were not mentioned to the Red Cross. It may be that  the  appellant
         was instructed to remain vague and give out no information so as to
         increase his own chances of a successful asylum  claim.  Certainly,
         the appellant's distress when speaking about leaving  his  brothers
         appeared to be genuine and I have no doubt he misses  them  but  it
         does not follow that he left in the circumstances claimed  or  that
         he has no knowledge of their whereabouts or  has  no  contact  with
         them. For the reasons I have given,  I  do  not  believe  that  the
         appellant left for the reasons claimed or in the manner claimed.  I
         do not accept that there is no contact between  the  appellant  and
         his brothers.


     54. When assessing the asylum claim,  I  therefore  conclude  that  the
         account of fearing two men who blamed the  appellant's  father  for
         the deaths of their relatives is a fabrication.  I  find  that  the
         appellant was not in danger from them or anyone else when  he  left
         Iraq. I find that there is still contact between the appellant  and
         his brothers. That is not, however, the end of the matter.   As the
         respondent has not disputed  the  appellant's  claim  of  being  an
         orphan, I must proceed on the basis that  the  only  relatives  the
         appellant has in Iraq are his two  brothers.  Even  though  I  have
         found that the appellant knows where they  are,  they  are  younger
         than him and would not be in any position to assist him  to  obtain
         CSID documents. No issue has been taken  with  the  fact  that  the
         appellant has no identity documents with him. Nor is  it  suggested
         that he has some in Iraq and could access  them.  Whilst  there  is
         confirmation from the German authorities that  they  have  retained
         his  passport,  which  no  doubt  could  be  used  to  obtain  CSID
         documents, until it is obtained from them the appellant is  without
         any documents.



     55. I now apply the guidance given in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944  to
         the facts of this case as per my findings. As the appellant is  not
         from the IKR, he would be returned to Baghdad. It is not  suggested
         that he has any form of support there or  that  he  has  ever  been
         there. As an adolescent, not yet 18, of Kurdish ethnicity, a mainly
         Kurdish Sorani speaker and with a medical condition  that  requires
         regular treatment, I find  that  it  would  not  be  safe  for  the
         appellant in Baghdad. I do not find that it would be reasonable for
         the appellant to relocate there. He is without a CSID, he has  only
         a basic smattering of Arabic, he has no family or friends there, he
         is from a minority community and there is  no  suggestion  that  he
         would be able to find a sponsor in order to  access  accommodation.
         Mr Staunton suggested that the appellant  could  make  his  way  to
         Kirkuk, no longer a contested area, or Irbil, but it is unclear how
         someone in the appellant's position would be able  to  do  that.  I
         accept that notwithstanding the fabricated case put forward, he  is
         a vulnerable young person. It would not be feasible for him to make
         arrangements for a flight to the IKR where he has  never  been  and
         has no support and, indeed, he would be unable to travel without  a
         CSID (5.4.7 Home Office Country Policy and Information Note).



     56. With respect to the issue of a CSID, which I have touched on above,
         I accept that this is not needed to  enter  Iraq  however,  as  Mrs
         Mustapha emphasised in her submissions, it is  required  to  access
         financial assistance from the authorities,  employment,  education,
         housing and medical treatment. The appellant does not have one  and
         I have already found that his two young brothers would not be  able
         to assist him to obtain one. Unless he were to obtain his documents
         from the German authorities, the chances of obtaining a CSID having
         entered  Iraq  are  very  slim.  Moreover,   given   the   accepted
         destruction of his home area, it is unlikely, even if  he  made  it
         home, that there would be any accessible  local  records.  On  that
         basis, therefore, I find that the appellant cannot be  returned  to
         Iraq. His article 3 claim is made out.



     57.  Mrs  Mustapha  made  no  separate  submissions   on   humanitarian
         protection and indeed the evidence does not suggest that  there  is
         any armed conflict at the present time in Kirkuk.



     58. No reliance was placed on article 8.



         Decision




     59. The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.


     60. The appeal is allowed on article 3 grounds.

     61. The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.



         Anonymity

     62. No anonymity order was made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no
         request for such an order was made before me.



    Signed



       Upper Tribunal Judge
          Date: 9 October 2017


