
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/08197/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On: 8th February 2018                 |On: 13th February 2018               |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    [R R]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Jamaica date of birth [  ]  1976.    On
    the 30th October 2017 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Evans) allowed his
    appeal, on human rights grounds, against a decision to deport him  from
    the United Kingdom.


 2. [RR] has lived in  the  United  Kingdom  since  2002.  He  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in November 2006. The Secretary of State for
    the Home Department took the  decision  to  deport,  at  least  in  its
    present form, on the 11th August 2017.  The basis of  the  decision  is
    that in the view of the Secretary of State for the Home Department [RR]
    is a persistent offender and as such his deportation would be conducive
    to the public good. Between May 2008 and October 2015 he was  convicted
    of 28 offences. Most of the offences related to possession of  cannabis
    but he has also been convicted of other matters which include dangerous
    driving (for which he received  a  custodial  sentence  of  9  months),
    assaulting a constable (12 months community order) and affray (4 months
    imprisonment).

 3. [RR] appealed on the grounds that a) he could not be  deported  because
    he was at risk in Jamaica and b) the consequences  of  his  deportation
    would be unduly harsh for his British children.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal on protection grounds.  It
    did not accept that [RR] faced any risk in Jamaica  (he  had,  somewhat
    ironically, asserted a fear  of  criminality  in  that  country).  That
    decision is not subject to challenge and it stands.

 5. In respect of the human rights limb of his  case,  the  Tribunal  heard
    that [RR] has four children living in the United Kingdom.  They are all
    British nationals. It was accepted by the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department that [RR] enjoyed a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with three of those children. It was in addition  accepted
    that he had such a relationship with a fifth child,  his  stepson.  The
    determination identifies the key  tests  in  the  appeal  as  being  a)
    whether it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the  children  to  go  to
    Jamaica with [RR], and b) whether it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect
    them to live here without him.   It then went on to make the  following
    findings of fact.

 6. [RR]'s daughter S was born in 2011 and the Tribunal  accepted  that  he
    had been closely involved in her upbringing ever  since.  The  Tribunal
    heard evidence from the child's mother about  how  distressed  she  was
    when her father went to prison. She expressed missing him, cried, and a
    social worker had reported how she  had  periods  of  bed  wetting  and
    nightmares when he 'went away'.  At the date of the appeal S had a  new
    baby brother, K, who is  suffering  from  Laryngomolacia,  a  condition
    which means he needs close attention and  feeding  more  often  that  a
    healthy baby of his age. The Tribunal  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    children's "articulate and generally straight-forward" mother that  she
    had returned to work following the birth and that it was [RR]  who  was
    the primary carer for both baby K and S. The Tribunal further  accepted
    that [RR] had been a "surrogate father" to his stepson M  since  M  was
    around four years old. M's own father had been deported to Jamaica when
    he was a baby.  M has communication and  social  difficulties  (he  has
    been referred for more treatment by a Senior Clinical Psychologist) but
    was reported, by his mother and social worker, to  have  an  especially
    close relationship with [RR]. He is said to confide in him rather  than
    his mother and had difficulties eating when [RR]  was  in  prison.   In
    respect of these three children, all living with their mother and  [RR]
    in  the  family  home,  the  Tribunal  accepted  the  social   worker's
    assessment  that  [RR]'s  deportation   would   have   a   "significant
    detrimental emotional and physical impact".


 7. Having applied those findings to the relevant tests in paragraph 399 of
    the Immigration Rules the Tribunal found [RR] to  have  discharged  the
    burden of proof in respect of both matters, and the appeal was allowed.

 8. The Secretary of State for the Home Department has permission to appeal
    on the narrow ground that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its approach
    to whether the children could be expected to live without their  father
    here. It is contended that what the Tribunal did was to simply apply  a
    'best interests' test, rather than the appropriate measure  of  whether
    the consequences for them would be 'unduly harsh'. The  key  difference
    between the two being that the latter required the Tribunal to weigh in
    the balance, and weigh heavily in the  balance,  the  presumption  that
    [RR]'s deportation would be in the public interest. He is a  persistent
    offender and that had to be taken  into  account  when  conducting  the
    proportionality assessment.

    Discussion and Findings

 9. [RR] plainly is a 'persistent offender': see Chege  ('is  a  persistent
    offender') [2016] UKUT 187 (IAC).  I entirely agree with the First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment that his lack of offending for the past couple of
    years does not negate that fact. As such his deportation  is  conducive
    to the public good.  I have kept that at the forefront of my mind  when
    assessing the merits of this appeal.


10. Having done so I am however unable to find that the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department has identified material error in  the  approach
    of the First-tier Tribunal.   The grounds are long and detailed but for
    the most part consist of a rehearsal of the facts plainly known to  the
    First-tier Tribunal; in other words they amount to  submissions  as  to
    why the Secretary of State believes that the appeal  should  have  been
    dismissed. Mr Diwnycz did not rely on any  of  these  paragraphs.    He
    instead adopted (and it is fair to say without much enthusiasm[1])  the
    only two points capable of raising an 'error of law'.

11. The central argument made is that  the  Tribunal  allowed  this  appeal
    simply because it would be contrary to the children's best interests if
    their father were to be  deported.  As  a  finding  of  fact  that  was
    actually uncontentious, since  that  much  had  been  accepted  by  the
    Respondent, if not explicitly in her 'reasons for refusal'  letter,  in
    her general statements of  policy.   The  Secretary  of  State  rightly
    submits that 'best interests' is not the  determinative  test  in  such
    appeals.    Had that been the extent of the Tribunal's  finding,  there
    would certainly be an error. I cannot  however  sensibly  construe  the
    determination in that way.

12. The narrow test of 'best interests'  is  the  starting  point  for  any
    tribunal faced with a case involving children. It requires the decision-
    maker to evaluate the life of the child in  question  both  before  and
    after the potential interference and for an assessment to be made as to
    when the child would be better  off.  The  test  of  'undue  harshness'
    requires an altogether different approach. The starting point  is  that
    on one side of the scales must be placed  the  weighty  presumption  in
    favour of deportation. Against that the decision-maker must  place  any
    positive findings about the deportee's relationship  with  his  or  her
    children, stand back and see if those findings can tip the scales  away
    from the public interest.  In this appeal the Tribunal reminded  itself
    throughout its assessment that  [RR]'s  deportation  would  be  in  the
    public interest, as  a  matter  of  fact  and  law:  see  for  instance
    paragraphs 4-7, 28-29,  54, 88-93, 104, 109, 111.   More  significantly
    it is clear from the way that the conclusions are  expressed  that  the
    Tribunal took the 'balance sheet' approach recommended by  Lord  Thomas
    in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60. At paragraph 109 the  determination  sets
    out the reasons why it would not be 'unduly' harsh for the children  if
    their father were to be removed: he  is  a  foreign  criminal  and  his
    deportation is in the public interest;  he  committed  28  offences  in
    seven years; he is not financially independent. At  paragraph  110  the
    determination sets out the reasons why it would be 'unduly' harsh:   it
    would generally be contrary to the children's best  interests  to  lose
    their face-to-face and regular contact with their father,  but  in  the
    particular circumstances it can also be said that it would be  strongly
    contrary to their best interests, given his heavy involvement in  their
    upbringing and his "positive and caring influence" in their lives.  The
    Tribunal here further had regard to  its  finding  that  [RR]  has  now
    stopped using cannabis (a feature in most, if not all, of his  criminal
    offending) and that he has taken  a  rehabilitation  course.   It  also
    noted that [RR] has had indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  UK  since
    2006.    At paragraph 111 the Tribunal reaches an "overall" conclusion.
    In light of that structure Mr  Diwnycz  agreed  that  it  was  hard  to
    justify the suggestion that  the  Tribunal  did  not  have  appropriate
    regard to the public interest.


13. The second point made in the grounds is that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    give 'clear reasons' for its conclusions in  respect  of  [RR]'s  other
    son, N, with whom he has only weekend and  holiday  contact.   I  would
    agree that the global  conclusion  at  paragraph  111  -  expressed  in
    relation to all of  the  children  -  is  not  prefaced  by  any  clear
    balancing exercise  in  respect  of  N.  The  determination  finds,  at
    paragraph 96, that it would be contrary to N's best interests  to  lose
    face-to-face contact with his father. I cannot see where  that  finding
    has been balanced against the  public  interest  in  deportation.  This
    ground is therefore made  out,  but  given  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    conclusions, clearly expressed, in relation to the children S, K and M,
    this error is not such that the decision must be set aside.


      Decisions


14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error
    of law and it is upheld.


15. There is no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                      9th
                                February 2018








                           -----------------------
[1] A realistic approach shared by his colleague in the First-tier
Tribunal: see paragraph 64 of the determination which records that the HOPO
Mr Richardson "accepted that the Article 8 arguments might well be resolved
in [RR's] favour".


