
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08404/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester Piccadilly    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On the 14th February 2018    On the 26th February 2018

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                 MR K. M. H.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Wilkins (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Traynor promulgated on the 8th May 2017, in which he
         dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision
         to refuse to grant his protection and Human Rights claims.

      2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on the  [  ]  1982.
         It is the Appellant's case  that  he  was  born  in  Erbil  in  the
         Kurdistan region of Iraq,  but  had  subsequently  worked  for  the
         coalition forces from March  2010  until  March  2011  having  been
         recruited through the Sarwan Company.  He says that he  had  served
         in 2 camps belonging to  those  forces  and  that  he  subsequently
         worked for the Kurdish Ministry of Education in Accounting in 2014.
          The Appellant came to the UK thereafter, and at a  time  following
         his arrival in the UK his case  is  that  the  Sarwan  Company  was
         invaded by forces belonging to ISIS and that at  the  beginning  of
         2015 he received a call from friends in  Iraq  informing  him  that
         ISIS had raided the company where he  had  worked  and  had  seized
         documents which showed that he had been employed by  the  coalition
         forces.

      3.  The Appellant's  case  was  that  in  April  2015  he  received  a
         telephone call  from  his  brother  who  had  been  listed  as  his
         emergency contact by the Sarwan Company  and  told  that  ISIS  had
         threatened to kill the Appellant because of  his  past  involvement
         with the coalition  forces.   The  Appellant's  case  is  that  his
         brother had informed him that within a 2 week  period  the  brother
         had received 2 telephone calls from ISIS threatening him  and  that
         the Appellant's brother had then left for Germany.  He says that he
         has also received messages on his Facebook page informing him  that
         he was a traitor and that he would be killed.  The Appellant's case
         is that if returned to Iraq he would be  killed  either  by  forces
         loyal to ISIS or alternatively by the Kurdish  government,  on  the
         basis that he was a supporter of the  Gorran  Party  (Movement  for
         Change).

      4. Within his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor  found  that
         the Appellant had received a genuine letter from  a  Captain  Geoff
         Brown of the US Army which supported his claim that he  had  worked
         for the coalition forces as a cleaner. However, Judge  Traynor  did
         not accept that the Appellant would have  worked  in  any  capacity
         which would have raised his profile to the  extent  that  he  would
         have been at risk upon return or  that  the  letter  supported  the
         Appellant's contention that there were significant records held  of
         him which resulted in threats being made towards him by ISIS.

      5. In respect of the Appellant's claim that  as  a  supporter  of  the
         Movement for Change, he would be  at  risk  from  the  authorities,
         Judge Traynor noted that at paragraph 11 of the Appellant's witness
         statement it was said that his career had been affected because  of
         his membership of the party but Judge Traynor found that  that  was
         not a convention reason, nor was there any evidence to suggest that
         the Appellant's career was being hampered simply because he was  an
         opposition supporter.  Judge Traynor found that he had  worked  for
         the government and the party in question had  numerous  members  of
         Parliament and that the Appellant had never suggested that  he  had
         encountered any problems from the KRG authorities because  of  that
         support and there was no reason why if returned  to  Iraq  and  the
         Kurdistan region he would be viewed any differently.

      6. Judge Traynor further found that he could please no weight  upon  a
         very  recently  received  letter  from  the   Appellant's   brother
         regarding the threats which were said to  have  been  made  to  the
         Appellant by ISIS on the basis that the document was not dated  and
         the Appellant's brother was in Germany and there  were  no  further
         details   concerning   the   Appellant's   brother's    immigration
         circumstances in that  country.   He  found  that  no  credible  or
         reasonable explanation had been given as to why  the  document  was
         not forwarded to the Respondent on  an  earlier  date  or  why  the
         Appellant  had  not  provided  more  information   concerning   his
         brother's circumstances.   Although  accepting  the  Appellant  had
         likely been in contact with his  brother,  Judge  Traynor  was  not
         satisfied that his brother had received  any  telephone  call  from
         ISIS in which the Appellant had been threatened on account  of  his
         past association ,working as a cleaner for  an  organisation  which
         cleaned coalition bases.  He further  found  that  the  Appellant's
         claim that ISIS had contacted him directly via Facebook was  wholly
         unsubstantiated.  Judge Traynor found that the  Appellant  had  not
         provided a credible, plausible or likely claim  that  he  had  been
         threatened on  account  of  his  imputed  and/or  actual  political
         opinion, and therefore rejected the Appellant's asylum claim.

      7. The Appellant now seeks to appeal that  decision  for  the  grounds
         relied upon in the renewed Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.



      8. Within the Grounds of Appeal, it is argued that the  Appellant  had
         in fact provided printouts of  2  Facebook  messages  that  he  had
         received making threats  against  him  which  corresponded  to  the
         timeline that he gave in interview  which  were  accompanied  by  a
         certified translation contained at pages 7 to 13 of the Appellant's
         bundle  and  that  the  Judge  had  misunderstood  the  Appellant's
         evidence when stating that the Appellant had said that he  did  not
         have any evidence to show  those  threats  as  he  had  closed  his
         Facebook page and then finding at [47] that the  Appellant's  claim
         that ISIS had  contacted  him  directly  via  Facebook  was  wholly
         unsubstantiated.  It is argued within the Grounds  of  Appeal  that
         what the Appellant had in fact stated was  that  he  did  not  have
         evidence of comments that he had made on  pro-ISIS  postings  which
         criticised the political stance by the terrorists, as the  pro-ISIS
         webpages have been shut down, not that his own Facebook account  to
         which the threats had been sent via  Facebook  Messenger  had  been
         shut down, were still available and in  respect  of  which  he  had
         actually provided documentary evidence within  the  appeal  bundle.
         It is argued  that  the  Judge  misunderstood  the  evidence  given
         regarding Facebook, and had ignored material evidence in respect of
         the Facebook threats.

      9. In the second ground of appeal it is said that  the  Judge  mistook
         the extent of the Appellant's role for  the  coalition  forces  and
         that the Appellant was a supervisor for the contractor, rather than
         simply a cleaner and therefore had more than a minor role but  that
         in any event, ISIS in the Mosul area would indiscriminately  attack
         any civilian who was not supportive of ISIS.

     10. In the third ground of appeal it  is  argued  that  the  Judge  had
         failed to take account of evidence and to give adequate reasons for
         rejecting the letter from the brother regarding the threats made to
         the Appellant via his brother and that people offered and  received
         advice as to what evidence to obtain in the run up to a hearing and
         that the letter had to be sent from Germany  via  the  brother  and
         then translated which it is argued explained  why  the  letter  was
         received late and the Judge did not give a sustainable reason as to
         why no weight should be attached to it.

     11. In the fourth ground of appeal it is argued  that  the  Judge  when
         considering  the  risk  posed  to  the  Appellant  because  of  his
         affiliation to the Gorran Party, which is said  to  be  a  separate
         risk on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  will  not  receive  state
         protection  from  ISIS,  found  that  there  was  no  evidence  the
         Appellant's career was hampered.  It  was  said  however  that  the
         Appellant had given evidence about that in  his  witness  statement
         and at the hearing and that his wife had also given evidence  about
         it in her witness statement.

     12.  In respect of ground 5 of the Grounds of Appeal it is argued  that
         the Judge made findings based upon no evidence regarding the wife's
         knowledge of threats made to  the  Appellant  and  that  the  Judge
         placed significant weight on the Appellant's statement that had not
         mentioned any awareness of the husband being threatened by ISIS via
         Facebook.  It is argued that neither the Respondent nor  the  Court
         asked the Appellant's wife what she knew about this in the  hearing
         and it was unfair to make an adverse finding that the  threats  did
         not get made in the absence of evidence on the point.

     13. In respect of the refusal of permission  to  appeal  originally  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson, it is argued that the Judge's
         assessment that irrespective of the merits of any Grounds of Appeal
         the Judge was entitled to conclude as he appeared to have done that
         the Appellant's home area of Erbil was safe but that it missed  the
         point that Erbil is  unsafe  to  the  Appellant  because  ISIS  are
         specifically pursuing him and have the capacity to pursue him  even
         within Erbil.

     14. Permission to appeal has  been  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Copieczek  who  found  that  it  was  arguable  that  the   adverse
         credibility assessment made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
         flawed, for example on account of a failure to  take  into  account
         which arguably demonstrated the Appellant did receive threats  from
         ISIS on Facebook.   Judge  Copieczek  further  found  that  it  was
         accepted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  the  Appellant  did
         work for coalition forces, but his role was considered by the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge to be one that would not give rise to any  real
         risk of harm and that that arguably amounted to an error of law  in
         terms of the assessment of risk to the Appellant.

     15. Within the Respondent's Rule 24 Reply dated the 15th November 2017,
         prepared by Mr McVeety himself it is argued that the Judge directed
         himself appropriately.  However it is stated that  Mr  McVeety  did
         not have access  to  the  Home  Office  file  in  respect  to  what
         documents were provided with the bundle, when preparing the Rule 24
         reply, but that even if the Judge did not note the alleged postings
         on Facebook the grounds overlook the fact that the lack of evidence
         was not the only reason why the Judge found against  the  Appellant
         in respect of the threats he received.

     16. It is argued that at  paragraph  [47]  the  Judge  found  that  the
         Appellant's claim that he and his brother  were  tracked  down  and
         threatened by ISIS was utterly inconsistent  with  the  failure  by
         them to track down and threaten his  family  who  remain  in  Iraq,
         seemingly with no problems.  It was argued that there  was  nothing
         in the objective evidence to show that being a cleaning  supervisor
         rather than a cleaner raises the  Appellant's  profile  to  someone
         with a level of significance to ISIS and that regarding the  letter
         from the Appellant's brother that is a  matter  for  the  Judge  to
         attach such weight to the letter  as  he  considered  fit.   It  is
         further argued that it was open to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the
         Appellant would not be persecuted due  to  his  political  beliefs,
         when he had previously been employed by the state.

     17. It was on that basis the case came before me in the Upper Tribunal.
          In the Upper Tribunal I listened carefully to the oral submissions
         of both Miss Wilkins on behalf of the Appellant and Mr  McVeety  on
         behalf of the Respondent, which are recorded within the  Record  of
         Proceedings.

     18. At the appeal hearing before  me,  Mr  McVeety  on  behalf  of  the
         Respondent conceded that it appeared that the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge  had  got  confused  regarding  the  Facebook  evidence   and
         seemingly had not taken account of the fact that there were said to
         be threats received by the Appellant on his Facebook page contained
         within the Appellant's bundle.  He  conceded  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge was in error in stating that  the  Appellant's  case
         was that he had not been able to provide  the  threats  which  were
         posted to him, on account of his webpage  having  been  closed,  as
         opposed to the evidence actually given that the  postings  that  he
         made on the account of ISIS supporters not being  available,  their
         Facebook pages having had been closed. He conceded that  the  Judge
         concluded that there was no evidence  of  any  threats  being  made
         against the Appellant, whereas clearly the threats were  referenced
         on the Facebook pages with  their  English  translations  contained
         within the Appellant's bundle.

     19. However, Mr McVeety  argued  that  such  error  not  sufficient  to
         justify setting aside the whole of the decision, and that the Judge
         would have reached the same conclusion in any event, even  if  that
         error had not been made.  He argued that the real issue in the case
         was materiality, and that as the Judge had found other reasons  for
         not finding the Appellant to be credible in respect  of  his  claim
         that he had been threatened by ISIS so he would  be  at  risk  upon
         return, that even if the Judge had taken the Facebook postings into
         account, he would have reached the  same  conclusion.   Mr  McVeety
         argued that when one looked at  the  Facebook  threats,  they  were
         exactly the same wording with even the same  punctuation,  although
         said to be made by different people on  different  dates  and  that
         little weight would have been attached to  those  postings  by  the
         Judge.

     20. Miss Wilkins on that point argued specifically  that  the  evidence
         should have been looked at holistically and in  the  round  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge, and  that  if  he  has  failed  to  take
         account of relevant evidence, that in itself is a material error of
         law and that the Appellant should  be  entitled  to  give  evidence
         regarding the reason why the threats were in identical wording, and
         to comment upon their genuineness, but the fact that the Judge  had
         failed  to  take  that  evidence  into  account  and  deprived  the
         Appellant of the opportunity of commenting upon the genuineness  of
         the documentation.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

     21. I do find, having carefully considered the decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Traynor, that  as  conceded  by  Mr  McVeety,  Judge
         Traynor has sadly become  confused  in  his  consideration  of  the
         Facebook threats and the evidence given by the Appellant in respect
         thereof, when finding that the Appellant's own testimony  was  that
         he did not have any evidence to show that the threats had been made
         as his own Facebook page had closed at [24]  of  his  decision  and
         thereafter at [47] that "Moreover, I  find  the  Appellant's  claim
         that ISIS had  contacted  him  directly  via  Facebook,  is  wholly
         unsubstantiated.   I   agree   entirely   with   the   Respondent's
         representative that no credible reason has been advanced  why  this
         evidence is not available".  The parties agree that  the  testimony
         given by the Appellant at the First-tier Tribunal was that  he  had
         not been able to produce the comments that he  had  made  on  other
         people's Facebook pages who were members of ISIS, criticising their
         actions, which had led to the retaliatory threats being  made  back
         to the Appellant's own Facebook Messenger page and that whereas the
         other people's Facebook pages had been closed  down  as  they  were
         supporting ISIS,  in  fact  as  he  stated  in  his  statement  the
         Appellant had received messages from  2  different  named  accounts
         criticising him for making adverse comments about the Islamic State
         on Facebook and saying that they knew that he had previously worked
         for the Americans. The  parties  further  agreed  that  within  the
         Appellant's own bundle and exhibited to his statement between pages
         8 and 13 were the 2 separate threats that  had  been  made  to  the
         Appellant on Facebook, together  with  the  translations  of  those
         threats, and that the Judge has not taken into account I  find,  in
         reaching his conclusion that the Appellant has not been  threatened
         by ISIS.

     22. Although Mr McVeety criticised the threats which were said to  have
         come from different people  on  different  dates  in  circumstances
         where the wording of  the  threats  were  identical,  even  to  the
         grammar and punctuation used, and argued that the Judge would  have
         placed little weight upon those threats in such circumstances,  the
         Appellant clearly was not given the opportunity  of  answering  any
         such concerns and was not asked such questions in cross-examination
         by the representative  of  the  Home  Office,  nor  were  any  such
         concerns regarding the wording of the threats put to him,  so  that
         he could deal with the same in evidence.

     23. In circumstances where the Judge accepted that  the  Appellant  had
         worked for the coalition forces in Iraq, the  Judge  has  then,  in
         finding that the Appellant had not been threatened by ISIS, ignored
         the actual evidence contained with the Appellant's bundle regarding
         the threats that were made on Facebook to him  on  the  Appellant's
         own Facebook account, which were contained within  the  Appellant's
         bundle.  The Judge has thereby failed to take account  of  relevant
         evidence in that regard.

     24.  I cannot say that the Judge would have placed no weight upon  such
         evidence, when the Appellant's explanation for the wording of those
         threats had not been sought, in circumstances where it  was  agreed
         that  the  Appellant  had  worked  for  the  coalition  forces  and
         therefore may have been seen as a perceived collaborator  with  the
         coalition forces.  I am therefore not in a position to say that the
         decision of the Judge would necessarily have  been  the  same,  had
         that error not been made.  I  therefore  do  find  that  that  does
         amount to a material error of law, such that the decision of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Traynor should be set aside, on the basis  that
         he has failed to take account of relevant evidence in reaching  his
         decision. Although Mr McVeety seeks to argue that that was not  the
         only ground upon which the Appellant's  credibility  was  rejected,
         given that the Judge had to consider the evidence in the round, and
         holistically, when reaching his decision,  the  fact  that  he  has
         failed to take account of relevant evidence  regarding  the  actual
         threats which were said to have been  made  to  the  Appellant  and
         considered that there was no  evidence  of  such  threats,  clearly
         undermines the holistic assessment made by him.

     25. Further, in finding that the Appellant did work for  the  coalition
         forces, but only in the limited capacity of cleaning, although I do
         not accept Miss Wilkin's submission that he worked not  just  as  a
         cleaner but as a supervisor and that  that  in  itself  would  have
         necessarily made a difference regarding the threat  level  that  he
         faced,  I  do  consider  that  Judge  Traynor  has  not  adequately
         explained why there would have to be  significant  records  of  the
         Appellant held by the company for which  he  worked  in  order  for
         threats to be made against him by ISIS, if those records show  that
         she had worked for the coalition forces, even  as  a  cleaner,  and
         therefore could potentially be said to  have  been  supporting  the
         coalition forces rather than ISIS.

     26. Further, the letter said to be from the Appellant's brother, is  in
         effect a witness statement referring to the  phone  calls  that  he
         says that he received threatening  the  Appellant  because  of  the
         Appellant's job with  the  Americans  from  members  of  ISIS,  and
         seemingly, having considered the same, was prepared for use at  the
         Appellant's appeal hearing.  In such circumstances, even though  it
         is said that the Appellant's brother was in Germany  and  that  the
         letter was received late in the day, having  only  been  translated
         into English on the 23rd February 2017, the decision of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Traynor does not adequately explain, why  no  weight
         should be attached to that evidence.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge
         appears to accept that the Appellant had been in contact  with  his
         brother, but has not adequately explained why it is that no  weight
         should be attached to what appears to  be  a  statement  in  letter
         form, supporting the Appellant's case for the appeal hearing. It is
         after  all,  a  letter  supporting  the  appeal,  rather   than   a
         contemporaneous record. There is therefore a failure to  adequately
         explain that finding, such as to enable the losing party,  in  this
         case the Appellant, to know why he has lost on that issue and as to
         why no weight was attached to his brother's  evidence.   This  also
         amounts to a material error of law.  I cannot say that the decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal Judge would necessarily  have  been  the
         same, had that evidence been taken account of and some weight, even
         if limited weight, had been placed upon it.

     27. The fourth ground of appeal however, lack merit.  In respect of the
         fourth ground of appeal regarding the  suggestion  that  the  Judge
         ignored the fact that the  Appellant  had  given  evidence  in  his
         witness statement, as  had  his  wife,  regarding  the  Appellant's
         career having been hampered, whereas the Judge said that there  was
         no evidence that his career had been hampered, it is clear that  in
         fact what the Judge is referring to at [45] was the fact that  this
         was not a  Convention  reason  and  there  was  not  any  objective
         evidence that the Appellant's career had been  hampered  simply  on
         the basis that he was an opposition supporter. The  implication  in
         the grounds of appeal that the Judge had failed to take account  of
         the fact that the Appellant's own statement had  referred  to  that
         fact is misconceived, as Judge Traynor at [45] states  specifically
         that "Paragraph 11 of the Appellant's witness statement claims that
         his career was affected because of his members of that  party"  the
         Judge therefore had clearly taken account of  the  Appellant's  own
         evidence on that issue, but was making the point that there was  no
         other objective evidence and that that was not a convention reason,
         in any event.  Those  were  findings  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
         evidence.

     28.  Further, in respect of the fifth ground of appeal, it was open  to
         the Judge to find that the Appellant' wife's statement  was  devoid
         of any reference to her being  aware  that  her  husband  had  been
         threatened by ISIS through that medium, namely Facebook.   Although
         it is argued that that should have been put to the Appellant or his
         wife, if the  Appellant  had  genuinely  been  threatened  in  that
         manner, it was open to the Judge to find that the  failure  of  the
         wife to suggest that she knew that to be the case in her statement,
         was a factor that he could rely upon in making his findings in that
         regard, and that had she known, she would have mentioned it in  her
         statement.

     29. However, for the reasons set out above, I do find that the decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor does contain  material  errors
         of law and that I cannot say that the  decision  would  necessarily
         have been the same, if those errors had not been made.   .   It  is
         therefore appropriate to  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Traynor in its entirety, and for the  matter  to  be
         remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  before  any
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Traynor.  It is not appropriate in the  circumstances,  given  that
         credibility has to be considered in the round, for there to be  any
         retained findings of fact.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor does contain material
    errors of law and is set aside in its entirety;

    I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  for  rehearing
    before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Traynor;

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge ordered for there to be anonymity in this
    case.  In the circumstances of the asylum claim, I too consider that an
    anonymity direction is appropriate.  Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or
    court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any
    member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and
    to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction can  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 16th February 2018
