
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/08808/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 September 2019                  |On 20 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      M
                         (Anonymity DIRECTion made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent: In Person (but assisted by Mr D Forbes as a McKenzie Friend)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. On 25 August 2017 the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         (the Secretary of State) refused to grant the  claimant  leave  to
         remain on human rights grounds. The claimant appealed to the First-
         tier Tribunal (the tribunal) and in a decision sent to the parties
         on 7 September 2018, following a hearing of  7  August  2018,  the
         tribunal allowed the claimant's  appeal.  It  did  so  because  it
         concluded she  met  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         concerning private life as contained in  paragraph  276  (ADE)  of
         those Rules and that she also met the requirements of Article 8 of
         the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) outside the  Rules.
         But the Secretary of  State  sought  and  obtained  permission  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and,  in  a  decision  sent  to  the
         parties on 22 July 2019, following a hearing of 1 July 2019, I set
         aside the tribunal's decision and directed that the decision under
         appeal be remade by the Upper Tribunal after  a  further  hearing.
         But I preserved the tribunal's factual findings. My  reasoning  as
         to why I decided to set aside the tribunal's decision may be found
         in my written decision of 17 July 2019. It is not necessary for me
         to repeat those reasons here but, essentially, I thought that with
         respect to the application of paragraph 276 ADE, the tribunal  had
         failed to  properly  focus  upon  the  question  of  obstacles  to
         integration upon return and that that error had carried over  into
         its assessment  of  the  position  under  Article  8  outside  the
         Immigration Rules because it had expressly relied  upon  its  view
         that the requirements of those Rules had been complied  with  when
         justifying its decision outside the Rules.

      2. The matter next came before me on 6 September  2019  for  remaking
         purposes. At that hearing representation was as indicated above. I
         am grateful to Mr McVeety, Mr Forbes and the claimant  herself.  I
         received some brief oral evidence from the claimant and  was  then
         addressed by Mr McVeety and Mr Forbes. I confirm I have taken into
         account all of what was said at the hearing. Further, I have taken
         into account the content of all of  the  documentation  which  has
         been provided by each party.

      3. As to the background, the claimant has a lengthy  immigration  and
         adjudication history. She was born on 13 January  1972  and  is  a
         national of Zimbabwe. She entered the UK on 11 September 2001 as a
         visitor.  Her  leave  as  a  visitor  expired  relatively  shortly
         afterwards, (I am not sure of the precise date of  expiry  but  it
         would almost certainly have been no more than six months after her
         date of entry) and she remained in the UK unlawfully. In  July  of
         2007 she claimed asylum on the basis of political opinion but that
         claim was refused by the Secretary of State on  17  December  2007
         and  an  appeal  was  dismissed  on  28  February  2008.   Further
         representations were sent  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  on  her
         behalf, initially without any success at all, but  representations
         made on  3  August  2017  did  lead  to  the  Secretary  of  State
         considering whether the claimant was entitled  to  asylum  on  the
         basis of her sexual orientation. However, on 25 August  2017,  the
         Secretary of State decided that there was no such entitlement  and
         on 16 October 2017 a tribunal dismissed her  appeal  against  that
         decision. But permission  to  appeal  was  granted  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal and on 22 May 2018 the Upper Tribunal  decided  that  the
         tribunal had erred in law and remitted to the tribunal but only in
         relation to Article 8 of the ECHR with respect to family life  and
         private  life.  The  tribunal's  negative   decision   (from   the
         claimant's   perspective)   with   respect   to   entitlement   to
         international protection was not disturbed. It was  that  remittal
         which led to the tribunal's decision of 7 September 2018  referred
         to above.

4.    The claimant's case in now seeking leave under Article 8 of  the  ECHR
and in pursuing her remitted appeal may be summarised as  follows:  She  has
resided in the UK, albeit for the most part unlawfully, since  11  September
2001. There are compassionate circumstances in that  she  is  HIV  positive.
She has many close family members residing lawfully in the  UK  including  a
cousin whom she had grown up  with  in  Zimbabwe;  two  sisters;  her  adult
daughter; a brother; and an uncle.  She  no  longer  has  any  close  family
members in Zimbabwe and the whereabouts  of  certain  of  her  close  family
members not mentioned above are now unknown. So, she would  have  no-one  to
assist her if she was required to return  to  Zimbabwe.  She  has  been  and
still is both  financially  and  emotionally  dependent  upon  her  UK-based
relatives. Certain of her close family members,  including  her  mother  and
her older sister, have sadly passed away.

5.     The  tribunal  which  issued  its  decision  on  7   September   2018
essentially accepted the evidence of the claimant regarding the presence  of
the above family members  in  the  UK  and  the  lack  of  any  known  close
relatives  still  in  Zimbabwe.  It  accepted  the  claimant's  HIV-positive
status. It accepted the passing of the  claimant's  mother  and  sister.  It
accepted, in effect, that the claimant is  emotionally  dependent  upon  her
siblings and cousins in the UK. So, since I  had  decided  to  preserve  its
findings, that formed the factual framework for my deliberations.

6.    As to Article 8 private life issues within the Immigration Rules,  the
relevant Rule is paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi). Since  the  Secretary  of  State
accepts that the claimant does not fall  foul  of  any  of  the  Suitability
Requirements contained in Appendix FM to the Rules, the issue is  under  the
Rules is whether the claimant is a person who has lived continuously in  the
UK for less than twenty years but in respect of whom  there  would  be  very
significant obstacles to her integration  into  the  country  to  which  she
would have to go if required to leave the  UK  (Zimbabwe).  It  is  for  the
claimant to demonstrate, to a balance of probabilities, that she meets  that
test.

7.    Mr McVeety, for the Secretary of State, stressed that  that  test  is,
as he put it, "a tough one". Mr Forbes, speaking for the claimant,  stressed
that what is required is a broad evaluative assessment. He pointed out  that
the claimant would be seeking to integrate into a society she had left  some
eighteen years ago and that building up relationships with people  she  does
not know in Zimbabwe will be difficult and that those difficulties  will  be
exacerbated by what he described as the "exodus" of her family members  from
Zimbabwe.

8.    In my view Mr McVeety is right to  stress  the  high  threshold  which
paragraph 276 (ADE) (1)(vi) sets. 'Very significant  obstacles'  is  a  high
hurdle  and  the  word  'very',  obviously  plays  an  important   part   in
underpinning that. I have no doubt that  going  back  to  live  in  Zimbabwe
having spent some eighteen years or so in the UK will be very difficult  for
the claimant. I proceed, on the basis of the preserved  findings,  that  she
does not currently have any close family in Zimbabwe and would lack  support
if she had to go there. I accept that  her  HIV-positive  status  will  make
matters more difficult for her but it was not argued  before  me  that,  for
example, she would not receive appropriate treatment should it be needed.  I
bear in mind the preserved  findings  regarding  a  considerable  number  of
close relatives in the UK and the emotional  dependency  that  the  claimant
has upon at least some of those relatives. But that matter,  of  itself,  is
not one which directly goes to the question of the nature and  substance  of
obstacles to reintegration. Putting everything together  I  have  concluded,
notwithstanding  Mr  Forbes  careful  arguments,  that  I  must  accept   Mr
McVeety's persuasive submissions to the effect that  the  claimant  has  not
demonstrated that she reaches the required threshold. So, I  have  concluded
that the claimant fails under the Immigration Rules.

9.    That, though, is not the end of the matter. I must now go onto  decide
whether the claimant is able  to  succeed  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,
outside the rules, on private and/or family life grounds.  As  to  that,  Mr
McVeety indicated his acceptance that there was family  life  sufficient  to
engage Article 8. He accepted that there were some factors weighing  in  the
claimant's favour and that my decision would be a "close call". But he  also
stressed the importance  of  the  maintenance  of  immigration  control.  Mr
Forbes stressed the presence of many relatives in the UK  and  doubted  that
there was, in the circumstances of  this  case,  a  legitimate  interest  in
requiring her to leave. It  would,  he  suggested,  be  disproportionate  to
return her to Zimbabwe to be, in effect, "an offshore dependent" of her  UK-
based family members and he argued that there were,  here,  exceptional  and
compelling circumstances. The claimant herself confirmed to me that she  was
happy to rely upon the points Mr Forbes had made to me.

10.   There are some things I must say straight away. Article 8  is  not  to
be used as a "general dispensing power".  Further,  a  case  should  not  be
resolved  in  favour  of  a  claimant  simply   because   there   might   be
compassionate circumstances. There is, in considering Article 8 outside  the
rules, a five-stage process as set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. If  matters
reach the stage where a proportionality  assessment  is  called  for  it  is
necessary  to  take  into  account  the  content  of  Section  117B  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  with  respect  to  family  and
private life. The consideration under Article  8  outside  the  Rules  is  a
proportionality  evaluation  or,  put  another  way,  a  balance  of  public
interest factors. Some factors are heavily weighted including  that  of  the
importance of immigration control. The Secretary of State's policy  is  that
where the requirements of the  Rules  are  not  met  leave  should  only  be
granted under Article 8 where exceptional circumstances apply. That  is  the
approach I must take and the legality of that policy and test  was  accepted
by the Supreme Court in Agyarko and Ikuga v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11.

11.   As I have indicated Mr McVeety accepted that Article  8  of  the  ECHR
was  engaged  on  the  basis  of  family  life.  It  is  obvious  that   any
interference with Article 8 rights is lawful  in  the  sense  that  the  law
provides for it in principle, and that it is in pursuance  of  a  legitimate
aim which is that of  immigration  control.  So,  matters  boil  down  to  a
consideration as to proportionality and as to whether there are  exceptional
circumstances  demanding  success  under  Article  8   outside   the   Rules
notwithstanding the failure to succeed within the Rules.

12.   The interests of immigration control is an important consideration  in
all  cases  but,  specifically,  in  this  case  because  the  claimant  has
overstayed her leave and then spent a considerable period of  time  residing
in the UK without leave. As to other  section  117B  factors,  the  claimant
does speak English (the ability to do so is not a  positive  factor  in  her
favour but it means no damage is caused to her case through an inability  to
do so) but is not currently supporting herself financially (a  matter  which
does damage her case). Her status in the UK has, aside from  the  first  six
months or so, been unlawful and has  always  been  precarious,  which  means
only little weight can be attached to private  life  aspects.  So,  for  the
most part, incorporation of the section 117B factors damages her  claim.  As
does her failure to bring herself within the terms of any  immigration  rule
concerning private or family life. It is also the case that if  she  has  to
return to Zimbabwe she will be returning to a country  where  she  was  born
and where she has resided, not only as a child, but as an adult too, in  the
past.

13.   I must now look at matters which  might  be  taken  to  weigh  in  the
claimant's favour. She has lived in  the  UK  for  an  extensive  period  of
years. Whilst I am statutorily obligated to give little  weight  to  private
life built up over that period of time I do  not  and  am  not  required  to
attach no weight at all to that period of long residence.  The  claimant  is
HIV-positive. Not very much of that consideration was made before me but  it
forms part of the factual background (indeed  a  significant  part)  in  the
sense that living with that condition is not without  its  difficulties  and
is a matter which might lead to a need for  emotional  reliance  upon  close
family.

14.   As to close family, the claimant has,  amongst  other  relatives,  two
sisters, a brother and her daughter  in  the  UK.  She  does  not  know  the
whereabouts of  any  other  family  members.  It  was  found,  in  preserved
findings, that there were elements of emotional dependency such that  family
life did exist (notwithstanding all protagonists  are  adults)  between  the
claimant and her close family members in the UK. The  claimant  has,  it  is
fair to say, experienced some trauma  over  the  years  with  the  death  of
family members, her losing touch with others, their  whereabouts  not  being
known, and receiving her HIV-positive diagnosis. Ordinarily those  sorts  of
issues would lead to cementing of family relationships for  mutual  support.
I am satisfied that that is what has occurred here.

15.   If the claimant has to go  back  to  Zimbabwe  then,  under  preserved
findings, she will not have support there. I accept that certain of the  UK-
based family members would be able to send her financial support  but  I  am
talking, here, about emotional support. Having had  such  support  for  many
years in the UK the sudden absence of it  is  likely,  in  my  judgment,  to
impact upon her to a significant extent.

16.   In my judgment the coming together of a  number  of  material  factors
encompassing the claimant's health situation and  emotional  needs  stemming
from it, her long-term residence (albeit mostly illegal) in the UK and  more
particularly her strong relationships with UK-based family members  and  the
impact upon not having those persons in close proximity if she  were  to  be
returned to Zimbabwe, operate to  constitute  to  exceptional  circumstances
sufficient to outweigh the interests of immigration control and the  various
other  countervailing  factors  I  have  identified   above.   That   means,
therefore, that this is one of those rare cases where the claimant  is  able
to (and does) succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR outside the Rules.

17.   In  light  of  the  above,  in  remaking  the  decision  I  allow  the
claimant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds  outside  the  Rules,  from  the
decision of the Secretary of State of 25 August 2017 refusing to  grant  her
leave to remain.

18.   Finally, I have granted the claimant anonymity.  The  tribunal  itself
did so and I continued that grant when making my decision to set  aside  the
tribunal's decision.  There  are,  in  this  case,  sensitive  circumstances
including the claimant's HIV-positive status which she understandably  would
wish to keep as private as possible.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already been set aside.

In remaking the decision, I allow the claimant's appeal from  the  Secretary
of State's decision of 25 August 2017 on human rights grounds (Article 8  of
the ECHR outside the Rules).

The claimant was granted anonymity by the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  continue
that grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008. Accordingly, no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  name  or
otherwise identify the claimant or any member of her family. Any breach  may
lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Dated: 18 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




