
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08559/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                       |Decision and Reasons promulgated   |
|on 4 September 2018                     |On 17 October 2018                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     RK
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Dingley of the Manuel Bravo Project
For the Respondent: Mrs Petersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Moxon promulgated on 22  March  2018  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 3 June 1985 who  is  the
        subject of an order for his deportation  from  the  United  Kingdom
        issued  on  23  January  2012.  The  appellant  asserted  that  his
        deportation contravenes the United Kingdom's obligations under  the
        Refugee Convention and/or the European Convention of Human Rights.
     3. It was not  in  dispute  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
        subsisting relationship with his British wife and their daughter or
        that it would be unduly harsh for them to  relocate  to  Iran.  The
        respondent's  case  is  that  it  will  be  proportionate  for  the
        appellant to be removed.
     4. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  8  August  2003  and
        claimed asylum the same day on the  basis  he  was  wanted  by  the
        Iranian authorities accused of illegal smuggling.  The  application
        was refused and although the appellant challenged that decision  he
        became  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  19   March   2004.   Further
        submissions made in April 2011 were rejected on 20 June 2011.
     5.  Following  service  of  the  deportation  decision  the  appellant
        asserted a real risk on return on the basis of  his  conversion  to
        Christianity.
     6. The deportation order was issued as a result of the appellant being
        convicted on 28 occasions for 41 offences  in  the  United  Kingdom
        between 6  January  2005  and  24  February  2015,  the  final  two
        convictions arising from two counts of shoplifting that occurred on
        4 February 2015. The Judge notes the  appellant  was  convicted  of
        possessing heroin in July 2005 and possessing an imitation  firearm
        in a public place in December 2007.
     7. The Judge sets out the nature of the  evidence  provided  including
        that from the appellant, his wife, and Pastor Dyson of  the  church
        the appellant attends who stated  he  believes  the  appellant  has
        become a committed Christian who attends Bible studies  and  prayer
        meetings. Reference  to  letters  and  other  documentary  evidence
        provided is set out in the decision under challenge.
     8. The Judge notes  the  appellant  had  given  a  broadly  consistent
        account of his religious conversion which was prima facie plausible
        and that he also had the benefit of substantial supporting  witness
        evidence, including from Pastor Dyson. The Judge found  that  those
        members of the church who attended were credible and not seeking to
        mislead, and accepted the appellant attended  church,  classes  and
        activities and did so  with  'vigour  and  enthusiasm'.  The  Judge
        accepts the  appellant  has  been  baptised  and  that  he  clearly
        dedicated a considerable amount of his available time to the church
        [40]. The Judge finds the witnesses believe  the  appellant  to  be
        sincere and have no reason to doubt him but finds  they  would  not
        subject the appellant's motives to the anxious scrutiny required by
        the Tribunal in the circumstances. The Judge  noted  at  [42]  that
        Pastor Dyson did not assert he challenged the appellant's faith and
        stated that he only refused baptism after interview for people that
        he felt were rushing into it rather than people who he disbelieved.
     9. The Judge noted the appellant's wife was baptised at the same  time
        but found aspects of the evidence that undermined  her  credibility
        at [43]. The Judge also noted inconsistencies in  the  evidence  of
        this witness.
    10. The Judge having noted positive elements found a number of features
        of the evidence that undermined the  appellant's  credibility,  set
        out at [41 (i) - (viii)] of the decision under challenge.  At  [45]
        the Judge finds:


                 45.   I have stood back and considered all of the  evidence
                      in the round and given as much weight as I feel  able
                      to the evidence that is supportive of the Appellant's
                      claim. I have reminded myself of the  lower  standard
                      of proof to be adopted. However, even upon  that  the
                      low standard of proof I am  not  satisfied  that  the
                      Appellant is a genuine Christian convert or  that  he
                      would seek to proselytise in Iran. I find that he has
                      fabricated an  account  to  pursue  an  unmeritorious
                      claim for asylum.


    11. Thereafter the Judge considered the appellant's position on  return
        as no more than a failed asylum seeker but did  not  find  that  he
        will face a real risk when considering  relevant  country  guidance
        evidence, sufficient to entitle him to  a  grant  of  international
        protection.
    12. In relation to the  assessment  of  the  appellant's  character  in
        general the Judge writes:


               52.    I do not accept  that  the  appellant  is  a  changed
                      character. Whilst I note that there has been a gap of
                      over three years since he last offended I  note  that
                      he has nevertheless sought to pursue an unmeritorious
                      claim for asylum which he has fabricated  to  members
                      of the church, to the Home Office and  to  myself  on
                      account of conversion to Christianity. He also sought
                      to mislead as to when he last offended. He remains  a
                      dishonest individual and  I  am  satisfied  that  his
                      restraint from criminal activity is motivated by  him
                      seeking to present as a changed character in order to
                      bolster his appeal against  deportation  rather  than
                      being genuine.


    13. Thereafter the Judge considered the human  rights  aspects  of  the
        claim concluding that any interference with the appellant's  family
        or  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of  his
        deportation was proportionate to the legitimate public  end  sought
        to be achieved.
    14. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal but granted  on
        a renewed application on 2 July 2018 on the basis Grounds 1  and  4
        are said to be arguable. Although the judge granting permission did
        not specifically refuse permission it was considered that the other
        grounds warranted less weight.
    15. Ground 1 asserted the Judge failed to accord due weight to the  3rd
        party corroborative evidence placing little weight on the  evidence
        of the Pastor and numerous  members  of  the  church  who  provided
        evidence in support  of  the  appellant's  conversion  and  changed
        lifestyle. Ground 4  asserts  the  Judge  undertook  an  inadequate
        assessment of whether it will  be  unduly  harsh  to  separate  the
        appellant's daughter from the appellant.




Rule 15(2A) application




    16. A rule 15(2A) application was submitted  by  the  appellant  on  29
        August 2018. It was directed that the application was to  be  dealt
        with at the oral hearing as it was out of time. The 'new'  evidence
        included responses from witnesses to the Judge's determination with
        specific regard to matters it is claimed had not been put to  those
        witnesses during the hearing and which  was  said  to  be  directly
        relevant to the issues to be determined by the Upper Tribunal.  Two
        letters from  GP's,  addressed  to  the  appellant  and  his  wife,
        regarding previous addictions and conversion to Christianity  which
        was not available at the time of the First-tier hearing  were  also
        provided, which is said to be directly relevant to  the  assessment
        of the child's best interests, raised in Ground 4.
    17. Rule 15(2A) provides:


        In an asylum case or an immigration case -
        a) if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider  evidence  that
           was not before the First-tier Tribunal, that party must send  or
           deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and any other party-
        i) indicating the nature of the evidence; and
        b) (ii) explaining why it  was  not  submitted  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal; and
        c) when considering whether to admit evidence that was  not  before
           the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal must have regard  to
           whether there has been  unreasonable  delay  in  producing  that
           evidence.


    18. The appellant is seeking to rely, in part, upon fresh evidence.  In
        general terms reliance on fresh evidence to establish the existence
        of a mistake of fact  is  covered  by  the  principles  in  Ladd  v
        Marshall [1954] 3 All ER 745 although  these  principles  might  be
        departed from in exceptional cases where the interests  of  justice
        require - see R v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.
    19. The principles in Ladd v Marshall are (i) the  new  evidence  could
        not with reasonable diligence have been obtained  for  use  at  the
        trial; (ii) the new evidence must be such that, if given, it  would
        probably have had an important influence on the result of the  case
        (though it need not be decisive) and (iii)  the  new  evidence  was
        apparently credible although it need not be incontrovertible.
    20. In JF (Republic of Congo) [2005] UKIAT 00053  the  Adjudicator  had
        dismissed the appellant's claimed membership of the UPADS and  post
        his decision the appellant produced a copy of his membership  card.
        The Tribunal noted that this was not "uncontentious and objectively
        verifiable" evidence as required by the E and R principles (E and R
        [2004] EWCA Civ 49) since the issue of  the  claimant's  membership
        remained contentious as the Secretary of State did not  accept  it.
        While the absence of the card was  material  to  the  Adjudicator's
        decision she had made no mistake in law on its availability at  the
        date of decision.  The late production did not establish any  point
        of law as to the decision's correctness.
    21. In R and Others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 Lord Justice Brooke said
        that the idea that a first instance judge had erred by  failing  to
        take into account  matters  which,  by  definition,  he  could  not
        possibly have known about unless he was a soothsayer was one worthy
        of Lewis Carroll.  The Court of  Appeal  took  the  view  that  the
        Adjudicators in R and Others who had refused  two  Afghani  appeals
        from members of Hezbi Islami  in  ignorance  of  the  evidence  put
        forward subsequently in  RS  (Afghanistan)  [2004]  UKIAT  00278  -
        evidence which was not uncontentious and objective verifiable - did
        not commit errors of law.
    22. In contrast, in Shabana Shaheen [2005] EWCA Civ 1294 the  Court  of
        Appeal re- affirmed that the identification of an uncontentious and
        objectively verifiable fact, such as the prior existence of crucial
        and reliable documentary evidence which could have made a  material
        difference to the decision under appeal, may show that  a  decision
        was erroneous in law, although the courts should be  very  wary  of
        allowing appeals on fact to re-enter  through  the  back  door  and
        appeals should not be reopened merely because a  witness  had  been
        found who could have given  evidence  challenging  the  conclusions
        reached  by  the  original  decision  maker  in  ignorance  of  the
        evidence.
    23. Following discussion it was accepted  that  the  letters  from  the
        witnesses commenting upon the weight given by the  Judge  to  their
        evidence was no more than disagreements  with  such  weight  rather
        than amounting to fresh evidence. The  only  new  material  is  the
        letters from the GP's which, on the appellant's own admission,  was
        not evidence before the Judge.
    24. In support of the argument  such  should  be  admitted  Mr  Dingley
        referred to the fact that the letters concerned  points  raised  in
        the refusal letter although were also raised in specific  terms  in
        cross examination of both the appellant and his wife. The appellant
        was aware the best interests of the child was  an  important  issue
        and that the appellant dealt with the same his witness statement. I
        find this was clearly an issue of  which  all  parties  were  aware
        before the hearing.
    25. In response to a specific question Mr Dingley accepted that the new
        evidence was evidence that could  have  been  obtained  before  the
        hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal but  submitted  the  medical
        evidence could have an important influence on the  results  of  the
        case so far as it related to the human rights aspects.  The  letter
        refers to the basic level of care but not what the effect would  be
        upon the appellant's wife, the child's mother, or the care that she
        could give if the appellant was removed. It was  submitted  on  the
        appellant's behalf that the contents of the GP  letter  are  not  a
        contentious issue on the basis of what the GP had been told.
    26. On behalf the Secretary of State, Mrs Peterson did  not  object  to
        the GP evidence being admitted by the Upper Tribunal in relation to
        the human rights aspects of  the  claim  only;  although  submitted
        submissions would be made in relation to  the  materiality  of  the
        same.
    27. I allow the rule  15(2A)  application  to  the  limited  extent  of
        allowing the appellant to rely upon the letters from  the  GP's  in
        relation to the article 8 aspects of the claim only.



Error of law


Ground 1 - Christian conversion.

    28. It is asserted the Judge failed to consider the evidence  that  had
        been provided in both oral and written  form.  It  was  argued  the
        Judge has missed out material aspects of the evidence  that  should
        have been included in the decision. The Pastor gave  oral  evidence
        of what was needed for a  person  to  be  baptised  including  that
        relating to the circumstances in which he  refused  to  consent  to
        baptism. It was submitted the Judge did not take into account other
        answers given and  did  not  take  evidence  into  account  as  the
        findings are contrary to the evidence given, and that if  taken  at
        its face value the evidence of the Pastor should have  led  to  the
        appeal being allowed.
    29. The appellant placed reliance upon a decision of the High Court  in
        SA (Iran) v Secretary of State the Home Department [2012] EWHC 2575
        asserting the same was binding but  this  is  factually  incorrect.
        Decisions of the High Court are persuasive but do not amount  to  a
        binding precedent in the same way a decision of the Court of Appeal
        or above is.
    30. A further case dealing with Christian converts, not referred to the
        Upper Tribunal as it was decided  only  recently,  is  that  of  TF
        (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH 58,
        in which the Inner House of the Court of Sessions found that church
        witnesses who were in positions of responsibility within the church
        who had observed an appellant's activities at church and  expressed
        their views on the genuine nature  of  the  appellant's  conversion
        based on their experience were giving expert evidence. The decision
        contains an extensive discussion  of  how  to  approach  the  fact-
        finding exercise in  cases  where  the  appellant  claims  to  have
        converted to Christianity.  So far as Dorodian  was  concerned,  it
        was said that while  it  would  no  doubt  be  desirable  that  the
        individual concerned be vouched for by someone  in  a  position  of
        leadership within the relevant church, it is  more  important  that
        the  evidence  be  given  by  someone  who  has  knowledge  of  the
        individual whose commitment is in question.  What mattered was that
        they have sufficient knowledge of the practices of  the  church  of
        which they are a member; sufficient  experience  of  observing  and
        interacting with those seeking to become  members  of  the  church;
        sufficient knowledge and experience of others who have gone through
        similar processes of engagement in church activities with a view to
        becoming members of the  church;  and,  in  cases  such  as  these,
        sufficient knowledge of the individuals concerned and of the manner
        in which they have thrown themselves into church activities.
    31. Even if this is  so,  it  does  not  mean  that  such  evidence  is
        necessarily determinative. The obligation upon  the  Judge  was  to
        properly consider such evidence together with  all  other  material
        relied upon by the parties to the appeal as the Judge did  in  this
        case. The appellant fails to establish  any  artificial  separation
        amounting to a procedural irregularity sufficient to amount  to  an
        arguable error of law in  a  manner  in  which  such  evidence  was
        considered.
    32. The Judge found the evidence  of  the  church  members  not  to  be
        determinative for the reasons set out at [44] of the decision under
        challenge which included the appellant previously seeking asylum on
        a basis which was found not to be credible, the fact the  appellant
        started to regularly attend church upon receiving  the  deportation
        order whereas whilst he had attended a number of  years  previously
        such was infrequent and appears to have been  incentivised  by  the
        provision of meals, that the appellant starting to regularly attend
        church and be baptised after the deportation notice indicating that
        his purported conversion was a further effort to seek to circumvent
        the immigration rules to secure his presence in the United Kingdom,
        that the appellant  had  sought  to  mislead  the  Judge  in  these
        proceedings in claiming his last conviction arose from an  incident
        in 2012-13 whereas the  last  offence  was  4  February  2015,  the
        appellant's attempts to minimise the offence of  possession  of  an
        imitation firearm claiming that it was a video game gun he had in a
        plastic bag rather than its box which is contrary to the  fact  the
        appellant was convicted pursuant to section 19 of the Firearms  Act
        1968 for which the appellant pleaded guilty and received a 12 month
        community order for that offence, that  the  appellant's  claim  to
        have become disillusioned with Islam was not raised in his  initial
        asylum claim and was not  accepted  as  being  credible,  and  that
        whilst a detailed knowledge of Christianity is not determinative of
        the lack of faith it was found there are basic areas  of  knowledge
        lacking such is the identity of Judas Iscariot and the denomination
        of the church within which the appellant was  baptised.  The  Judge
        notes that whilst Pastor Dyson stated that it is  not  unusual  for
        someone not to know the denomination of the church the Judge  noted
        the appellant claimed to have been come disillusioned with Islam in
        Iran and have made enquiries about faith since his arrival  in  the
        United Kingdom making it implausible he would not  have  learnt  of
        the denominations, the Judge rejected the  appellant's  attempt  to
        explain his lack of knowledge as problems  with  interpretation  in
        his asylum interview as the appellant was  interviewed  in  English
        and did not raise any  difficulties  at  the  time,  speaks  fluent
        English, and also interprets for Farsi speakers at the church.  The
        Judge noted when asked about the denomination of the church  during
        his asylum interview he was recorded as responding "I forgot".  The
        Judge found the appellant's assertion of posting Christian messages
        on Facebook did not establish any real risk in light of there being
        insufficient  evidence  that  any  Facebook  entries  posted   were
        available to the public to see or  that  the  appellant  could  not
        delete any account prior to returning to Iran.
    33. This is  not  an  appeal  in  which  the  Judge  has  held  adverse
        credibility findings against the appellant that  arose  in  earlier
        proceedings and effectively use those to reduce the weight given to
        evidence made available in these proceedings including from members
        of the church. The Judge does not in any way criticise the evidence
        from churchgoers, including Pastor  Dyson,  who  gave  evidence  in
        relation to  what  they  saw  and  what  they  believe.  The  Judge
        undertook the assessment exercise  based  upon  the  evidence  made
        available to the First-Tier Tribunal and, attributing the weight to
        that evidence the Judge thought was appropriate, did not  find  the
        appellant had established that his  claim  to  be  a  Christian  is
        genuine.
    34. As the Judge undertook the examination of  the  evidence  with  the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny and has given adequate  reasons
        in support of the findings made, the weight  to  be  given  to  the
        evidence was a matter for the Judge. It is not legal error for  the
        Judge not to set out all the evidence provided or to make  specific
        findings in relation to every aspect of  the  evidence  provided  a
        reader of the determination  properly  understands  how  the  Judge
        arrived at the conclusions he or she did. That is the situation  in
        this appeal.
    35. The appellant challenges the conclusion that he is  not  a  genuine
        convert to Christianity although it is noted  that  in  the  recent
        case of A v Switzerland (Application no 60342/16) before  the  ECHR
        the Swiss government accepted that the appellant had  converted  to
        Christianity although expressed doubts whether his  conversion  was
        genuine and  lasting.   The   government  however  considered  that
        Christian converts would only face a real risk of ill-treatment  if
        they expressed their faith in a manner which  would  lead  to  them
        being perceived as a threat to the  authorities  which  required  a
        certain level of public exposure which was not  the  case  for  the
        applicant.  They considered that the Iranian authorities  would  be
        aware  that  Iranian  citizens  at  times  attempted  to  rely   on
        conversion to Christianity to  secure  refugee  status  abroad  and
        would take such circumstances into account  such  that  the  person
        would not be at real risk of ill-treatment on return.  There was no
        evidence before the ECHR to contradict the government's findings on
        the public practice of the appellant's faith.  The ECHR  considered
        that bearing in mind the reasoning of the Swiss government and  the
        reports on the situations of Christian converts, in the absence  of
        fresh evidence there were no grounds to consider  the  government's
        assessment inadequate.  The Home Office  place  great  reliance  on
        this case in their March 2018 CPIN.
    36. The finding by the Judge that there was  insufficient  evidence  to
        establish a real risk on return, on any basis,  has  therefore  not
        been shown to be a decision infected by arguable legal error.


Ground 2 -


    37. In this ground the appellant claims the  Judge  has  made  findings
        without taking into account the appellant's  explanation  and  that
        even if it was accepted the appellant  had  lied  on  a  particular
        point in relation to when he last  committed  his  offences  it  is
        argued this was not sufficient to find him wholly incredible.
    38. Mrs Peterson submits the appellant is  attempting  to  mislead  the
        Upper Tribunal in relation to this pleading, referring specifically
        to [43] in which the Judge finds:


             43.  I take into  account  as  supportive  of  the  Appellant's
                  account that his wife  was  baptised  at  the  same  time.
                  However, this is not determinative. There are  aspects  of
                  the evidence that do undermine her  credibility.  She  has
                  asserted significant anxiety as an explanation of why  she
                  could not care for her daughter without the Appellant  yet
                  she has failed to adduce any  corroborative  evidence,  as
                  outlined in paragraph 55, below. Also, in her statement to
                  paragraph 4 she stated that she  was  previously  was  not
                  religious, had no interest in religion and had not thought
                  about religion much, which is inconsistent with  the  oral
                  evidence of her mother who stated that she had  "religious
                  leanings" before  the  Appellant  introduced  her  to  the
                  church. This reduces  the  weight  that  I  can  give  her
                  evidence and I note in any event that she and  her  family
                  members are not independent which also reduces the  weight
                  that I give their evidence.


    39. It is also submitted on the respondent's behalf that the  appellant
        has a long history which was taken into account by the Judge.
    40. This ground has no arguable merit. It is  not  disputed  the  Judge
        correctly records  the  appellant  claiming  he  thought  his  last
        conviction was in 2013 whereas it was in 2015. The Judge finds  the
        appellant had attempted to mislead in this  respect,  a  conclusion
        arrived at having considered the evidence as  a  whole.  The  Judge
        does not treat this is the determinative factor or a central  issue
        but one of a number  of  factors  of  concern.  No  arguable  error
        material to the decision arises on this point.


Ground 3


    41. The appellant asserts the Judge gives inadequate reasoning for  the
        findings of no risk from screening on return, but such claim has no
        arguable merit. The Judge clearly considered the  relevant  country
        guidance case on this point but did not  find  there  was  anything
        specifically relevant to the appellant that  would  create  a  real
        risk. At [47] the Judge writes:


               47.    Given  the  adverse  credibility  findings,  outlined
                      above,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  he   left   Iran
                      illegally. In any event, whilst  I  accept  that  the
                      Appellant has been outside  of  Iran  for  a  lengthy
                      period and would return as a failed asylum  seeker  I
                      do not accept that he will  be  subject  to  scrutiny
                      given his lack of profile and in any event I  do  not
                      accept that he would disclose church activity  as  he
                      is not genuinely a Christian. I do  not  accept  that
                      the  Appellant's  marriage  will  itself  result   in
                      persecution  and  no  objective  evidence  has   been
                      highlighted to this effect. I do not accept that  the
                      Appellant would be asked about his marriage and given
                      that I do not accept that the Appellant has renounced
                      his Islamic faith I  do  not  accept  that  it  would
                      result in negative attention.


    42. The Judge clearly gives adequate reasons in support of the  finding
        that there is nothing that would give rise to a real risk on return
        during the processes the appellant is likely to have  to  undertake
        if returned to Iran.
    43. As submitted by Mrs Peterson, Mr Dingley was  unable  to  point  to
        case law or country information establishing a  real  risk  at  the
        point of return on these facts.


Ground 4


    44. The appellant asserts the Judge undertook an inadequate  assessment
        of whether it would be unduly harsh to separate the appellant  from
        his daughter; claiming the Judge  did  not  assess  the  daughter's
        interests  in  her  own  right  but  assesses  it   alongside   the
        appellant's spouse in the context of the availability of care.  The
        appellant in his grounds refers to the decision in MAB  (para  399,
        "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC) but this  decision  was
        found to have been wrongly decided by the Court  of  Appeal  in  MM
        (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450.
    45. Mr Dingley submitted that the issue in relation to this ground  was
        in fact the availability of care if the appellant is  removed  from
        the United Kingdom, but at [68] the Judge  found  "I  am  satisfied
        that the appellant's child will be  adequately  cared  for  by  her
        mother and her mother's family.  I  am  told  of  a  large  support
        network from what is clearly a close family".
    46. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that this case is unduly
        harsh on the facts and that although the GP evidence was not before
        the Judge the Judge commented upon lack of  corroboration.  It  was
        argued there was no evidence the mother had abandoned the child  or
        that her parents had abandoned her.
    47. It is not made out the Judge failed to consider the correct test in
        finding that whilst it  would  no  doubt  be  distressing  for  the
        appellant's wife and child to be separated from  the  appellant  it
        would not be unduly harsh.
    48. Evidence from the GP has now been made available  as  part  of  the
        Rule  15(2A)  application.  The  evidence  from  the  GP,  for  the
        appellant's wife, is in the following terms:


                 I write in support of  [LR]  (the  appellant's  wife)  ,  a
                 patient registered at Holycroft Surgery.


                 [LR]  and  her  husband  together   have   battled   heroin
                 addiction. Through  the  tremendous  psychological  support
                 that he gives her, [LR] has been able to make progress with
                 her profound anxiety, and started coming out of the  house,
                 socialising and so forth. Together they have  engaged  with
                 the local recovery programme and are both on a stable  dose
                 of methadone, without any illicit  drug  use  in  addition.
                 [LR] has  experienced  a  marked  reduction  in  her  panic
                 attacks. Unfortunately the current stressful situation with
                 her husband has meant that  both  the  anxiety  levels  and
                 panic attacks have re-escalated to such  a  degree  that  I
                 will be concerned about [LR's] ability to look after  their
                 daughter without her husband's support. She is experiencing
                 nightmares and is on a constant state of heightened  alert.
                 [LR] is currently taking mirtazapine, an antidepressant;  I
                 have advised her not to further  reduce  the  methadone  at
                 this stage as I am concerned about the deterioration in her
                 mental health.


                 [LR] had made good progress in her recovery, which has only
                 been possible for her due to the shared journey and support
                 of her husband. Removing the stability will have  a  marked
                 detrimental effect on her mental  health  as  well  is  her
                 ability to care for their  child.  I  hope  that  you  will
                 consider both [LR's] mental well-being, but  also  that  of
                 their  daughter,  and  allow  her  husband  to  remain  and
                 continue to provide them both with the  unwavering  support
                 that they deserve. If there is any further information that
                 you require please do not hesitate to contact me.


    49. In relation to the appellant, written by a different doctor:


                 I am writing this letter in relation to [RK's]  application
                 to remain in the UK. I have known him in my capacity as his
                 family's General Protest  practitioner  for  the  past  2.5
                 years.


                 [RK] and his wife [L] are both former injecting drug users,
                 however they have engaged well with local Substance  Misuse
                 Services and are now both off street drugs and no longer on
                 an Opiate Substitution Program (e.g. methadone).  [RK]  and
                 his wife attribute much of their success  to  their  active
                 Christian faith and the support of Sunbridge  Road  Mission
                 Church, based in Bradford. I understand that [RK] brings  a
                 unique contribution to  the  church  community  by  running
                 Bible study groups for an Iranian group who are  linked  to
                 the church. [RK] speaks excellent English, has high  levels
                 of UK cultural competency and  expresses  a  commitment  to
                 continue to integrate and contribute to UK life.


                 I understand that there has been  challenge  regarding  the
                 authenticity of [RK's] Christian faith. In the time that  I
                 have known [RK], he has always been  expressive  about  his
                 active  Christian  faith,  in  an  appropriate   way,   and
                 described how his faith and  involvement  with  his  church
                 community have greatly helped him and his  family  overcome
                 drug addiction. In no way did this  appear  linked  to  any
                 attempt to renew his Visa, as this was  over  2  years  ago
                 that I first heard [RK] volunteer detail about  his  active
                 Christian faith. To have  overcome  drug  addiction  is  an
                 obstacle many people with addiction do not achieve, and  in
                 my experience, the  majority  who  manage  this  remain  on
                 Opiate  Substitution  Treatment  for  many  years  or  even
                 decades. The fact that [RK] and his wife have both overcome
                 heroin addiction and through  substantial  motivation  have
                 finished  their  Opiate  Substitution   Treatment   in   an
                 approximately 3 year period is unusual and impressive.


                 I think it is highly likely  that  their  active  Christian
                 faith and genuine involvement and support  of  their  local
                 church  over  a  number  of  years  have   been   a   major
                 contributing factor. You will be aware there are many faith-
                 based drug rehabilitation programs which assert  a  similar
                 link.


                 In my judgement, [RK] has a genuine Christian faith and  it
                 is real danger  of  facing  persecution,  imprisonment  and
                 torture if he returns to Iran, and  I  wholly  support  his
                 application to remain in the UK.


    50. The letter from the appellant's GP commenting upon the  appellant's
        faith appears to be based solely upon what he has been told by  the
        appellant which, arguably, does not add anything  of  substance  to
        the evidence already considered by the Judge.
    51. It is noticeable that whilst the appellant's  GP  states  that  the
        appellant and his wife are no  longer  on  an  opiate  substitution
        program e.g. methadone,  the  letter  written  by  the  appellant's
        wife's GP specifically states that both the appellant and his  wife
        are on a stable dose of methadone without any illicit drug  use  in
        addition. There is clearly a contradiction in the  letters  written
        by two members of the same surgery treating these family members.
    52. The Judge took into account the  evidence  provided  and  there  is
        nothing in the GP letter commenting upon the finding of  the  Judge
        that, whatever problems the family unit may have  experienced,  the
        appellant's wife will be able to care for  their  daughter  if  the
        appellant is removed either on her own or with  the  large  support
        network available to her. There is no suggestion of local authority
        intervention in relation to the child in the evidence even when the
        child's parents must  have  been  dependent  upon  heroin,  or  any
        indication  that  the  best  interests  of  the   child   are   the
        determinative factor.
    53. It is not made out to the Judge has erred in  law  by  applying  an
        appropriate  weight  or  in  failing  to  consider   the   evidence
        appropriately. It is not made  out  the  Judge  has  committed  any
        procedural irregularity or made  a  decision  that  is  irrational,
        perverse, and/or not within the range of decisions reasonably  open
        to the Judge on the evidence. Whilst  the  appellant  may  disagree
        with the conclusions reached  it  has  not  been  made  out  it  is
        appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to interfere in this judgement.


Decision

    54. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

Anonymity.


    55. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11 October 2018












