
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09062/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                           |On 11 January 2019            |
|Decision given orally at hearing              |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     SF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     McGlashan MacKay
For the Respondent:    Mrs O'Brien


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the appellant against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which on 8 May 2018 following a hearing in Glasgow
    on 25 January that year, dismissed the appellant's protection appeal.

 2. This determination was substantially delayed  in  appearing.   That  in
    itself is not a reason to challenge its validity.   We  know  now  from
    case law of the Court of Appeal in England  and  Wales  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal itself that what matters in a case involving a  delay  in  the
    production of a decision is whether there is  anything  in  that  delay
    that may have infected and so called into question the findings of fact
    of the Tribunal.

 3. In this case, the matter is simple to decide.  At paragraph 21  of  the
    decision, the judge said "The Appellant's wife did not appear  to  give
    evidence on behalf of the Appellant".  The decision discusses a written
    statement of the appellant's wife, together with the  evidence  of  the
    appellant, both oral and written.

 4. Regrettably, what the judge said in paragraph 21 is wrong.  If we  look
    at the Record of Proceedings, we see that the wife was called,  adopted
    her statement,  and  was  then  extensively  cross-examined.   That  is
    relevant because, as the grounds point out, the wife is  said  to  have
    provided corroboration of many of the matters that concerned the  judge
    and which led to the dismissal of the appellant's appeal.

 5. Had this point been noted, then the First-tier Tribunal, upon receiving
    the application for permission to appeal, should pursuant to rule 35 of
    the First-tier Tribunal Rules and section 9 of  the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007, have undertaken a review,  which  would  have
    resulted in this appeal decision being  set  aside  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal itself and re-made in that Tribunal.

 6. Unfortunately, permission was granted, which means that there has  been
    delay in this case coming before the Upper Tribunal and there will then
    be further delay in remitting it to the First-tier Tribunal.   That  is
    inevitable now, since the nature of the fact-finding exercise that  has
    to be undertaken is extensive.  Indeed, it seems to the Upper  Tribunal
    that the appellant has not had  a  fair  hearing  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is, accordingly, set aside  for
    error of law and  the  decision  will  be  re-made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                               Signed                     Date 31/12/18


                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber


