
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/09270/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|                                     |On 13 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                   K A M C
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Tully,  promulgated
    on 11 February 2020.

 2. The grounds are:

    [1]  failure to address the evidence of the appellant's partner;

    [2]  error of fact, taking it as the appellant's evidence that he  took
         no precautions, when he did describe precautions taken; and

    [3]  error in identifying discrepancies arising from interviews.

 3. The FtT granted permission principally in  light  of  ground  [1],  but
    without restriction.

 4. The UT issued directions with a view  to  deciding  without  a  hearing
    whether the FtT erred in law and, if so, whether its decision should be
    set aside.  In response, the appellant argues for the  decision  to  be
    set aside, and seeks a remit.   The  SSHD  "...  agrees  that  the  FtT
    materially erred  in  failing  to  engage  with  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's partner", and seeks the same outcome.

 5. I am satisfied that parties are correct in their  agreement  on  ground
    [1].  It is unnecessary to resolve grounds [2] and [3], or to deal with
    the appellant's submissions on whether  the  UT  should  hold  an  oral
    hearing.

 6. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  It stands only as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 7. Under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, the
    case is remitted to  the  FtT  for  an  entirely  fresh  hearing.   The
    member(s) chosen to hear the case are not to include Judge Tully.

 8. The FtT's anonymity direction is preserved.

 9. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.


    Hugh Macleman Date 29/06/2020


    UT Judge Macleman




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.
