
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09340/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th January 2018                          |On 25th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  qandi [w]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    A. A. Wilson, promulgated on 23rd August 2017 following the hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 14th August 2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Afghanistan, and  was  born  in
    1953.  She entered the UK on 20th  February  2016,  seeking  asylum  on
    arrival, but her application was refused, because the Appellant already
    had a  refugee  card  from  Pakistan  and  had  declared  in  her  visa
    application in 2014 that for the previous five years she  had  in  fact
    been residing in Pakistan.  On this basis,  the  Respondent  considered
    that the Secretary of State was entitled to  expect  the  Appellant  to
    reside in Pakistan if she were to be removed there.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before Judge A. A.  Wilson  on  14th  August  2017,  the
    Tribunal was concerned about  the  lack  of  progress  in  ascertaining
    whether the  Appellant  was  realistically  removable  to  Pakistan,  a
    country of which she was not a national.  Judge Wilson  observed  that,
    "It is deeply unfortunate that despite that delay no  real  effort  has
    been made to ascertain what if any is Pakistan's attitude  to  her  re-
    admission to that country as a refugee".  Second, the judge went on  so
    far as to say that, "A common sense approach might be that as  she  had
    been out of Pakistan for at  least  eighteen  months  that  they  would
    decline her request for her re-admission".   However,  this  remains  a
    "mere hypothesis" because neither party has  sought  to  ascertain  the
    actual position.  Third, at the same time,  however,  it  remained  the
    position  that  the  Appellant  "had  a  Pakistan  refugee  card"  (see
    paragraph 2 of the determination).

 4. In considering the merits of the appeal, the judge went on to say  that
    the first issue was whether there was a real risk that  Pakistan  would
    refoul the Appellant to Afghanistan, but that "the  evidence  filed  on
    that is somewhat limited".  There was evidence before  the  judge  from
    Human Rights Watch stating that mass forced returns were  taking  place
    to Afghanistan.  However, as the judge rightly observed,  whether  this
    applied to somebody such as the Appellant, who was in possession  of  a
    valid refugee identity card, remained as yet undetermined.  The  judge,
    nevertheless, went on to say that, "It is perhaps  an  indication  that
    Pakistan would not re-admit her".  Nevertheless, the judge  held  that,
    "I do not find that is sufficient on its own to justify  allowing  this
    appeal" (paragraph 3).

 5. Ultimately, therefore, the issue remained as  to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant "is a  single  elderly  person"  who  would  be  at  risk  in
    Afghanistan.  This could only be addressed, the judge reasoned, if  and
    when it was established that Pakistan would not re-admit the Appellant.
     The judge did not accept the  Counsel's  argument  that  the  Tribunal
    should make a decision on that issue now.  This was because "she is not
    at risk on return to Afghanistan now  and  it  is  not  appropriate  to
    speculate as to future matters". If the Respondent Secretary  of  State
    intended to return the Appellant to Pakistan it was up to the Appellant
    to establish that that was  not  possible.   This  had  not  been  done
    (paragraph 4).

 6. In relation to Article 8, the judge held that  the  appeal  had  little
    merit because the Appellant had  arrived  in  the  UK  claiming  asylum
    stating that she came from Afghanistan and Section  117B  applies  such
    that the interest in immigration control was a legitimate consideration
    for the government of the day (see paragraph 10).

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  not
    considering whether the Appellant is a refugee by reason  of  the  fact
    that the Respondent proposed removing the Appellant to  Pakistan  where
    she had been recognised as a refugee from  Afghanistan  in  any  event.
    Second, the Appellant argued that the Respondent could not  prove  that
    the Appellant would be re-admitted to Pakistan and not be refouled from
    there to Afghanistan.  Therefore, the obligation fell on the  judge  to
    consider whether the Appellant was a refugee  in  those  circumstances.
    Failure to do so led the judge into error.

 8. On 13th November 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me  on  26th  January  2018,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Fripp of Counsel and the Respondent  was  represented
    by Ms Everett, a Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.   Mr  Fripp
    relied upon the simple proposition that in  an  appeal  such  as  this,
    refugee status fell to be determined by reference to the  situation  in
    Afghanistan.  European law, he submitted, was superior to the  national
    law of the UK, and it adopted nationality as a basis for identification
    of the state which is the reference  country  for  purposes  of  status
    determination.  Under the Council Directive 2004/83/EC  of  29th  April
    2004, are the minimum standards for the  qualification  and  status  of
    third country nationals or stateless persons as refugees.  It  is  made
    clear  (Article  2(3))  that  the  assessment  of  an  application  for
    international protection is to be carried out on  an  individual  basis
    and includes taking into account "all relevant facts" as they relate to
    the country of  origin  at  the  time  of  taking  a  decision  on  the
    application; including laws and regulations of the  country  of  origin
    and the manner in which they are applied (see Article 2(3)(a)).   Given
    that ST (Eritrea) [2012] 2 AC 135 stated (in the words  of  Lord  Hope)
    that under Council Directive 2004/83/EC the law went  further  in  some
    respects than the Refugee Convention "because, for example, it requires
    a residence permit to be issued as soon as possible where an  applicant
    qualifies as a refugee", it was necessary for the  judge  to  determine
    whether the Appellant did qualify as a refugee.   The  failure  of  the
    judge to determine whether the Appellant was a refugee by reference  to
    what was agreed as being a country of nationality, namely, Afghanistan,
    put into error.

10. For her part, Ms Everett submitted that when the Appellant applied  for
    a visit visa to come to the UK, she had stated that  she  would  return
    back to Pakistan for which she had  a  residence  permit.   The  expert
    report provided in support of her may now give more evidence to raise a
    concern but this would be a matter for a fresh claim.   The  fact  that
    the Appellant had refugee status in Pakistan  did  not  mean  that  she
    would qualify for refugee status under the 1951 Refugee  Convention  in
    the UK as well.  The Secretary of State of  State  had  discharged  her
    burden because she had found the Appellant to be habitually resident in
    Pakistan.  She was returnable there.

11. In reply, Mr Fripp submitted that both the Refugee Convention  and  the
    Qualification Directive place the burden upon an Appellant  only  where
    he or she is status.  It is common ground that the  Appellant  was  not
    status.  She was a citizen of Afghanistan.  Mr Fripp drew my  attention
    to Macdonald's Immigration Law  and  Practice  (at  page  2,  122)  and
    submitted that the country of  habitual  residence  was  irrelevant  to
    determining whether the Appellant had a genuine risk of persecution and
    a well-founded fear.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are  as  follows.   This  is  a  case  where  the
    Appellant is a single elderly person with Afghan nationality.  She  has
    been away from  Pakistan  for  the  last  eighteen  months.   This  was
    significant enough as a fact for the judge to observe that,  "a  common
    sense approach might be that as she had been out  of  Pakistan  for  at
    least eighteen months that they would decline her request for  her  re-
    admission" (paragraph 2).  There had been a failure to progress matters
    in this respect on both sides.  The appeal was first  listed  in  March
    2017 and adjourned after consideration of precisely these issues.  When
    it arose before Judge Wilson in August 2017  matters  were  no  further
    advanced.  Against all of this,  there  was  background  evidence  from
    Human Rights Watch that Pakistan was engaged in mass removals of Afghan
    nationals back to Afghanistan.  It was for the judge  to  determine  in
    these circumstances whether the Appellant was a genuine  refugee  under
    the 1951 Refugee Convention for the reasons given  by  Mr  Fripp.   The
    essential question was whether there was  a  real  risk  that  Pakistan
    would refoul the Appellant to Afghanistan as a single elderly woman.

Remaking the Decision

13. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal to the limited extent that it  is  to
    be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  determined  by  a
    judge other than Judge Wilson.  However, it is important  that  I  give
    directions.  Given the level of procrastination in failing to ascertain
    what was likely to happen to the Appellant, were she to be returned  to
    Pakistan, after an absence of 18 months, as a citizen  of  Afghanistan,
    it is important that there is a CMR.  This is because also that she has
    a daughter living in North America, who had been granted refugee status
    because she served as a chief of staff to the Afghan first lady, and is
    willing to apply to the UK to give evidence in the Appellant's  appeal.
    During the CMR, it is  important  that  clarification  is  sought  with
    respect to what the position is in relation to those who hold a refugee
    card in Pakistan as Afghan nationals that have been out of the  country
    for close to two years.  If they are not realistically returnable  back
    to Pakistan, the position then is a very different one, because one has
    to consider the Appellant's eligibility for refugee status as an Afghan
    national who is a single elderly woman being returned to Afghanistan.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge Wilson, after a  CMR,
    in which the issues that  I  have  highlighted,  will  be  specifically
    addressed.

15. No anonymity direction is made.

16. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th March 2018




