
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/09438/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 March 2018                  |On 10 April 2018                    |
|                                  |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     R S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr G Dolan (counsel) instructed by AMZ Law,
solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the  anonymity  order  deemed  necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant,

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  to
avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the  First-tier
Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke, promulgated  on  16  November  2017  which
allowed the Appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
the appellant's protection claim.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 10/08/1980 and is a national  of  Liberia.  The
appellant arrived in the UK of 17 December  2004  and  claimed  asylum  that
day. That application for asylum was refused on 20 January 2005 for want  of
insistence because the appellant absconded. The  appellant's  appeal  rights
were exhausted on 5 January 2005. It was not until February  2011  that  the
appellant contacted the respondent again. He renewed his  claim  for  asylum
and his application was refused on 30 September  2014.  Further  submissions
were submitted for the appellant on 8 February 2016. In a decision  dated  5
September 2017 the respondent refused  the  appellant's  renewed  protection
claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Clarke ("the Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.  Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  29/12/201  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Lever gave permission to appeal stating

      1. The respondent seeks permission to appeal against the  decision  of
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clarke, who in a decision promulgated
      on 16 Nov 2017 allowed the appellant's appeal inferentially under  A3-
      medical grounds and A8.


      2. The grounds assert that the Judge erred in placing reliance on  the
      case of  Paposhvili  and  not  taking  account  of  EA(Paposhvili  not
      applicable) [2017] UKUT 00445. Further it is said the Judge failed  to
      give adequate reasons for his findings under A8.


      3. The Judge  had  provided  a  short  decision  and  noted  that  the
      appellant failed to attend the hearing. At [10] the Judge appeared  to
      rely upon Paposhvili and it is arguable that he misdirected himself in
      this regard and produced little information  within  the  decision  in
      respect of the respondent's evidence from background material. In like
      manner it is arguable that his findings under A8  do  not  necessarily
      demonstrate a proper balancing act between the public interest and the
      appellant's private life which as he acknowledged  counts  for  little
      given his  unlawful  status  in  the  UK  and  his  absconding  for  a
      significant period whilst in the UK.  That  combination  means  it  is
      arguable that an error was made in this case.


      4. There was an arguable error of law in this case

The Hearing

5. (a) Mr Bramble for the appellant moved the grounds of appeal. He told  me
that there are two  grounds  of  appeal.  The  first  is  that  the  Judge's
approach to the case of Paposhvili v Belgium is incorrect, as a  result  the
Judge's article 3 assessment is wholly undermined. The second  is  that  the
Judge's flawed article 3 findings infect the Judge's article 8 findings.

(b) Mr Bramble told me that the respondent made two decisions in this  case.
The first decision was made in September 2014, the second decision  (on  the
appellant's renewed claim) is dated 5 September  2017.  In  those  decisions
the respondent considered medical evidence produced for  the  appellant.  He
told me that that medical evidence demonstrates that between 2014  and  2017
the appellant was not receiving any psychiatric care or assistance. He  told
me that the medical reports do not support the appellant's  account  and  do
not support the Judge's conclusions. He complained that the Judge  took  the
appellant's claim at face value, and that there  was  insufficient  evidence
for the Judge to conclude that there is a significant risk  of  suicide  and
that article 3 would be breached if the appellant is  removed.  He  told  me
that the Judge's findings at [12] to [14] of the decision  are  inadequately
reasoned.

(c) Mr Bramble told me that the Judge has  proceeded  on  assumption  rather
than on evidence and that (in any event) the decision is devoid of  analysis
of the evidence placed before the Judge. He told me that the Judge used  the
findings in relation to article 3 as her reasoning in  relation  to  article
8, so that the Judge has failed to resolve conflicts  in  the  evidence.  He
urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

6. (a) For the appellant Mr Dolan  referred  me  to  EA  &  Ors  (Article  3
medical cases - Paposhvili not applicable)  [2017]  UKUT  445.  He  took  me
straight to [15] of the decision and told me that, there,  the  Judge  finds
that the appellant meets the requirements of  paragraph  276  ADE(1)(vi)  of
the rules. He told me that that is a clear, safe  and  unassailable  finding
which is all that is required for the appellant  to  succeed  on  article  8
ECHR grounds. He reminded me that the Home  Office  was  represented  before
the First-tier and the appellant was not.

(b) Mr Dolan  told  me  that  the  psychiatric  evidence  produced  was  not
contested and that the conclusions reached by the Judge are well within  the
range of reasonable conclusions available to the  Judge.  He  insisted  that
the respondent's challenge is nothing more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
facts as the Judge found them to be.

(c) Mr Dolan told me that the Judge's treatment of Paposhvili v  Belgium  is
flawless and argued that the Judge was not bound  by  EA,  the  decision  in
which was not available until after the Judge had promulgated her  decision.
He told me that the Judge found that the appellant is  at  risk  of  suicide
and that that finding was based on psychiatric evidence  before  the  Judge.
He urged me to dismiss this appeal and to allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. At [8] the Judge summarily dismisses the  appellant's  asylum  claim  and
declares that she moves on to consider article 3 at  [9]  of  the  decision,
where she summarises the respondent's position. At [10] the Judge  discusses
Paposhvili v Belgium (Application no 41738/10,13.12.16). At [11] & [12]  the
Judge discusses the burden and standard of proof.

8. The Judge's findings in relation to article 3  are  restricted  [13]  and
[14] of the decision. At [17] the Judge appears to make  her  findings  from
Dr Attalla's report, but, in reality, only repeats  the  conclusion  of  one
report. Dr Attalla provided two psychiatric reports. No meaningful  analysis
of either report is carried out by the Judge. In the first sentence of  [14]
the Judge summarises  the  respondent's  position  before  setting  out  her
conclusion.

9. It is difficult to see how the Judge  arrived  at  her  conclusions.  The
Judge does not properly analyse the evidence nor  does  the  Judge  set  out
adequate  findings  of  fact.  Instead  the  Judge  appears  to  rush  to  a
conclusion.

10.     In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  00641  (IAC),  it
was held that (i) It was axiomatic that a  determination  disclosed  clearly
the reasons for a  tribunal's  decision.  (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral
evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or  a  document  to  be
worth no weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the  determination
and for such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare  statement  that  a
witness was not believed or that a  document  was  afforded  no  weight  was
unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

11. The Judge's decision relies heavily on Paposhvili v Belgium.  Paposhvili
differs from current domestic case law including because it appears  to  put
the burden of proof on the returning state.   In R (on  the  application  of
SS  )  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department   ("self-serving"
statements) [2017] UKUT 164 (IAC) there is a reminder  that  to  the  extent
that Paposhvili runs counter to binding domestic case law, the latter  must,
of course, prevail at Tribunal level.  The Upper Tribunal decided  in  EA  &
Ors (Article 3 medical cases - Paposhvili not applicable)  [2017]  UKUT  445
that the test in Paposhvili was not a test that it was open to the  tribunal
to apply because it is contrary to judicial precedent.

12.  The Court of Appeal  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  64
decided that the European Court had not ruled that on the  medical  evidence
adduced it would in fact have been a violation of Article  3  to  remove  Mr
Paposhvili  to  Georgia,  rather  that  Belgium  would  have  violated   the
procedural aspect of Article  3  had  they  removed  Mr  Paposhvili  without
consideration of his medical condition.  Whilst N was binding  authority  up
to Supreme Court level, the Court of Appeal  said  that  Paposhvili  relaxed
the test only to a very modest extent.  The applicant would have to  face  a
real risk of  rapidly  experiencing  intense  suffering  to  the  Article  3
standard because of  their  illness  and  the  non-availability  (there)  of
treatment available to them in the removing state or face  a  real  risk  of
death within a short time in the receiving state for the  same  reason.  The
boundary had simply shifted from being defined by imminence of death in  the
removing state, even with treatment, to the imminence of  intense  suffering
or death in the receiving state occurring because of the lack  of  treatment
previously available in the removing state.  On those facts  the  appellants
could not bring themselves within that test.

13. In GS (India); EO (Ghana); GM (India); PL (Jamaica); BA (Ghana)  and  KK
(DRC) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40  it was held  that  the  case  of  a  person
whose life would  be  drastically  shortened  by  the  progress  of  natural
disease if he was removed  to  his  home  State  did  not  fall  within  the
paradigm of Article 3. Such a case could only succeed under that Article  if
it fell within the exception articulated in D v  United  Kingdom  (1997)  24
EHRR 423. In that case the claimant was critically ill and close  to  death,
could not be guaranteed any nursing  or  medical  care  in  his  country  of
origin and had no family there willing or able to care for  him  or  provide
him with even a basic level of food, shelter or social support.

14.  The Judge does not provide adequate  reasoning  for  finding  that  the
threshold to engage article 3 was met in this case. There is  no  meaningful
analysis of the medical  evidence,  and  the  decision  contains  inadequate
findings of fact. The Judge has not reconciled Paposvili with  the  existing
caselaw. EA tells me that the Judge was wrong to rely on Paposhvili.

15. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

16. The lack of findings  of  fact  and  the  inadequacy  of  reasoning  are
material errors of law. The lack of explanation for reliance  on  Paposhvili
is a material error of law. I must set the decision aside.

17. I consider whether or not I can substitute  my  own  decision  but  find
that I cannot do so because of  the  extent  of  the  fact-finding  exercise
necessary. Both parties agree that further  fact  finding  is  necessary  in
this case.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. This case is remitted because the  fact-finding  exercise  has  not  yet
been carried out.  A complete re-hearing is necessary.

20. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  before  any
First-tier Judge other than Judge S J Clarke.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

22.  The Judge's decision dated 16 November 2017 is set  aside.  The  appeal
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date  6 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle





