
                                    [pic]




    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09241/2019




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Remote Hearing by Skype              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th January 2021                 |On 17th February 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA




                                   Between


                                     H K
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr A Islam, Fountain Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").   As
the appeal raises matters regarding a claim  for  international  protection,
it is appropriate for an anonymity direction to be made.  Unless  and  until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction


      1. The appellant is a national of Iraq and of  Kurdish  ethnicity.  He
         appealed the respondent's decision dated  20th  September  2019  to
         refuse his claim for international protection. The  appeal  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") was dismissed by FtT Judge Rowlands for
         reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 7th January 2020.


      2. Permission to appeal to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 4th February 2020.  The matter
         comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge
         Rowlands is vitiated by a material error of law.


      3. The parties were sent directions made by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
         setting out her provisional view that in light of the need to  take
         precautions against the spread of Covid-19, it would be appropriate
         to determine  whether  the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision involved the making of an error on a point of law, without
         a hearing.  Upper Tribunal Judge Coker made  directions  permitting
         the appellant to submit  further  submissions  in  support  of  the
         appeal and permitting the respondent to reply. Upper Tribunal Judge
         Coker also directed that despite her provisional  view,  if  either
         party considers a hearing is  necessary  to  consider  whether  the
         making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of
         an error of law, they may submit reasons for that view.


      4. In response to the directions  made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
         appellant filed and served further submissions that are undated but
         comprise of [23] paragraphs.  The appellant submitted that  if  the
         respondent does not concede  the 'error of law', the matter  should
         be listed  for  an  oral  hearing.  The  respondent  filed  written
         submissions in reply dated 17th May 2020.  The respondent expressed
         the view that it is not necessary for there to be a further hearing
         to decide if the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  contains
         material errors of law. The  respondent  confirmed  the  appeal  is
         opposed and invited the Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appeal.  Having
         considered the written submissions received, on 7th September  2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb directed that the error of  law  hearing
         can and should be held remotely on a date to be fixed.


      5. The hearing before me on 26th January  2021  took  the  form  of  a
         remote hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  I
         sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre.  The appellant did  not
         join the remote hearing.  Mr Islam told me the  appellant  did  not
         have the required facilities but  was  happy  for  the  hearing  to
         proceed. I was addressed by the representatives in exactly the same
         way as I would have been if the parties had  attended  the  hearing
         together.  I was satisfied no party has been prejudiced; and  that,
         insofar as there has been any restriction on a right  or  interest,
         it is justified as necessary and proportionate.   I  was  satisfied
         that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance with  the
         overriding objective to proceed with a remote  hearing  because  of
         the present need to take precautions against the spread  of  Covid-
         19, and to avoid delay.  I was  satisfied  that  a  remote  hearing
         would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly  in  a  way
         that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity
         of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs  and  resources
         of the parties.  At the end of the hearing  I  was  satisfied  that
         both parties had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.




      6. In her decision of 20th September 2019, the respondent accepted the
         appellant is  a  national  of  Iraq  and  that  he  is  of  Kurdish
         ethnicity.  The  respondent  concluded  the  reason  given  by  the
         appellant for claiming international protection  is  not  one  that
         engages  the  Refugee  Convention.   Nevertheless,  the  respondent
         considered the claim made by the appellant and concluded  he  would
         not be at  risk  on  return  to  Iraq  and  does  not  qualify  for
         humanitarian protection.


      7.  The  background  to  the  appellant's  claim   for   international
         protection is  summarised  in  the  respondent's  decision  and  at
         paragraph [4] of the decision of  Judge  Rowlands.   The  appellant
         gave evidence and relied upon the matters set out  in  his  witness
         statement dated 7th November 2019.  The evidence that  he  gave  in
         cross examination, and when asked a question by Judge Rowlands,  is
         recorded at paragraphs [5] to [9] of  the  decision.   The  judge's
         findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [21] to [32]  of
         the decision.


    The appeal before the Upper Tribunal


      8. The appellant advances  three  grounds  of  appeal.   First,  Judge
         Rowlands erred in concluding, at paragraph [22], that the appellant
         cannot succeed in his claim for international protection under  the
         Refugee Convention.  The appellant claims that he would be at  risk
         upon return both  because  of  an  imputed  political  opinion  and
         because he is a member of a particular social  group.  It  is  said
         that he is a young  adult  male  targeted  by  ISIL.   Second,  the
         appellant claims Judge Rowlands failed to reach any clear  findings
         with regard to the appellant's claim, despite  confirming  that  he
         had  no  reason  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  claim  lacks
         credibility.  The  appellant  also  claims  that  in  reaching  his
         decision, Judge Rowlands appears  to  have  assessed  the  evidence
         adopting a higher standard of proof  in  reaching  his  finding  at
         paragraph [27] of the decision that he was "absolutely sure",  that
         the appellant is not and has never fled  Iraq  for  fear  of  ISIL.
         Finally, the appellant claims Judge Rowlands misdirected himself by
         failing to consider the detailed guidance set out  in  the  country
         guidance  decision  of  SMO  &  Others  (Article  15(c);   identity
         documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT  00400  (IAC),   regarding   the
         requirement for, and availability of A CSID,  a  document  that  is
         essential for an individual returning to Iraq.


      9. I consider each of the grounds in turn. Both Mr Islam and Mrs Aboni
         adopted, and  expanded  upon  the  written  submissions  that  have
         previously been sent to the Upper Tribunal.  It is  appropriate  to
         consider the second  and  third  grounds  first.   My  decision  in
         relation to those two grounds will inform my decision as to whether
         any error identified in ground one, is material to the  outcome  of
         the appeal.


    Ground 2:     Failure to make clear  findings  and  apply  the  correct
    standard of proof


     10. The appellant refers to paragraph [25] of  the  decision  of  Judge
         Rowlands in which he states:


             "The respondent does not find the appellant's claim as to what
             happened to him to be credible. I, on the other hand, find  no
             reason to conclude that his claim lacks credibility.  He  says
             that ISIL were active in his area and that their neighbour was
             an active ISIL member who  brought  4  other  members  to  his
             house.  There is no suggestion, by him, that he perceived  any
             threat to him from either his neighbour  or  the  4  visitors.
             His father, the owner/tenant of the property was happy to  let
             the authorities use his home and I am satisfied that,  whether
             the area is disputed is  (sic)  not,  the  appellant  and  his
             family were happy to continue living  there  up  to  the  2016
             incident and continued to live there for at least  two  years,
             even if off and on. I do not believe that there  ever  was  an
             objective fear of ISIL in either of the two places  he  claims
             to have lived in.


     11. Mr Islam also refers to what follows at paragraphs [26] and [27] of
         the decision and submits that having said that he has no reason  to
         conclude  that  the  appellant's  claim  lacks  credibility,  Judge
         Rowlands failed to make any clear findings as to the  core  of  the
         appellant's claim and in particular, as to whether the  appellant's
         house was used by the security  forces  for  spying  on  ISIL,  and
         whether, as a result, the appellant received threats as he  claims.
         He submits that the appellant has discharged the burden on him,  to
         the lower  standard,  but  Judge  Rowlands  assessed  the  evidence
         requiring the appellant to establish his case at a higher  standard
         of proof.  Mr Islam submits that at paragraph [26]  Judge  Rowlands
         appears to accept the appellant's house  was  used  for  spying  on
         ISIL.  He submits that if ISIL were aware or become  aware  of  the
         use of the house to spy on ISIL, the appellant would  be  at  risk.
         He submits no clear finding was made by Judge Rowlands  as  to  why
         the family would not be at risk from ISIL if it  is  accepted  that
         the appellant's home was used by security forces.


     12. The assessment of the risk upon return and credibility of the claim
         advanced by an appellant is always a highly  fact  sensitive  task.
         Judge Rowlands was required to consider a number of factors.   They
         include,  whether  the  account  given  by  the  appellant  was  of
         sufficient detail, whether the account is internally consistent and
         consistent  with  any  relevant  specific   and   general   country
         information, and whether the account is plausible.  The ingredients
         of the story, and the story as a whole, have to  be  considered  by
         reference  to  the  evidence  available  to  the  Tribunal.   Judge
         Rowlands was required to resolve what had happened in the past, and
         whether the appellant would be at risk on return in the future.


     13. Paragraphs [25] to [27] of the decision must be read  together.  It
         was undoubtedly open to Judge  Rowlands  to  find,  as  he  did  at
         paragraph [25], that there  is  no  reason  to  conclude  that  the
         appellant's claim lacks  credibility.  In  reaching  his  decision,
         Judge Rowlands noted the core of the appellant's  claim  that  ISIL
         were active in the area and their  neighbour  was  an  active  ISIL
         member, who had brought four other members to his house. He  noted,
         at paragraph [26], that the claim the  authorities  are  active  in
         action against  ISIL  is  no  surprise.   The  claim  made  by  the
         appellant  was  consistent  with  background  material  and   Judge
         Rowlands was undoubtedly entitled to find  that  there  is  nothing
         incredible about the authorities wanting to spy on the  appellant's
         neighbour.  It does not follow that Judge  Rowlands  was  bound  to
         accept the entirety of the claim advanced by the appellant.


     14. Having found the appellant's claim that his home had been  used  by
         the security forces to spy on his neighbour to be  credible,  Judge
         Rowlands considered the appellant's claim that he  has  a  specific
         fear of ISIL because his family had allowed the authorities to  use
         their house. The submission by Mr Islam that if ISIL were aware  or
         become aware of the use of the house to spy on ISIL, the  appellant
         would be at risk, is to ignore the evidence.  The claim made by the
         appellant is summarised at paragraph [4] of the decision  of  Judge
         Rowlands.  He noted that following the  death  of  the  appellant's
         neighbour, the appellant had travelled back and forth from his home
         in Darbandikhan and his home in the  village  of  Homer  Qala.   No
         threats were issued directly to the appellant and although  a  note
         was thrown into the back garden, and there was a  video  shared  on
         social media threatening  those  responsible  for  his  neighbour's
         death, the appellant was never approached by his neighbour's family
         or ISIL in relation to that event or any  other  matter.  In  cross
         examination, the appellant had accepted that  he  himself  had  not
         witnessed the arrest of his neighbour in November 2016, and had not
         seen his neighbour's body following the death.  He had heard  about
         the incident from people in the town, and  did  not  know  who  had
         killed his neighbour.


     15. It was in my judgement open to Judge Rowlands to find, as he did at
         paragraph [26] of his decision, that it is not  credible  that  the
         appellant had received any kind of threat towards  him.  The  judge
         considered the appellant's claim that a brick was  thrown,  with  a
         note, onto their  land  threatening  anyone  who  might  have  been
         involved in notifying the authorities or assisting the authorities.
          Judge Rowlands noted that the note attached to the brick was never
         targeted at the appellant  himself  and  neither  was  the  alleged
         video.  It was in the end open to Judge Rowlands to  conclude  that
         the appellant has not established that there is any personal threat
         towards him, for the reasons set out in paragraphs [25] to [27]  of
         the decision.


     16. I also reject the  claim  that  in  reaching  his  decision,  Judge
         Rowlands applied too high a standard of proof.  At paragraph  [14],
         he correctly directed himself that the onus  of  showing  that  the
         appellant is entitled to asylum lies with  the  appellant  and  the
         appellant has to demonstrate that there is a reasonable likelihood,
         that is a serious possibility, that should he be  returned  to  his
         own country he would be persecuted.  Judge Rowlands refers in  that
         paragraph to the lower standard that applies  in  such  an  appeal.
         There is nothing in paragraphs [25] and [26] of the  decision  that
         even begin to suggest that Judge Rowlands did not apply the correct
         standard of proof when considering  the  core  of  the  appellant's
         account. In the closing sentence of paragraph [26], Judge  Rowlands
         confirms that  "The  Appellant  has  not  proven  to  the  required
         standard that there is any personal threat towards him.".


     17. The sentence in paragraph [27]  of  the  decision  in  which  Judge
         Rowlands states that he is "absolutely sure that the  appellant  is
         not and has never fled Iraq for fear of ISIL and that that  is  not
         the reason he came here", must be read in context.  Judge  Rowlands
         had already made his findings regarding the core of the appellant's
         claim, applying the correct standard of proof.  He did not  require
         the appellant to establish his claim upon anything other  than  the
         lower standard but in the  end,  was  "absolutely  sure"  that  the
         appellant had not fled Iraq for fear of ISIL.  That is not  to  say
         that he required the appellant to satisfy him so that he  could  be
         "absolutely sure" that all aspects of the appellant's  account  are
         credible.  I reject the claim made  by  the  appellant  that  Judge
         Rowlands applied a "higher standard of proof".  That is simply  not
         demonstrated by a careful reading of the  findings  made  regarding
         the core of the appellant's account.  It is clear  in  my  judgment
         that Judge Rowlands properly considered the evidence in  the  round
         before he reached his findings of fact, applying the correct  stand
         of proof.  There is therefore no merit  in  the  second  ground  of
         appeal.


    Ground 3:     Material misdirection in law


     18. The appellant refers  to  the  judge's  analysis  of  the  evidence
         regarding the documentation required to  enable  the  appellant  to
         return to Iraq.  The appellant claims the judge failed to  consider
         the country guidance set out in SMO & Others which reiterates  that
         a CSID is an essential document for individuals returning to  Iraq.
         The  appellant  claims  Judge  Rowlands  erred  in   reaching   the
         conclusion that the lack of any CSID  available  to  the  appellant
         now, makes no difference whatsoever, and it is perfectly  safe  for
         the appellant to return to Iraq.  Mr Islam submits  Judge  Rowlands
         failed to  consider  how  the  appellant  would  get  the  relevant
         documents.  The appellant's evidence set out in paragraph  [23]  of
         his witness statement was that he does not have access to his  CSID
         card.  He claims it was left in Iraq and he cannot have it sent  to
         him.  Mr Islam submits the family had moved out of the family  home
         in Darbandikhan and there is a lack of any proper consideration  as
         to  whether  the  documents  required  by  the  appellant  will  be
         available to him, to enable him to safely make the journey  to  his
         home area or the IKR.


     19. There is no merit in the third ground of appeal.  In my  judgement,
         the difficulty with  the  claim  made  by  the  appellant  and  the
         submissions made by Mr Islam is that they  disregard  the  evidence
         that was before the  Tribunal,  and  the  criticisms  made  do  not
         reflect the facts.  During the course of the hearing before  me,  I
         asked Mr  Islam  to  identify  where  the  appellant's  home  area,
         Darbandikhan, is, in Iraq.  He was  unable  to  say  precisely  but
         believed it to be on the outskirts of Kirkuk,  a  former  contested
         area.  I note  that  at  paragraph  [31]  of  his  decision,  Judge
         Rowlands states; ".. The appellant has addressed me concerning  him
         removing (sic) to the Kurdish controlled region but  of  course  he
         has never lived in the Kurdish controlled region and would  not  be
         expected to go there..".


     20. In fact, at  paragraph  [27]  of  the  respondent's  decision,  the
         respondent identifies that Darbandikhan is in a Kurdish  region  of
         Iraq. It is a town in the governorate of Sulaymaniyah. In paragraph
         [10] of the appellant's witness statement dated 7th November  2019,
         the appellant  confirms  that  paragraphs  [27]  and  [28]  of  the
         respondent's decision are correct.  The respondent  also  noted  in
         her decision, at paragraph [66], that the appellant claimed that he
         had  also  previously  lived  in  Sulaymaniyah.    The   respondent
         confirmed at paragraph [67], that as  a  Kurd  from  the  IKR,  the
         appellant's return to Iraq will be to the IKR.  The respondent also
         noted, at paragraph [75] of  her  decision,  the  appellant  has  a
         sister who lives in Zarayan and that his parents  have  permanently
         moved to Homar Qala (which is also  in  Sulaymaniyah),  where  they
         have not experienced any  problems.   As  Mr  Islam  accepted,  the
         appellant had not claimed, even in his witness statement,  that  he
         was no longer in contact with his family.


     21. In section C of the headnotes in the country guidance  decision  in
         SMO & Others, the Upper Tribunal considered the need for a CSID  or
         INID to enable an individual to live and travel within Iraq without
         encountering treatment or conditions which are contrary to  Article
         3 ECHR.    The  Tribunal  noted  that  notwithstanding  the  phased
         transition to  the  INID  within  Iraq,  replacement  CSIDs  remain
         available through Iraqi Consular facilities.  Whether an individual
         will be able to obtain a replacement CSID whilst in the UK  depends
         on the documents available and, critically, the availability of the
         volume and page reference of the entry in the Family Book in  Iraq,
         which system  continues  to  underpin  the  Civil  Status  Identity
         process.


     22. At paragraph [31], Judge Rowlands noted the appellant's claim  that
         he  does  not  have  the  required  documentation  to  move  around
         internally in Iraq.  He noted however that the appellant's  parents
         still live at their home address, and there is absolutely no reason
         why the CSID could not  be  obtained  from  them.  The  appellant's
         evidence in his witness statement was that he left his CSID card in
         Iraq. He does not claim that he has never held a CSID  or  that  it
         has been lost.  He  simply  claimed,  without  any  explanation  or
         elaboration, that he cannot have it sent to him.  On  the  evidence
         that was before the Tribunal, it  was  undoubtedly  open  to  Judge
         Rowlands to conclude that the appellant's CSID is in Iraq,  and  he
         has the ability to contact his parents in order to arrange  for  it
         to be provided to him.


     23. As I have noted,  Judge  Rowlands  appeared  to  proceed  upon  the
         premise  that  the  appellant  has  never  lived  in  the   Kurdish
         controlled region and would  not  be  expected  to  go  there.   He
         proceeds upon the premise that the appellant can return to his home
         area. As I have said, the appellant's home area is in fact  in  the
         Sulaymaniyah area in the IKR.  In SMO & Others, the Tribunal  noted
         there are regular direct flights from the UK to the  Iraqi  Kurdish
         Region and it is for the respondent to state whether she intends to
         remove to Baghdad, Erbil or  Sulaymaniyah.   Here,  the  respondent
         confirms in  her  decision  that  as  a  Kurd  from  the  IKR,  the
         appellant's return to  Iraq  will  be  to  the  IKR.   The  country
         guidance confirms that once at the IKR border (by land or  air)  an
         individual would  normally  be  granted  entry  to  the  territory.
         Subject to security screening, and registering  presence  with  the
         local mukhtar, the individual  would  be  permitted  to  enter  and
         reside  in  the  IKR  with  no   further   legal   impediments   or
         requirements. There are no sponsorship requirements  for  entry  or
         residence  in  any  of  the  three  IKR  Governorates  for   Kurds.
         Importantly, it also confirms that if  an  individual   has  family
         members living in the IKR, cultural norms would require that family
         to  accommodate  the  individual  and  in  such  circumstances  the
         individual would, in general, have sufficient assistance  from  the
         family so as to lead a 'relatively normal life', which would not be
         unduly harsh. The appellant's parents  and  sister  remain  in  the
         Sulaymaniyah area, and there was no evidence  before  the  Tribunal
         that the appellant could not return to his home area  and  turn  to
         his family for assistance.


    Ground 1; The Convention reason


     24.  The  appellant  claims  Judge  Rowlands  erred  in  reaching   his
         conclusion, at paragraph [22], that the  appellant  cannot  succeed
         under the Refugee Convention, because he has not  established  that
         he is a member of a particular social group.  Judge Rowlands  noted
         the appellant fears ISIL or the family of his neighbour because his
         father had permitted observations of  the  neighbour's  house,  but
         concluded that even if that  is  true,  that  does  not  place  the
         appellant in a particular social group as he claims. He  noted  the
         appellant failed to identify what the particular social  group  is.
         In the grounds  of  appeal  the  appellant  claims  the  conclusion
         reached by the judge is "absolutely absurd", as the appellant fears
         ISIL as a young Iraqi Kurdish male.  It is  said  that  his  "claim
         would come under political opinion and arguable PSG grounds  as  an
         ISIL target as a young adult". The appellant claims it is  expected
         from an experienced  judge  to  identify  the  relevant  convention
         ground, regardless of the submissions made by an appellant  or  his
         representatives, and even where no submissions are made at all.  Mr
         Islam submits the appellant had claimed that he was a member  of  a
         particular social group as an ethnic Kurd, and he is at  risk  from
         ISIL.  The appellant would also be considered to  have  an  imputed
         political opinion as someone who opposes ISIL.


     25. In their written and oral submissions, neither party  addressed  in
         any detail whether the appellant is a member of a particular social
         group.  In order to establish that he is a member of  a  particular
         social group, the appellant must establish that  the  social  group
         exists independently of and is not defined by the persecution.  The
         'group' must share a common characteristic, which will often be one
         which is innate, unchangeable, or which is otherwise fundamental to
         his identity, conscience or the exercise of his human  rights.  The
         appellant does not claim to be at risk upon return from  the  Iraqi
         authorities, or indeed the authorities in the IKR  because  of  his
         Kurdish ethnicity.  As noted by Judge Rowlands in paragraph [22] of
         his decision, at its highest, the appellant fears his neighbour  in
         Darbandikhan or ISIL. The appellant  had  failed  to  identify  the
         'particular social group' and it was  open  to  Judge  Rowlands  to
         conclude that the appellant has not established that he is a member
         of a particular social group for  the  reasons  set  out.   In  any
         event, Judge Rowlands addressed the appellant's claim  that  he  is
         entitled to international protection under the Refugee  Convention,
         and in the alternative, under Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
         Directive.   On  the  findings  made  by  Judge  Rowlands  and  the
         conclusions he reached, any error as to whether the appellant is  a
         member of a particular social group or would be perceived  to  have
         an imputed political opinion, is immaterial to the outcome  of  the
         appeal.


     26. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not  overturn  a  judgment  at
         first instance, unless it really  cannot  understand  the  original
         judge's  thought  process  when  the  judge  was  making   material
         findings. In my judgement, Judge Rowlands identified the issues and
         gave a proper and adequate explanation for his conclusions  on  the
         central issues on which the appeal  was  determined.  The  findings
         made by the judge were findings that  were  properly  open  to  the
         judge on the evidence before the Tribunal.  The findings cannot  be
         said to be perverse, irrational or findings that were not supported
         by the evidence.  Having carefully considered the decision of Judge
         Rowlands I am quite satisfied that the appeal was  dismissed  after
         the judge had carefully considered the facts and  circumstances  of
         the claim, and all the evidence before him.


     27. It follows that in my judgement the decision of First-tier Tribunal
         Rowlands is not vitiated by a material error of law and the  appeal
         is dismissed.


    Notice of Decision


     28. The appeal  is  dismissed,  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal stands


     29. I make an anonymity direction.

Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         27th January 2021
             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia






