
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09408/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 21 March 2019                     |on 11 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     KS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Patry of Counsel instructed by Amirthan &
Suresh, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble of the Specialist Appeals Team


                             Anonymity Direction
Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellant or  any  family  member.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, both the Appellant and the Respondent.   Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan Tamil born in 1979. On 19 September  2009
    she entered with leave as a Tier 4 (General Migrant)  student.  Further
    leave in the same capacity was granted and then replaced  by  leave  as
    the spouse of a settled person, expiring on 28 September 2015. She made
    an application for further leave in saying capacity which was  rejected
    on 9 December 2015. A renewed application was made on  7  January  2016
    and refused with an out of  country  right  of  appeal.  The  Appellant
    became an over stayer  and  on  15  February  2017  claimed  subsidiary
    protection because she feared persecution  on  return  because  of  her
    involvement with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil  Eelam  (LTTE)  in  Sri
    Lanka and with the Tamil Youth Organisation (TYO) and the  Transitional
    Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) in the United Kingdom.

The SSHD's decision

 2. On 18 July 2018, the Respondent (the SSHD) accepted  the  Appellant  in
    2008 in Sri  Lanka  had  been  detained  in  2008  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities who believed she was involved with the LTTE. The SSHD  also
    accepted the Appellant had been involved in Tamil opposition to the Sri
    Lankan government in the United Kingdom.

 3. The SSHD rejected the Appellant's account how she with her ex-husband's
    financial assistance had secured the release of a previous boyfriend of
    the Appellant who had been detained in Sri Lanka to fund  his  release.
    Similarly, her claim that, out of spite, her ex-husband  had  disclosed
    to the authorities in her home area in Sri Lanka her involvement in the
    ex-boyfriend's release. The SSHD also noted the apparent delay  of  the
    Appellant in making her claim for subsidiary protection.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The Applicant appealed and by a decision promulgated on 6 December 2018
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Oxlade found the  Applicant's  account
    not to be credible and therefore concluded she would not be at risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka credible. She dismissed the appeal on all  grounds.



 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis the Judge had:

      a)   failed  to  consider  whether,  on  the  basis  of  her   adverse
         credibility finding, the Appellant would or would not be at risk on
         return.

      b) Improperly made adverse inferences on the basis of:

          i)   the  replies  the  Appellant  gave  when  screened   by   an
             immigration officer

         ii) the lack of reference to the Appellant's ex-boyfriend  in  Sri
             Lanka in the records of  the  Appellant's  GP  and  not  taken
             adequate account that the Appellant's mental  health  problems
             arose from the domestic violence she claimed she had  suffered
             at the hands of her now ex-husband

        iii) an inadequate or  inaccurate  consideration  of  the  evidence
             contained in both a letter from a Sri Lankan  attorney  and  a
             statement by the Appellant's father

      c) failed to take into account that the Respondent  had  accepted  the
         Appellant had been involved with the LTTE in Sri Lanka

6.   On 9 January 2019  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lever  refused
    permission to appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

7.   The Appellant renewed her permission application  and  on  15  February
    2019 Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Mailer  granted  permission  on
    the grounds that the specific errors identified did not  amount  to  no
    more than a disagreement with the Judge and because it was arguable her
    assessment of the risk on return did not include a consideration of the
    Appellant's involvement with the Tamil movement in the United Kingdom.

8.   At the start Mr Bramble for the SSHD quite properly accepted  that  the
    Judge's decision contained a  number  of  arguable  errors  which  with
    others to which I shall refer such that the decision  could  not  stand
    and should be set aside. In that light I indicated to Ms Patry for  the
    Appellant that I did not need to hear her submissions.

Error of Law Consideration

 9.  At the end of the hearing I stated that I found there  were  errors  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that it  should  be
    set aside with no findings preserved. I now give my reasons.

10.  A reading of paragraph 2 of the Judge's decision immediately  discloses
    that ground (a) referred to above at paragraph 5 is made  out  and  the
    Judge did not take into account the 2008 detention which the  SSHD  had
    accepted when she reached  her  conclusions  towards  the  end  of  her
    decision.

11.  I do not consider paragraph 18 of the Judge's  decision  to  take  into
    account the nature of a screening interview and more importantly to  be
    a fair reflection of what the Appellant  is  recorded  as  saying  when
    screened. A careful reading of sections 4.1 and 5.3 and 5.4  shows  the
    Appellant mentioned her concerns that the Sri Lankan  authorities  were
    suspicious of her for helping her  boyfriend  and  both  sections  also
    refer to her detention in 2008. The record of this screening  interview
    is insufficient evidence to link the Appellant's fears  exclusively  to
    events which happened in 2008. Additionally, the Appellant  at  section
    2.3 referred expressly to the domestic violence she had suffered at the
    hands of her ex-husband. The evidence is that the Appellant's financial
    assistance to secure the release of her ex-boyfriend was  in  2012  but
    the issues with her now ex-husband's refusal to give her the papers she
    needed for her application for further  leave  dates  from  some  three
    years later.

12.  Paragraphs 43, 44 and the end of 46 do not reflect that  the  Appellant
    explained at interview replies  124-127  why  she  had  not  previously
    mentioned the matter of securing her ex-boyfriend's release from prison
    which at the time of her application for  further  leave  as  a  spouse
    could not have been as relevant as her then  husband's  withholding  of
    papers to enable her to complete her application, particularly  as  the
    evidence before the Judge was that the release of the ex-boyfriend  had
    been secured in 2012, some  three  years  before  her  application  for
    further leave: see page 3 of the Record of Proceedings.

13.  Paragraph 44  of  the  Judge's  decision  makes  no  reference  to  the
    explanation given for the delay in mentioning  the  marital  abuse  the
    Appellant claimed she had suffered given  at  interview  replies  62-63
    which appear to include a claim that the Appellant was sexually  abused
    when detained by the Sri Lankan authorities  in  2008.  This  does  not
    appear to have been addressed.

14.  The Judge, having rejected the Appellant's account of post-2014  events
    at paragraph 49 of her decision needed to explain  why  she  considered
    that the Appellant's detention and claimed torture referred  to  in  my
    preceding paragraph, could be discounted in any assessment of  risk  on
    return.

15.  Taking these matters into account,  I  find  the  Judge's  fact-finding
    exercise is unsafe which  will  have  had  a  material  impact  on  her
    consideration of the appeal. The decision is set aside in its entirety.

16.  Having regard to the extensive fact-finding exercise  which  will  have
    to be conducted as any re-hearing, I consider it appropriate  to  remit
    the appeal for a hearing afresh before a different judge in the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

17.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  contains  an  anonymity  direction
    although it gives no reason why it is proportionate  to  the  need  for
    transparency in the Tribunal's administration of justice.   This  is  a
    subsidiary protection appeal and on that basis and because  the  matter
    was not addressed at the hearing before me I propose  to  continue  the
    anonymity direction.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.
    The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh.
    Anonymity direction continued.



Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 09.  iv.
2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
