
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/09698/2017
                                                               pa/09700/2017
                                                               pa/09701/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals Liverpool |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th September 2018                        |On 23rd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              (1) MR HASSAN [K]
                             (2) MISS REZVAN [R]
                               (3) MR REZA [R]
                        (no ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Greer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Alis, following a hearing on 31st October 2017 at Manchester.   In  the
    determination, the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,
    whereupon the Appellants subsequently applied for,  and  were  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matters  come
    before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are all citizens of Iran.  The First  Appellant  is  the
    stepfather of the second and third named Appellants.  They have treated
    him as their father.  They have  had  no  contact  with  their  natural
    father for over twenty years.  They have lived in the home of the First
    Appellant in Tehran prior to coming to the UK on 29th March  2017  when
    they all claimed asylum.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellants'  claim  is  that  the  Second  Appellant
    became involved with a prohibited  political  party,  the  United  Iran
    Party, in June 2010.  She carried out work for the UIP.  This  involved
    distribution of magazines and materials.  She attended  meetings  at  a
    house in Karaj.  The Third Appellant also became a  provisional  member
    of the party the  following  month,  becoming  an  official  member  in
    January 2011, and also attended meetings.  The First Appellant was  not
    arrested  but  was  invited  regularly  for  questioning  as   to   the
    whereabouts of his stepchildren, which the authorities began to take an
    interest in.  A particular feature of this appeal  before  Judge  Alis,
    was that the Second and Third Appellants' sibling brother, Ali [R], had
    been granted asylum in the UK on a very similar basis,  in  an  earlier
    application, when he had come to the UK himself.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard submissions from the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    that the Appellants' claim lacked credibility because  the  Second  and
    Third Appellants had not engaged with UIP activities  in  this  country
    following their arrival here, so that it was not credible that they had
    been actually involved with such activities in Iran in the first place.
     Moreover, the fact that their brother had been granted asylum did  not
    affect their appeals.  He had been granted asylum on the basis  of  his
    sur place activities.  Indeed, the respondent had  rejected  his  claim
    about what had happened in Iran.  There was no risk through association
    because he felt he left Iran as a student in 2011 and  had  no  contact
    with the Appellants for over five years (see paragraph 40).  The  judge
    also heard submissions from the  Appellants'  own  representative  that
    even if the Appellants' account was lacking in  credibility  there  had
    been Facebook entries by them which would place them at risk.   Indeed,
    the fact of their brother having been granted asylum was  a  matter  of
    some considerable significance because "this would benefit the position
    of the remaining Appellants especially as the authorities may be  aware
    of the brother's activities" (paragraph 46).

 5. The judge held that the Appellants' claim was not credible.   The  core
    issue was whether they had been arrested as  they  had  alleged.   This
    account lacked credibility (see paragraph 56).  They claimed that  they
    had paid a bribe for their release, but even  though  large  sums  were
    allegedly paid for their release, "they did not leave the  country  but
    instead stayed in a villa in an orchard" (paragraph 59).  As far as the
    grant of asylum status to their brother, Ali [R], was concerned,

         "they claim to have had no contact  with  Ali  (son/brother)  until
         they arrived here but the motive for coming here was to be reunited
         as a family.  All the witnesses claimed there had been no  contact,
         but I do not find that  credible.   Ali  was  granted  humanitarian
         protection and indefinite leave to remain in  May  2012  and  I  am
         satisfied that the Appellants were aware of his grant and that this
         was their motive for coming to the United Kingdom (paragraph 61)."

 6. With respect to the position of their UK brother, referred to as "Ali",
    the judge stated that "the Appellants need  to  show  more"  (paragraph
    68).  It is true that the decision in AB (internet activity - state  of
    evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257, deals with Facebook activity  in  Iran.
    However, as Judge Alis stated, "the Tribunal in AB are not saying  that
    anyone who posts to Facebook would be at  risk".   In  any  event,  the
    Second Appellant's posts to Facebook were limited and the exact  nature
    of the articles was unknown.  The judge did not  accept  that  she  was
    politically motivated (paragraph 71).

 7. The judge then went on to say that "however, I also  have  to  consider
    whether being linked to Ali would increase their risk in light  of  the
    fact that  the  Respondent  has  accepted  he  faces  a  real  risk  of
    persecution" (paragraph 72).  The judge held that as  far  as  Ali  was
    concerned, "his application never  went  before  the  Tribunal  so  the
    outcome of his decision was never reported by the  Tribunal"  and  that
    "simply being related to a person  granted  asylum  does  not  mean  an
    application would succeed" (paragraph 73).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    provide adequate reasons for rejecting as  inherently  implausible  the
    Appellants' claim of being detained  by  the  Iranian  authorities  and
    released on the payment of a bribe.  The grounds also  state  that  the
    judge erred by committing a procedural irregularity in  looking  behind
    the Respondent's  concession  that  untranslated  Facebook  posts  were
    political and failed to make findings on behaviour  on  return  by  the
    Appellants to Iran.  Finally,  the  judge  also  failed  to  apply  the
    country guidance in SSH and HR (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum  seeker)
    Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308.

10. On 29th March 2018, the Upper Tribunal granted permission only  on  the
    basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    address the Appellants' claim that they would be at risk on  return  to
    Iran by reason of their connection to Ali [R], their brother in the UK,
    who had been granted asylum.

11. This was not because of the fact that he had been  granted  asylum  per
    se.  It was because he was identifiable as  a  political  opponent  and
    that would lead to a risk that the Appellants  would  be  subjected  to
    enhanced interrogation about this on return to  Iran.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred arguably in not considering that there  would  be  a
    risk of further questioning, detention and potential  ill-treatment  to
    these Appellants on return as was made clear in SSH and HR.

12. On 5th June 2018, a Rule 24 response by  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    submitted to the effect that the only accepted fact was  that  Ali  had
    been granted asylum.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 12th September 2018, Mr Greer, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, handed up the decision  by  the  Home  Office,
    with respect to Ali [R] accepting his claim for asylum.  He directed my
    attention to paragraphs 22 to 26.  In particular, he asked me  to  look
    at paragraph 24 which reads:

         "in the light of the paragraphs above  it  is  concluded  that  the
         Iranian authorities could identify the claimant  because  his  name
         appeared alongside his photograph on his Facebook account,  and  on
         the internet.  Therefore there is no need to doubt the authorities'
         ability to identify the applicant because  his  identity  has  been
         made available for the authorities in Iran..." (at paragraph 26).

  14. This followed, submitted Mr Greer, from what was stated  at  paragraph
      24, namely that, "it is  accepted  that  the  claimant  took  part  in
      demonstrations in the UK which have been reported  via  various  media
      formats".  Mr  Greer  then  asked  me  to  look  at  page  37  of  the
      Appellants' bundle, where his skeleton argument, before the First-tier
      Tribunal, appears.




  15. In particular, my attention was drawn to paragraph 14, which makes  it
      clear that the Second and Third Appellants' sibling brother, Ali  [R],
      is a major player in the  political  activism  of  his  country,  thus
      putting the Appellants themselves at risk, were they  to  be  returned
      back to Iran.  He submitted that their case was that if  Ali  [R]  had
      succeeded in his application, then so should the Appellants succeed in
      the appeal before the judge below.  This  is  because  they  would  be
      questioned vigorously upon return and detained and subjected  to  ill-
      treatment.




  16. Mr Greer submitted that the judge, although looking at the Appellants'
      own political activism,  had  overlooked  the  fact  that  an  equally
      important dimension to their claim was that they were related to their
      brother who had been granted asylum status in the UK.  One only had to
      look at the judge's treatment of the issues at paragraphs 72 to 74  to
      realise that the point that was now being made had been missed by  the
      judge below.  He submitted that the judge had misconstrued the  import
      of the skeleton argument put before the Tribunal below.

17. For his part, Mr Tan submitted that it was not the case that the  judge
    had overlooked this particular dimension to the Appellants' claim.  The
    judge makes it clear that, "the  fact  the  brother  had  been  granted
    asylum did not affect these appeals" (paragraph 40).  He had taken into
    account the fact that "the authorities may be aware  of  the  brother's
    activities" (paragraph 46).  Even at the end of the determination,  the
    judge made it clear that "the  Appellants  need  to  show  more",  than
    "their connection to Ali" (paragraph 68).  Finally,  Mr  Tan  submitted
    that if one looks at the country guidance cases on this  matter,  there
    is no reference made there to relatives being at risk,  on  account  of
    their association with someone who had been granted asylum in  the  UK.
    At the same time, the judge does consider the case of SSH  and  HR  and
    observes that "it is clear that illegal exit and being a failed  asylum
    seeker is insufficient to bring  a  successful  claim  for  protection"
    (paragraph 67).

18. In the case of these Appellants, submitted Mr Tan, what would happen is
    that there would be a question upon arrival, at the first  stage,  when
    enquiries would be made about what they had been doing in  the  UK  and
    how they had made their asylum applications.  Thereafter, however,  the
    second stage level of questioning  would  only  happen  if  there  were
    "alarm bells ringing" and this was not going to  be  the  case  if  the
    authorities accepted that the Appellants left their country  illegally,
    and then proceeded to cooperate with the authorities.

19. In reply, Mr Greer submitted that the country guidance case of SSH  and
    HR does not specifically deal with problems that siblings may face upon
    return to Iran.  However, there was background evidence, in the form of
    what was said in the appendix (at  paragraph  11)  which  would  be  of
    importance, and could not be overlooked.

No Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  I have come to this conclusion  notwithstanding  Mr  Greer's
    careful and measured submissions before me.  This was a case where  the
    judge disbelieved the Appellants' own account.  He expressly found that
    the Appellants' "motive for coming to the United  Kingdom"  was  to  be
    reunited with Ali [R].

21. However, by far the most important and significant finding by the judge
    was that "Ali's claims about activities in Iran were  rejected  by  the
    Respondent and he was granted protection based only on  his  sur  place
    activities" (paragraph 61).  The Appellants themselves had not  engaged
    in sur place activities, as the Respondent made clear (paragraph 35).

22.  It is not the case that the judge did not consider  the  risk  to  the
    Appellants on the basis of their connection with Ali, known more  fully
    as, "Ali [R]".  This is because towards the end  of  the  determination
    the judge states that, "I also have to consider whether being linked to
    Ali would increase the risk in light of the fact  that  Respondent  has
    accepted he faces every risk of persecution" (paragraph 72).  The judge
    observed that  Ali's  application  "never  went  before  the  Tribunal"
    (paragraph  73).   Even  so,  looking  at  the  "untranslated  Facebook
    postings", the judge was not persuaded, to the lower standard of proof,
    "that they are persons who would be targeted by  the  authorities  were
    they to be returned" (paragraph 74).

23. Significantly also, the way in which the appeal was argued  before  the
    judge below, was primarily on the basis of their own activities,  which
    were rejected by the judge,  and  this  was  clear  from  the  skeleton
    argument of Mr Greer.  Mr Greer's skeleton argument states at the very
    end (at paragraph 14)  that,  "alternatively,  if  returned  as  failed
    asylum seekers, the Appellants are likely to be questioned about  their
    asylum claim abroad including their family history.

24. It is accepted that their close relative  AR  has  been  involved  with
    politics in the UK and could be identified by the  Iranian  authorities
    (the Respondent's grant minute paragraph 24  -  26).  It  is  therefore
    submitted that it is reasonably likely that  the  Appellants  would  be
    subjected to enhanced interrogation in relation to AR's  activities  in
    the UK" (paragraph 14).  Even though this was an additional element  to
    the Appellants' claim, it is clear that Judge  Alis  did  give  it  due
    consideration in the determination, in what  was  a  comprehensive  and
    detailed consideration of the claim.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018



