
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09450/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2019                            |On 06 February 2019           |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     D A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Winter, instructed by Katani & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mathews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Montgomery, promulgated on 22 December  2017.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Iran whose case is that  he  is  at  risk  of
    persecution on return on  account  of  his  religious  beliefs,  having
    converted from Islam to Christianity.  It is his case that he converted
    from Islam to Christianity in Iran and came to the adverse attention of
    the authorities as a result.

 2. The judge did not find the appellant to be credible concluding that:-

      i) the appellant's account was neither credible nor plausible [23];

     ii) the appellant had not  shown  that  he  is  a  genuine  convert  to
         Christianity or was the member of a house church in Iran [27];

    iii) the appellant's interest in  Christianity  shown  by  the  accepted
         evidence that he attends the Tron Church  in  Glasgow  was  nothing
         more than a route to obtaining asylum [28];

     iv) if there was no real risk for a convert who would  not  evangelise,
         then there is even less risk on return to a person who  has  failed
         to  establish  he  is  a  genuine  convert,  following  SZ  and  JM
         (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 0082;

      v) the appellant had not shown that he  had  previously  come  to  the
         adverse attention of the authorities and thus he had not  shown  he
         was entitled to protection under the Refugee Convention [29].

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds:-

 4. That although the Tribunal  had  referred  to  the  appellant's  mental
    health issues, the judge had failed properly to follow AM v SSHD [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1123:-

      i) in failing to assess medical information holistically,  in  failing
         to consider  whether  the  psychological  issues  might  provide  a
         reasonable explanation  for  any  inconsistency,  discrepancies  or
         explain the appellant's previous behaviour, failed  to  follow  the
         vulnerable adult and sensitive risk Practice Direction and  it  was
         not inevitable that the decision would be the same;

     ii) in failing to take into account a country guidance case which is in
         itself a material error the judge failing to take into account that
         the appellant had been questioned at the airport, failing  to  take
         into account the concession that if he had genuinely converted  his
         appeal  would  succeed  and  taking  into  account   the   relevant
         consideration  of  whether  he  would  evangelise,  in  failing  to
         consider how he would answer when asked about his activities in the
         United Kingdom, the judge failing to  assess  whether  the  Iranian
         authorities  would  at  the  very  least  perceive  him  of  having
         converted to Christianity however this might raise  submissions  on
         the part of the authorities.

 5. There is no merit in ground 1.  The  medical  evidence  consists  of  a
    short letter from the appellant's GP which although explaining that  he
    has some symptoms of depression and that he has been  prescribed  anti-
    depressants, that makes no formal diagnosis.  There is no suggestion in
    the letter that the appellant's ability to recall events is impaired or
    that he would have  difficulty  in  answering  questions  or  that  any
    adjustments were necessary in order for him, in line with the  relevant
    Practice Direction and  Presidential  Guidance  Note.   Mr  Winter  was
    unable to take me to any submissions made  to  the  Tribunal  that  any
    adjustments should be made or were necessary.  Properly  viewed  it  is
    evident that the judge took proper account of the medical  evidence  as
    part of her assessment and equally it  is  difficult  to  see  how  any
    weight could be attached to it given it is very limited in nature.

 6. It is not in dispute that the  judge  failed  to  mention  SSH  and  HR
    (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker (CG) [2016] UKUT 308 nor  is  there
    any indication that the judge considered that the  appellant  would  be
    questioned on return.  There is no indication  either  that  the  judge
    considered what that questioning would involve.

 7. That said, the headnote in SSH and HR provides as follows:-

         "(a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who  does
             not possess a  passport,  will  be  returnable  on  a  laissez
             passer, which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on  proof
             of identity and nationality.

         (b)  An Iranian male in respect of whom  no  adverse  interest  has
             previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not  face
             a real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3  rights  on
             return to Iran on account of having left Iran illegally and/or
             being a failed asylum seeker.  No such risk exists at the time
             of questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e.  of
             illegal exit and being  a  failed  asylum  seeker)  have  been
             established.  In particular, there  is  not  a  real  risk  of
             prosecution leading to imprisonment."

 8. Aside from whether the appellant would be questioned about how  he  had
    sought to establish his asylum claim, there is nothing to show that  he
    would be of any interest to the Iranian authorities.   The  sustainable
    finding of the judge is that he had not been of  previous  interest  to
    the state.

 9. There is little in the substantive findings in SSH  and  HR  about  the
    nature of the questioning which would take place.  What evidence  there
    is set out in Appendix 1 to SSH and HR is the political likely that  he
    would likely to be of interest.

10. Since the decision in this appeal was  promulgated  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal has in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT  430
    considered SSH and HR, by concluding  that  it  remains  valid  country
    guidance.  The case is inevitably concerned with the position of  Kurds
    which has a political dimension.  It is clear the political activity is
    performed by Kurds or are likely to raise suspicions.  There is  little
    with regard to what he is likely to be asked about religion other  than
    what is set out in the  evidence  of  Anna  Enayat  in  Appendix  B  at
    paragraphs 9 to 15.

11. It is noticeable in this that Miss Enayat drew  a  distinction  between
    those who had made political statements on for example a Facebook  page
    from those who had pretended to convert.  It is her evidence that if  a
    returnee said, when asked aobut his asylum claim, that he pretended  to
    convert to Christianity is unlikely to result in adverse attention.

12. It is evident in this case that the judge did not ask  herself  whether
    the appellant would be questioned  and  if  so  about  what.   Had  she
    applied SSH and HR and asked herself what was likely to be asked,  then
    there was insufficient evidence to show, even to  the  lower  standard,
    that anything untoward would flow from the appellant  stating  that  he
    had pretended to convert to Christianity.  Thus, the  appellant  cannot
    lie, that would be the truth on the basis of the findings of fact  made
    by the judge.  Further, this is not a case in which the  appellant  had
    been baptised and even had Miss Enayat's evidence been available to the
    judge, the evidence is that his pretended conversion  would  not  be  a
    problem on return.

13. In conclusion, therefore, whilst  I  accept  that  the  judge  did  not
    mention SSH and HR which was an error, it was not material as she  (and
    indeed any judge)would inevitably have  come  to  the  same  conclusion
    because on the facts as found by her, there was only one answer on  the
    evidence which is the  appellant  would  be  questioned,  it  would  be
    determined that he would have failed asylum particularly  it  would  be
    determined also that he had pretended to convert  to  Christianity  but
    there was nothing to suggest that that would  have led to ill-treatment
    and accordingly, it cannot be said that the error was  one  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the case and thus, any error was not material.
    For these reasons, I find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. I make an anonymity order in respect of the appellant.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 1 February 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

