
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09878/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 April 2018                              |On 14 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of  22  September  2017  refusing  his  application  for  international
    protection.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  [  ]  1987.   He
    arrived in the UK on 4 September 2009 with a valid student visa and his
    leave was subsequently extended in the same capacity  until  5  October
    2015.  On 14 February 2015 his leave was curtailed  with  no  right  of
    appeal because he was unable at that stage  to  continue  to  fund  his
    studies.

3.    On 20 April 2015 he made a further application  for  leave  to  remain
    based on human rights grounds, but this was refused  on  6  July  2015.
    His appeal against that decision was dismissed and permission to appeal
    was refused.  He became appeal rights exhausted on 2 March 2017.  On 20
    March 2017 he claimed asylum.  His  application  was  refused  for  the
    reasons given in the annex to the decision of 22 September 2017.

4.    His appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on  2  November  2017.
    The appellant claimed that he would be  at  risk  of  serious  harm  on
    return to Bangladesh by reason of his and his father's support for  the
    BNP.  He had been attacked and seriously injured on 27  September  2014
    during a short return visit to Bangladesh.  He believed that the attack
    was perpetrated by members of the Awami League,  but  the  judge  found
    that there was absolutely  no  evidence  to  substantiate  this  claim.
    Having reviewed the evidence, he found that the appellant had failed to
    show either that he had a well-founded fear  of  being  persecuted  for
    reasons of his political opinion or that he had  a  genuine  subjective
    fear of being returned to Bangladesh.

The Grounds of Appeal

5.    In the grounds of appeal, a number  of  challenges  are  made  to  the
    judge's decision.  It is argued firstly that the judge wrongly  refused
    an application for an adjournment and failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for his refusal.  It is further  argued  that  he  failed  properly  to
    consider para 339K of the Rules or to point to reasons why the  serious
    harm the appellant had suffered when assaulted would not  be  repeated;
    to give adequate reasons for his findings particularly  in  respect  of
    his comments on the name of the appellant's father, failing to  realise
    that the translations he referred to were in fact  transliterations  of
    Bengali names into English; to have regard to the weight to be attached
    to the documentary evidence and in particular the FIRs in  the  absence
    of verification by the respondent; to assess the risk in the  light  of
    the appellant's sur place activities and to give adequate  reasons  why
    para 276ADE(1)(vi) was not met.

6.    After Mr Karim had made his submissions on the first  ground,  whether
    the judge had erred  in  law  in  refusing  an  adjournment,  Mr  Tufan
    indicated that he had real concerns about whether the judge  had  dealt
    properly with that issue and, whilst making no concessions on the other
    grounds, he did not seek to resist that ground.

The Error of Law

7.    The application for an adjournment was made at the  beginning  of  the
    hearing on the basis that the appellant had originally instructed other
    counsel and that counsel appearing had only just taken over  the  case,
    the appellant had also only recently  prepared  his  witness  statement
    which was still unsigned and undated and some of the documents  in  the
    appellant's bundle had been  badly  translated.   The  application  was
    opposed by the Home Office Presenting Officer on the basis  that  there
    had been no application for an adjournment  because  of  any  of  these
    apparent problems prior to the hearing and  the  appellant's  solicitor
    had had plenty of time to prepare the case properly and to sort out any
    problems relating to the translation of documents.   The  judge  agreed
    with this submission and refused the application.

8.    When assessing whether a refusal to grant an  adjournment  request  is
    erroneous in law,  the  issue  in  substance  is  whether  the  refusal
    deprived the affected party of his right to a fair hearing.  In Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418, the then President,  McCloskey
    J, said:

         "Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it
         is important to recognise that the question for the Upper  Tribunal
         is not whether the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be
         applied is that of fairness:  was  there  any  deprivation  of  the
         affected party's right to a fair hearing?"

    On this issue, see also SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  [2011]
         EWCA Civ 1284.

9.    The factor which gives rise to concern in the  present  case  is  that
    the application was based  in  part  on  the  fact  that  some  of  the
    documents in the appellant's bundle had been badly translated.  In  his
    submissions Mr Karim made the point that the judge had drawn an adverse
    inference at [52] from the fact that the FIRs produced in evidence  did
    not identify the appellant's  father  as  he  was  named  on  the  visa
    application.  Further, a newspaper  report  referred  to  a  particular
    individual, but the judge said that there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    named individual was the same person as the  appellant's  father  [53].
    These comments provide  support  for  the  argument  that  the  claimed
    inadequacies in the translation of some of the documents had a  bearing
    on the assessment of the credibility of the  appellant's  account.  His
    solicitors may well have had time to sort out  this  problem,  but  the
    fact remains that counsel had concerns about the translations  and  the
    appellant was not given an opportunity to  resolve  those  concerns  on
    matters capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

10    In these circumstances, I am satisfied that Mr Tufan's  concession  is
    rightly made and that the judge erred in law in refusing an adjournment
    in the particular circumstances of this  appeal.   The  representatives
    submitted that the proper course was for the appeal to be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.   In  the  light  of  the
    Senior Presidents Practice Statement I agree  that  that  this  is  the
    proper course.  I need not deal with the other grounds  which  remained
    in issue between the parties.

11.   I note for the record that on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Tufan
    submitted two further documents, a copy of the decision relating to the
    appellant in the earlier appeal at Harmondsworth on 19 July 2016 and  a
    record of the appellant's convictions on 16 August 2016 at  North  East
    London Magistrates  Court.   On  behalf  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Karim
    produced a copy of the recent COI report  on  Bangladesh  published  in
    January 2018.



Decision

12.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision  is  set  aside.
    It  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor  House  for
    reconsideration by way of a full rehearing before a different judge.


          Signed                   H          J           E           Latter
Dated:  8 May 2108

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter













