
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/09401/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 March 2018                           | On 16 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                   Mr MMAC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  8
    September 2017 to refuse his application for asylum in the UK.   First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 15 November 2017.  The Appellant  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    4 January 2018.

 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that he fears being  returned  to
    Bangladesh on the grounds of his sexuality. He claims that he  realised
    that he was gay at the age of 12 after an encounter  with  two  distant
    cousins and thereafter with classmates. He claims that  he  was  caught
    with his classmate by his uncle who informed other family  members  and
    he was beaten and sent away to live with  an  aunt.  He  says  that  he
    entered into a relationship at College claiming that he  was  discreet.
    The appellant and the man with whom he was in a  relationship  intended
    to travel to the UK but the Appellant travelled alone as the man  could
    not raise finances. The Appellant claims that he  has  had  two  casual
    relationships in the UK  with  the  last  ending  in  March  2016.  The
    Appellant claims to owe money to two friends  in  Bangladesh  and  that
    they have threatened his father and  asked  when  he  is  returning  to
    Bangladesh. The Appellant entered the UK on 2 January 2011 on a Tier  2
    student visa valid until  30  April  2014.  His  leave  to  remain  was
    curtailed. His subsequent application for leave to remain as a  student
    was refused on 1 April 2014. He made  an  application  for  a  European
    Economic Area Residence Card which was refused on 26 October  2015  and
    he withdrew his appeal against this decision.  He  contacted  the  Home
    Office on 15 March 2017 to initiate an  asylum  claim  and  he  claimed
    asylum on 20 March 2017.

 3. In considering the appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge set out details
    of the Appellant's  claim  and  his  oral  evidence.   The  judge  made
    findings at paragraphs 37-55 of the decision.  The judge found that the
    Appellant had not  established  that  he  is  gay  or  that  he  has  a
    subjective fear on his return to Bangladesh.

The Grounds of appeal

 4. There are three Grounds of Appeal. The first ground contends  that  the
    judge erred in concluding that the Appellant's provision of more detail
    in his witness statement than in the asylum interview  amounted  to  an
    inconsistency. It is  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
    whether a person drafting a witness statement may be able to give  more
    detail than in a Home Office interview. It is  further  contended  that
    the judge erred in his treatment of the evidence of the witness, as, in
    finding him not credible, the judge failed to give any explanation  for
    his implicit finding that the witness lied about having  had  a  sexual
    relationship with the Appellant. Reliance is placed on the case of  EPI
    Environmental Technologies Inc & Anr v  Symphony  Plastic  technologies
    PLC & Anr [2004] EWHC 2945 (Ch) in relation to the  evaluation  of  the
    witness's evidence.

 5. It is contended in the second ground that the judge erred in failing to
    give a 'Lucas direction' to remind himself that he should 'bear in mind
    that a witness might lie for  a  number  of  reasons,  such  as  shame,
    misplaced loyalty, panic, fear, distress and the fact  that  a  witness
    has lied about some matters does not mean that he or she has lied about
    everything' R v Lucas [1981] QB 720.

 6. It is contended in the  third  ground  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    consideration of risk and that the judge's decision as to whether there
    is a well-founded fear of persecution if the Appellant is a  homosexual
    man in Bangladesh is confused.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
    who noted that the decision is not easy to follow at times due to  poor
    or no proof reading and that the lack  of  coherence  in  the  decision
    suggests a lack of professionalism and care. He considered it  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a  material  error  in  finding
    that the Appellant did  not  require  international  protection  before
    considering the documents submitted in support of his claim or deciding
    if he was gay and in deciding that he was not  gay  before  considering
    the evidence of his witness.  He noted that these points  had  not  bee
    raised in the grounds of appeal but considered that they  are  Robinson
    obvious.

The submissions

 8. At the hearing Ms Jones submitted that the judge erred at paragraph  42
    where he said that he attached no weight to the documents in  light  of
    his findings in the preceding paragraphs. Ms Jones submitted  that  the
    judge erred at paragraph 51 in his treatment of  the  evidence  of  the
    witness who claimed that he had a relationship with the Appellant.  She
    submitted that the judge erred in finding  that  the  witness  was  not
    credible due to inconsistencies between his account  and  that  of  the
    Appellant rather than making clear findings as to whether he found  the
    witness credible and failed to grapple with the  crucial  part  of  the
    evidence of the witness, that is his claim that he had  a  relationship
    with the Appellant. In  her  submission  the  judge  further  erred  in
    failing to consider why the witness would lie about this. She contended
    that the judge did not approach the evidence of the witness in a proper
    and coherent way. She submitted that it is also apparent that the judge
    found that the  Appellant  was  not  credible  before  considering  the
    witness's evidence [49]. In relation to ground  2  she  submitted  that
    inconsistencies do not mean that a witness is lying  about  everything.
    As regards  ground  3  she  submitted  that  the  risk  on  return  was
    considered extremely briefly and that paragraph  54  is  confusing  and
    contradictory. She referred also to paragraph 41 where the  judge  said
    that the Appellant was not in need of international protection. In  her
    submission the judge failed to consider the evidence in the round.

 9. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge had made no material error in  the
    decision. She pointed to paragraph 40 where the judge said that he  had
    considered  Tanveer  Ahmed  and  found  that  the  Appellant  had   not
    discharged the burden of proof. She submitted that  the  judge  reached
    this conclusion at paragraph 40 and the  following  paragraphs  contain
    the reasons for that conclusion. She pointed out that  the  judge  also
    said that he looked at all  of  the  evidence  in  the  round.  In  her
    submission the judge's comments at paragraph  41  are  in  relation  to
    delay, he is not saying there that the Appellant  is  not  in  need  of
    international protection. The  judge  found  that  the  documents  were
    submitted to bolster the Appellant's claim and then went on to look  at
    the claim from paragraph 43 onwards. In her submission it was  open  to
    the  judge  to  find  that  there  were  inconsistencies  between   the
    Appellant's  evidence  in  his  witness  statement  and  that  in   his
    interview. She submitted that the findings made about  the  Appellant's
    evidence were open to him and that he did not need to conclude that the
    Appellant was lying.  She submitted that the judge properly  considered
    the documentary and oral evidence before concluding that the  Appellant
    is not gay. She further submitted  that  the  judge  gave  reasons  for
    finding that the witness was not credible and that he was  entitled  to
    make that finding given the  inconsistencies  between  the  Appellant's
    evidence  and  that  of  the  witness.  In  her  submission  the  judge
    considered all of the evidence in the round before concluding that  the
    Appellant is not gay. In her submission the  judge  made  no  error  in
    considering the objective evidence at paragraph 54.

10. In response Ms Jones submitted that the fact that the judge  said  that
    he had considered all of the evidence in the round did not mean that he
    had done so. In her submission the judge made a finding at  the  outset
    that the Appellant was not in need of international protection and then
    at paragraph 42 rejected the  documents  based  on  that  finding.  She
    submitted that paragraph 54 is not coherent.

Error of Law

11. I firstly consider the grounds of appeal as set out in the  application
    for permission to appeal and amplified by Ms Jones at the hearing.

12. The first ground contends that the judge erred in his consideration  of
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence because he had  given  more
    details in his witness statement than in his asylum interview and  that
    he erred in concluding  that  the  witness  was  not  credible  due  to
    inconsistencies in his evidence.

13. The judge considered the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs 43-48.  The
    judge noted that the Appellant's claim  to  be  gay  is  based  in  his
    account of his early experiences as a child in Bangladesh when  he  had
    sex with two cousins. The judge took account of the fact  that  in  his
    asylum interview the Appellant was unable to expand on his  description
    of his feelings or emotions when he realised that he was  gay,  however
    in  his  witness  statement  he  said  that  he  was  confused  by  the
    experience. The Appellant also said in oral evidence that he was  raped
    by his cousins but that he enjoyed the experience. The judge found this
    part of the Appellant's account to be  contradictory  and  inconsistent
    [44]. In my view these findings were open to the judge on the evidence.
    The judge also  found  the  Appellant's  evidence  as  to  his  claimed
    relationship to be inconsistent and not credible because the  Appellant
    was more  expansive  in  his  witness  statement  than  in  his  asylum
    interview and the  judge  considered  that  this  was  to  bolster  the
    Appellant's claim [45]. Again this conclusion was open to the judge  on
    the evidence. It is clear from the asylum interview that the  Appellant
    was given every opportunity to put forward his case and I do not accept
    any contention that the judge could not take account of the differences
    between  the  asylum  interview  and  witness  statement  in  assessing
    credibility. The judge considered that the fact that the Appellant  did
    not provide evidence from or about the two men he claims  to  have  had
    casual relationships with in the UK [46]. In my view this finding  tool
    was open to the judge in the circumstances. The  judge  considered  the
    Appellant's evidence about his attendance at a gay club noting that  he
    had not provided any evidence of this  and  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    explanation as to why he had no photographs or emails. The  judge  also
    took account of the  fact  that  the  Appellant  produced  only  recent
    receipts as evidence of his attendance at the club. The judge also took
    account of the Appellant's reference in the  asylum  interview  to  his
    'gender change' and his explanation at the hearing that he is  gay  and
    wants to have sex with girls  and  concluded  that  this  evidence  was
    incoherent and confused and damaged his credibility [50].  In  my  view
    the judge was entitled to  reach  the  conclusions  he  did  about  the
    Appellant's own evidence.

14. The judge considered the witness's evidence at  paragraphs  51-52.  The
    judge set out the reasons why he did not  consider  that  the  evidence
    from the witness was credible at paragraph 52. These included the  fact
    that  the  evidence  was  vague  as  to  the  nature  of  the   claimed
    relationship between them and there were conflicts between his evidence
    and that of the Appellant as to where they met. In my  view  these  are
    sufficient reasons for concluding that the evidence of the witness  was
    not credible.

15. There is no need for the judge, in expressing doubts about the evidence
    of the witness, to conclude that the witness was lying. That  would  be
    to apply the wrong standard to the  assessment  of  the  evidence.  The
    judge is obliged to apply the  lower  standard  to  the  assessment  of
    evidence; this cannot go so far as to require  the  judge  to  reach  a
    conclusion as to whether and why an Appellant or witness is lying.

16. I find that ground 1, which challenges the judge's  assessment  of  the
    evidence of the Appellant and the witness, has not been made out.

17. The second ground is linked to the first and contends  that  the  judge
    erred in failing to give a  'Lucas  direction'.  However,  as  set  out
    above, the judge  did  not  have  to  reach  any  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant and/or his witness were telling lies in relation to  some  or
    all of their evidence. His role was  to  consider  the  credibility  of
    their evidence. This is what he did. I find that this  ground  has  not
    been made out.

18. The third ground relates to the findings  in  paragraph  54  where  the
    judge said:

         "54.     I also find that the objective evidence provided  by  both
         parties suggest that in general LGBT persons are not at  real  risk
         of persecution under the law in Bangladesh and that the onus is  on
         the applicant to show that they will be at risk. The appellant  has
         not discharged this burden even on the lower standard of proof. The
         appellant has not provided credible evidence that  he  will  be  at
         risk on return be at risk  (sic)  for  reasons  stated  above.  The
         objective material provided by  the  appellant  did  indicate  that
         individuals have been  killed  on  the  basis  of  their  sexuality
         however the subjective evidence of the appellant does not  indicate
         that he will face a real risk of persecution and  as  indicated  in
         the country information on Bangladesh each case must be  determined
         on the evidence."

19. I find that, if there is  any  error  in  this  paragraph,  it  is  not
    material. The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  not
    credible; he found that the Appellant had not established  that  he  is
    gay and therefore had not established that he is at risk in Bangladesh.
    There is no material error  in  this  paragraph  and  accordingly  this
    ground has not been made out.

20. I have considered the issues raised  in  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal. The  judge  granting  permission  to  appeal  appears  to  have
    misunderstood  paragraph  41.  It  is  suggested  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge may have erred in finding that  the  Appellant  did  not
    require international protection  before  considering  the  documentary
    evidence or deciding whether the Appellant is gay. However at paragraph
    41 the judge was considering the delay of six years in claiming  asylum
    and said: "... I find that if he were in genuine (sic) of international
    protection he would have sought the assistance of the authorities at  a
    much earlier stage". This comment is clearly limited to the delay issue
    and is not  a  definitive  conclusion  as  to  the  Appellant's  claim.
    Accordingly there is no merit to Ms Jones' submission  that  the  judge
    erred in finding at paragraph 41 that the Appellant is not in  need  of
    international  protection  before  finding  at  paragraph  42  that  he
    attached no weight to the documents.

21. The grant of permission to appeal also raises  the  possibility  of  an
    error in the judge's finding that the  Appellant  was  not  gay  before
    considering the evidence of the witness. Ms Jones  submitted  that  the
    judge erred in failing to consider the evidence in the round. I  accept
    that on first reading it appears that the judge reached conclusions  on
    various parts of the evidence without considering all of  the  evidence
    in the round. Whilst in my view it would have been clearer in terms  of
    presentation and the flow of the decision to set out the conclusions at
    the end, the judge made no material error. This is because he  set  out
    the overall conclusions at paragraph 40  where  he  said  that  he  had
    considered the principles set out in Tanveer Ahmed and that  he  looked
    at all of the evidence in the round including the documentary  evidence
    in concluding that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof
    upon him. I find that reading the decision as a whole it is clear  that
    the judge set out his conclusions in paragraph 40  and  then  gave  the
    reasons for the conclusions in the  subsequent  paragraphs.  Hence  the
    criticism that he reached conclusions as to the  Appellant's  sexuality
    before considering the evidence of the witness  does  not  hold  up.  I
    accept that there appears to be proof reading issues with the  decision
    and that it could have been structured better. However the judge  dealt
    with all of the evidence and reached conclusions open to  him  on  that
    evidence and made no material errors.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law.

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                       Date: 11 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there is no fee award.

Signed                                       Date: 11 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
