
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09243/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16th November 2017                     |On 05th January 2018              |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                    [c h]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Ethiopia  born  on  [  ]  1998.   He
    entered the UK illegally on 5th June 2015 and applied for  asylum  that
    day.  That application was refused for the reasons given in  a  Reasons
    for Refusal statement dated 17th August 2016.  The  Appellant  appealed
    and his appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  (the
    Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 17th March 2017.  He decided to dismiss
    the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds
    for the reasons given in  his  Decision  dated  24th  March  2017.  The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision and  on  20th  September
    2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Ethiopia as an  ethnic
    Oromo who was a supporter of the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) for which
    organisation he distributed leaflets and contributed money.  His father
    had been a supporter of the OLF who had been abducted by the  Ethiopian
    authorities in 2005, and his mother had been imprisoned in 2014.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because although he was  satisfied  that
    the Appellant had participated in a demonstration held  on  29th  April
    2014, the Judge was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  a  prominent
    profile within the OLF or the Oromo community in Ethiopia, nor that the
    Appellant had been  active  within  the  OLF  as  claimed.   The  Judge
    rejected most of the Appellant's evidence as lacking  credibility,  and
    found that the authorities in Ethiopia had no adverse interest  in  the
    Appellant.  The Judge noted that according to the information from  the
    Competent Authority that the Appellant had been trafficked, but decided
    that that issue had no bearing on his credibility finding.   The  Judge
    noted discrepancies in the Appellant's evidence when compared with what
    he had  said  during  his  screening  interview,  and  found  that  the
    Appellant did not come within the risk categories identified in MB (OLF
    and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030.  Since his  arrival  in
    the UK  the  Appellant  had  done  no  more  than  simply  attend  some
    demonstrations.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Woodhouse argued that the Judge had erred in law  in
    coming to these conclusions.  The decision  of  the  Judge  as  to  the
    Appellant's credibility was flawed.  The Judge had failed to treat  the
    Appellant as a vulnerable  witness  established  by  his  age  and  the
    evidence that  the  Appellant  had  been  trafficked.   The  Judge  had
    attached too much weight to  what  the  Appellant  had  said  during  a
    screening interview.  This was a  material  error  as  the  Appellant's
    evidence was that he and his parents  have  a  significant  history  as
    members and supporters of the OLF which put the  Appellant  in  a  risk
    category as described in MB.

 6. In response, Mr McVeety referred to the Rule  24  response  and  argued
    that there was no such error of law.  The Judge  had  directed  himself
    appropriately, and according to what he wrote at paragraph  10  of  the
    Decision, had taken into account the Appellant's age  when  considering
    his evidence.  There was no authority to say that  what  the  Appellant
    had  said  during  his  screening  interview  could  be  ignored.   The
    discrepancies referred to by the Judge were material as  they  did  not
    relate to minor issues.

 7. I find an error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    set aside.  The Judge's  decision  is  based  almost  entirely  on  his
    finding that the Appellant was not credible and  that  therefore  there
    was no reliable evidence which placed the Appellant in any of the  risk
    categories identified in MB.  However, although the Judge  referred  to
    the age of the Appellant  when  analysing  his  evidence,  he  had  not
    treated the Appellant as somebody who had been trafficked  despite  the
    evidence from the  Competent  Authority  referred  to  in  the  refusal
    letter, and he had not treated the Appellant as a vulnerable witness in
    accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010.
    This amounts to  a  material  error  of  law  because  the  Appellant's
    vulnerability might have explained the discrepancies  in  his  evidence
    relied upon by the Judge to find him lacking in credibility.

 8. I did not proceed to remake the decision in the appeal.   Instead  that
    decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal in  accordance  with
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement as there  is  a  substantial
    amount of judicial fact-finding still to be made.  None of the findings
    of fact made by the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal may be preserved.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date 4th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton





