
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09620/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2020                  |On 07 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 2000 and is a male Kurdish  citizen
    of Iran. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  November  2018
    as an unaccompanied 16 year old. His claim for asylum was  rejected  by
    the Secretary of State and the appellant appealed to the FTT which,  in
    a decision promulgated on 22 November 2019,  allowed  the  appeal.  The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.



 2. The appellants claim is based on his account of  involvement  with  his
    uncle's house Christian church in Iran. The church met in  secret  and,
    on two occasions, at the appellant's home in 2018. The appellant became
    interested  in  Christianity  as  a  result  of  attendance  at  church
    meetings. In the autumn of 2018, one of the members of  the  group  had
    been arrested and he  had  provided  particulars  of  meetings  to  the
    Iranian authorities. As a consequence, the appellant's uncle  had  been
    arrested. The appellant claims that the authorities also  came  to  his
    own home after details of the appellant's involvement with  the  church
    had been made known to the authorities. The appellant claimed  that  he
    then left Iran on 24 October 2018 before he was apprehended.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal. First, the respondent argues that  the
    appellant should not have been found  by  the  judge  to  have  been  a
    genuine convert to Christianity. The appellant does not claim  to  have
    been baptise and could not remember the days upon which his  conversion
    had occurred. The  appellant  was  unable  to  provide  any  reason  or
    motivation  for  his  religious  conversion  other  than  a  sense   of
    obligation towards  his  uncle  [interview,  Q55].  The  appellant  had
    enjoyed an opportunity to explore Christianity in  a  safe  environment
    whilst in United Kingdom but had failed to do so. The respondent argues
    there was  no  evidential  basis  for  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant was either genuine Christian  convert  or  that  he  faced  a
    future risk upon return to  Iran.  The  grounds  also  argue  that  the
    judge's finding that 'returning [to Iran] will cause  problems  if  the
    convert has been known by  the  authorities  before  leaving  [26]'  is
    inadequately  reasoned.  There  is  also  no  reason  as  to  why   the
    appellant's family in Iran could not have sent him a copy of  the  rest
    warrant which the appellant asserts has been issued  against  him.  The
    appellant had also failed to prove that he  had  left  Iran  illegally.
    There would be no need for the appellant to lie to the  authorities  on
    arrival as he would 'simply be returning [as] following a bogus  asylum
    therefore his rights...under HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31  would  not  be
    breached.'

 4. The judge was aware that the appellant had only very brief  involvement
    with  the  church  run  by  his  uncle.   The   judge   noted   certain
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence. First, the  appellant  had
    said at interview that he had been uncertain regarding the  dates  upon
    which certain events had occurred. I note that the judge found that  it
    was not credible that the appellant had left Iran on  the  day  of  the
    raid of his  parents'  house  because  it  would  'take  time  to  make
    arrangements to leave.' [22] However, the judge  had  found  [23]  that
    '[on] the evidence as a whole and taking into account  the  appellant's
    immaturity, I concluded the appellant is a Christian even though you in
    the faith and uncertain  about  its  practices.'  At  [27],  the  judge
    accepted 'the appellant is not an evangelist, [but] he is connected  to
    his uncle's house group and he became a person of interest. On balance,
    I conclude that it would not be  reasonable  for  the  appellant  as  a
    Christian convert to return to Iran.'

 5. The judge's findings are in some respects problematic.  The  judge  was
    not required to determine whether it  would  be  'reasonable'  for  the
    appellant to return to Iran but whether he would face a  real  risk  of
    ill-treatment. The finding that the appellant is a 'person of interest'
    should perhaps have been supported by more detailed reasoning  although
    I accept that this is  an  unequivocal  finding  that  the  appellant's
    account regarding the arrest of his uncle and, crucially, the  raid  of
    the authorities on the appellant's own home was accepted by  the  judge
    as being true and accurate. I also find no error in the judge's finding
    that the appellant has  given  sound  reasons  for  not  having  become
    involved in Christian worship whilst in United Kingdom. I reminded  (as
    the judge also correctly reminded himself) that the appellant  was,  at
    the time of his entry to the United Kingdom  and  remains  was  a  very
    young man. In that context,  the  judge's  finding  at  [20]  that  the
    appellant had not attended Christian services because of his difficulty
    understanding English is, in my opinion, sound and I see no  reason  to
    interfere with it. More generally, I am aware that  I  should  hesitate
    before interfering with the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal
    which, unlike myself, had the opportunity to hear  oral  evidence  from
    the appellant himself. Moreover, as the judge records, the  appellant's
    account was consistent with background  material  concerning  Christian
    worship in Iran. Although the term is not used, the respondent  is,  in
    effect, arguing that that the judge's findings where  perverse.  Whilst
    acknowledging the brevity of the  reasons  provided,  I  am  unable  to
    conclude that the findings of fact of the judge  could  not  rationally
    have been reached on the evidence.

 6. The judge made it clear that he found the appellant credible as to  the
    core of his account. If  one  considers  the  claim  of  the  appellant
    leaving aside the claim that  his  uncle  was  arrested  and  that  the
    appellant's own home had been raided, then it  would  be  difficult  to
    conclude that the appellant's brief and not very deep association  with
    Christianity would engage the principles of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 at
    all. The judge also found that there was no evidence that the appellant
    would proselytise his Christian beliefs upon return to Iran.  The  only
    finding of the judge upon which a claim  for  international  protection
    could succeed is that relating to the arrest of the uncle and the  raid
    on the appellant's home. Again, it would have been better if the  judge
    had made detailed findings, but it is clear that the judge has accepted
    that  the  appellant  would  be  known  to  the   Iranian   authorities
    irrespective of what may be asked  at  interview  when  he  returns  to
    Teheran ('he became a person of interest').  Notwithstanding  the  fact
    that the appellant had not produced any arrest warrant, it was open  to
    the judge to believe that this  part  of  the  appellant's  account  is
    consistent with the background materials concerning risk on return.  It
    is possible another judge, faced with the  same  evidence,  would  have
    reached different findings. However, that is not the point. Despite the
    problems with this decision, I can identify no reason, as  advanced  in
    the grounds or otherwise, to set aside the judge's  findings  of  fact.
    The question  of  the  genuineness  or  otherwise  of  the  appellant's
    conversion to Christianity is not material given that the  judge  found
    the appellant would be known to  the  Iranian  authorities  immediately
    upon his return to Iran and would, in consequence, be exposed to a risk
    on return of harm. I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                             Date 27 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



































