
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09314/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2019                  |On 25 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                     R B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse, Counsel instructed by CK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant and her family are citizens of Algeria who claim to be at
    risk because they are followers of the Ahmadi religion.

The Appellant's Claim and Immigration History

 2. It is claimed by the appellant that her husband converted to the Ahmadi
    faith in 2010 and that she converted in 2014.

 3. The appellant claims that her husband was arrested in  April  2017  and
    detained for eighteen hours.  She also claims that on  3  October  2017
    there was an attempt to kidnap her son from school.

 4. The appellant also gave an account of her family  suffering  harassment
    and intimidation and it is  claimed  that  the  police  threatened  her
    husband, warning him that there would be negative  consequences  if  he
    continued to collect money for the Ahmadi community.

 5. In August 2017 the appellant and her husband travelled to  the  UK  for
    one  week  (on  a  visitor  visa)  leaving  their  children  with   the
    appellant's mother in Algeria.

 6. In December 2017 the appellant returned to  the  UK  with  her  husband
    (again, as visitors). On this occasion they brought their children. The
    appellant claimed asylum on 15 January 2018.

 7. On 15  July  2018  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  was  refused.   The
    respondent did not accept that she and her family were Ahmadis.

 8. The appellant appealed and her appeal was  heard  at  Taylor  House  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Burnett ("the judge").  In a  decision
    promulgated on 22  May  2019  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant is now appealing against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The judge did not find the appellant and her  husband  to  be  credible
    witnesses and rejected their claim to be followers of the Ahmadi faith.
    He gave several reasons, including:

      a) If the appellant and her husband genuinely believed that they  were
         at risk of persecution and death they would not  have  returned  to
         Algeria following their trip to the UK in  August  2017;  and  they
         would not have left their children behind when they made that trip.



      b) It was not consistent with  the  objective  evidence,  which  shows
         harassment and arrest of Ahmadis, that the appellant had  not  been
         arrested and her husband was not arrested until 2017.

      c) The appellant's evidence was unconvincing  and  evasive  about  the
         practice of her faith in the UK.

      d) There was an absence of support  and  assistance  from  the  Ahmadi
         community in the UK despite an adjournment previously  having  been
         granted in order to obtain such support from the Ahmadi  Mosque  in
         the UK.

      e) Some of  the  evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant  (specifically,
         threatening text messages and a letter from Algeria) appeared to be
         contrived and were not explained.



Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

10. The grounds of appeal raise only one issue, which  is  that  the  judge
    erred  by  failing  to  recognise  that  the  appellant's  account  was
    consistent with the background country information  which  showed  that
    there had been a significant deterioration in the treatment of  Ahmadis
    in Algeria since 2016.

11. At the error of law hearing Ms  Hulse,  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,
    sought to expand the scope of the appeal by arguing  that  the  judge's
    decision  was  flawed  because  there  was   no   basis   for   finding
    inconsistencies in the  appellant's  account  and  the  judge  had  not
    considered the best interests of the appellant's children. We  declined
    to consider these arguments as they were not in the grounds  of  appeal
    and no application was made (either  before  or  at  the  hearing)  for
    permission to rely on them.

12. With regard to the objective evidence, Ms Hulse argued that  the  error
    of  law  identified  in  the  grounds  fundamentally   undermined   the
    credibility findings and therefore rendered the decision unsafe.

13. Mr Avery argued that even  if  the  judge  misconstrued  the  objective
    evidence, it would not have made any difference to the outcome  as  the
    judge gave a range of sustainable reasons for his  adverse  credibility
    findings.   He submitted that the judge was aware  that  the  appellant
    and her husband had claimed to have  undertaken  a  conversion  to  the
    Ahmadi faith in 2010 and 2014 because he referred to this specifically.
    Equally, argued Mr Avery, the judge was aware that the appellant's case
    was that they were always living and worshipping discretely from  fear,
    having undertaken a conversion, because of  the  attitude  to  apostasy
    within the general population. Thus  their  case  was  not  that  their
    problems had only begun in 2016/7, albeit that their evidence was  that
    the nature of the  threat  faced  by  the  Ahmadi  community  had  then
    altered.

14. Mr Avery also argued that the judge's approach (as he was  entitled  to
    take) was to find that the appellant and her husband's account of their
    experiences from 2010  onwards  was  inconsistent  with  the  objective
    evidence placed  before  him  as  to  the  experiences  of  the  Ahmadi
    community over this period and that the judge was entitled to find that
    he was not satisfied that the appellant  and  her  husband  would  have
    acted as they claimed to have done in August  2017  if  they  genuinely
    believed that their children  were  then  at  risk  of  harm  from  the
    specific and targeted attention that they had claimed their family  had
    by then attracted. He submitted that these adverse credibility findings
    were not the subject of any challenge in the grounds, and nor  was  the
    rejection of the appellant's evidence  concerning  her  claim  to  have
    received threats on her mobile phone; or the rejection of the  incident
    supposedly confirmed in a letter from MIAS.

15. He also raised that there was no error disclosed, or even asserted,  in
    the judge's approach to the evidence concerning  the  practice  of  the
    Ahmadi faith in the UK by the appellant and her husband  and  that  the
    judge described her evidence on this issue as unconvincing and evasive;
    and he was entitled to have regard to the failure of the  appellant  to
    offer evidence from the Ahmadi community within the UK to  confirm  her
    conversion, given the size of the Ahmadi community in Algeria, and  the
    lengthy adjournment to the hearing of the appeal that had been afforded
    to the appellant for that very purpose.

Analysis

16. At paragraph 62 of the decision, the judge stated:

         "The appellant and her husband claimed to have  converted  in  2010
         and 2014.  They claim they have spent a lot of time with  HC,  (the
         appellant's husband since 2009) and yet it is not until  2017  just
         shortly before they came to the UK, they  the  appellant's  husband
         was arrested.  The appellant has never been  detained.   I  do  not
         accept this evidence as credible especially when  set  against  the
         background evidence which states  that  the  Ahmadi  community  are
         subjected to harassment and arrest."

17. The wording of this paragraph is confusing, but it appears  be  stating
    (as contended by Ms Hulse) that the appellant's credibility was damaged
    because the account of  her  husband  not  being  arrested  until  2017
    despite being an Ahmadi since 2010 (and of her not  being  detained  at
    any time between becoming an Ahmadi in  2014  and  leaving  Algeria  in
    2017) is inconsistent with the objective evidence about harassment  and
    arrest of members of the Ahmadi community.

18. The objective evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  indicates  that
    the Ahmadi community  in  Algeria  (comprising  of  approximately  2000
    people) only began  experiencing  serious  difficulties  in  2016.  For
    example, an Amnesty International article dated 19 June 2017 states:

         "At least 280 Ahmadi men and  women  have  faced  investigation  or
         prosecution over the past year, since a wave of arrests began after
         failed attempts to register and Ahmadi Association and inaugurate a
         new mosque in 2016".

19.  The  article  also  refers  to  public  officials  making  hateful  or
    discriminatory comments over the past year.

20. Similarly, an article in "The New Arab" dated  26  August  2017  states
    that Ahmadis worshipped freely (but discreetly) until  2016  when  "the
    government crackdown" began.

21. In our view, the appellant's claim that she and her family began facing
    serious difficulties in 2017 (with her husband being arrested  in  that
    year) is not inconsistent with the objective country evidence,  a  part
    of which is summarised above, which points  to  2016  being  a  turning
    point for Ahmadis in Algeria. Nor is it inconsistent with the objective
    evidence that the appellant claims to not have been arrested given that
    the background evidence indicates that  some,  but  by  no  means  all,
    Ahmadis  have  been  subject  to  arrest.  We  therefore   accept   the
    appellant's argument that the judge erred by failing to recognise  that
    the  objective  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    indicates a deterioration for Ahmadis in (and since) 2016 and that  the
    appellant's account was not inconsistent with this objective evidence.

22. However, we do not accept that this error was material. The judge  gave
    several other reasons, unconnected to the objective evidence,  none  of
    which have been challenged in the grounds of appeal,  that,  considered
    together, are, in our  judgment,  clearly  sufficient  to  support  the
    overall credibility findings. These include that:

      a. The appellant  was  not  supported  by  anyone  in  the  UK  Ahmadi
         community, despite being given a substantial adjournment to  obtain
         such support;

      b. the appellant and her husband travelled to the UK in  August  2017,
         leaving their children behind  in  Algeria  and  then  returned  to
         Algeria a week later - actions that  the  judge  considered  to  be
         inconsistent with a genuine fear;

      c. the appellant gave evasive  and  unconvincing  evidence  about  the
         practice of her faith in the UK; and

      d. the appellant adduced evidence, in the form of text messages and  a
         letter, which were not adequately explained and appeared contrived.

23. Given the judge's cogent and clear findings (other than the finding  at
    paragraph 62) which support the conclusion that the appellant  and  her
    husband were not being truthful about converting to the  Ahmadi  faith,
    we are satisfied that  even  if  the  judge  had  recognised  that  the
    appellant's account was not inconsistent  with  the  objective  country
    evidence before him (and had appreciated that 2016 was a turning  point
    for Ahmadi is in Algeria) the outcome would have  been  the  same.  The
    appeal is therefore dismissed.

Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and stands.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

25. Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  her  family.
    This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  proceedings  being
    brought for contempt of court.
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan        |Dated: 23 October 2019               |

