
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:  PA/09564/2016
      PA/02795/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision made on the papers                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|At Field House                                |                               |
|On Thursday 1 March 2018                      |On Tuesday 6 March 2018        |
|                                              |                               |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     B A
                                     E A
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  However,  as  these
appeals involve a protection claim, it is appropriate to make  a  direction.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                  DECISION


    1. By a decision promulgated on 9 February 2018 and made on  the  papers
       following a written concession by the Respondent, I found there to be
       an error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana
       promulgated on 11 October 2017 and I set that decision aside.  I gave
       directions seeking written submissions from  the  parties  concerning
       the re-making of the decisions in these appeals.

    2. By letter dated 22 February 2018, the  Appellants'  solicitors  wrote
       inviting me to remit the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.  I  have
       received no written submissions from the Respondent.

    3. Having considered the Appellants' submissions, I am satisfied that it
       is appropriate to remit these appeals to the First-tier Tribunal  for
       re-making of the decision. As I observed in my earlier decision,  the
       error of law made by Judge Chana involved the failure  to  take  into
       account a medico legal report which, if accepted, might be capable of
       undermining the adverse credibility findings  made  by  Judge  Chana.
       The re-making of the decision will therefore involve  a  reassessment
       of the credibility of the  Appellant  "EA".   The  findings  in  that
       regard are capable of impacting also on the  best  interests  of  the
       children involved and Article 8 rights of the Appellants.

    4. For those reasons, these  appeals  are  remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for the re-making of the decision.

DECISION
Having decided, by my decision promulgated on  9  February  2018,  that  the
First-tier Tribunal Decision of Judge Chana promulgated on 11  October  2017
involves the making of a material error on a point of  law  and  having  set
that aside, these appeals  are  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
rehearing by a Judge other than Judge Chana.


Signed           [pic] Dated: 1 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
