
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09552/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     h a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp instructed by Hoole & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 1 July  1999.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on 19 September 2014 and on 4 November
    2014 he claimed asylum.  His claim was refused but,  as  the  appellant
    was an unaccompanied minor, he  was  granted  limited  leave  until  31
    December 2016.  The appellant brought an  'upgrade'  appeal  under  the
    then s.83 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  against
    the refusal of his claim for asylum.  On 8 December  2015,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge O'Rourke) dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 3. Further submissions were made and on 5 September 2017, the Secretary of
    State again refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  as  well  as
    refusing his claim for humanitarian protection and human  rights  claim
    under the ECHR.  The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a  decision  sent  on  14  February  2018,  Judge  Frazer
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.   The  appellant
    subsequently  successfully  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  a
    decision sent on 14 August 2018, DUTJ  Farrelly  concluded  that  Judge
    Frazer's decision could not  stand  as  she  had  materially  erred  in
    assessing whether the appellant could safely and reasonably relocate to
    Kabul.

 4. The remitted  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  Lever  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a decision sent on  9  January  2019,  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal finding that it was reasonable for him  to  relocate
    to Kabul in the light of the country guidance decision in AS (safety of
    Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118 (IAC).

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds.  On 8
    February 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Scott-Baker) granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 6. On 12 March 2019, the Secretary of  State  filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

 7. At the outset of the hearing before me, Mr Fripp, who  represented  the
    appellant, raised a preliminary point as to the scope of the  grant  of
    permission  to  appeal.   This  arose  because  Judge  Scott-Baker  had
    observed that the first of the appellant's four grounds of  appeal  was
    not arguable.  However, Mr Howells, who represented  the  Secretary  of
    State accepted that in the light of the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in
    Safi and Others (permission to  appeal  decisions)  [2018]  UKUT  00388
    (IAC), the appellant was entitled to rely on all four grounds.

 8. Further, Mr Fripp sought permission to  add  a  further  ground.   This
    ground reflected the fact that on 24 May  2019,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    ([2019] EWCA Civ 873) had set aside the Upper Tribunal decision in  the
    country guidance case of AS on the basis that it had  materially  erred
    in law in reaching its assessment of the risk to (and therefore  safety
    of) an individual returned to Kabul.  Mr Fripp pointed out  that  Judge
    Lever's decision had applied the UT's country guidance decision  in  AS
    and that now that that decision had been set aside and remitted to  the
    Upper Tribunal to reach a fresh conclusion on  the  issue  of  risk  on
    return, Judge Lever's decision based  upon  it  was  similarly  legally
    flawed.

 9. Mr Fripp invited me to permit the appellant to  amend  his  grounds  in
    order to add this new ground which had only arisen as a result  of  the
    Court of Appeal's decision on 24 May 2019.

10. Mr Howells, accepted that the appellant should be entitled to amend his
    grounds to reflect the fact that the Court of Appeal had set aside  the
    country guidance decision in AS and further he  accepted  that  in  the
    light of that Judge Lever's decision could not stand as  it  was  based
    upon the UT's decision in AS as to the reasonableness of the  appellant
    relocating to Kabul.  In particular, at para 27, Judge Lever concluded:
    "I do not find applying the tests in AS [2018] that he is  at  risk  of
    persecution in Kabul and it will be reasonable for him to  relocate  to
    Kabul."

11. In the  light  of  the  representative's  common  position,  I  granted
    permission to amend the appellant's grounds of appeal so as to  reflect
    a challenge to Judge Lever's decision based upon his reliance upon  the
    (then) extant country guidance decision in AS  which  has  subsequently
    been set aside by the Court of Appeal on the  basis  that  the  UT  had
    materially  erred  in  law  in   reaching   its   assessment   of   the
    reasonableness of relocating to Kabul.  I also agree  with  the  common
    position of the  representatives  that,  as  a  result,  Judge  Lever's
    decision cannot stand because of his reliance upon a  country  guidance
    decision which has been set aside on the  basis  that  the  conclusions
    were legally flawed.

12. For those reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error of  law  and
    is set aside.

13. Mr Fripp raised a further point at which he indicated he did not invite
    me to decide but which would be an issue for the judge in remaking  the
    decision.  The point essentially arose from his first ground of appeal.
     It was that the adverse credibility finding made by Judge Frazer,  and
    which the DUTJ Farrelly directed  should  stand,  was  based  upon  the
    adverse credibility finding made earlier by Judge O'Rourke.   Mr  Fripp
    informed me that the appellant had  not  attended  the  hearing  before
    Judge O'Rourke and that that was not as a result of any fault  by  him.
    Mr Fripp accepted that the judge in re-hearing the appeal would look at
    the earlier adverse credibility finding in the light of the guidance in
    Devaseelan v SSHD [2003] Imm AR 1.  He indicated that it would  be  the
    appellant's position that there was good reason not to base any  future
    assessment of the appellant's credibility on  the  earlier  finding  of
    Judge O'Rourke (because of the  appellant's  excusable  non-attendance)
    which had been, itself,  relied  upon  by  Judge  Frazer.   As  I  have
    indicated, Mr Fripp did not invite me to reach any conclusion upon this
    as it will be a matter for the judge remaking the decision.   It  would
    appear that Mr Fripp would seek to bring the  appellant's  circumstance
    within guideline (7) in Devaseelan (see [42](7)]).

Decision

14. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material  error
    of law.  That decision is set aside.

15. In the light of the nature and extent  of  fact-finding  required,  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
    the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to remake the decision in respect of  the  appellant's  asylum
    and humanitarian protection  claims.   It  does  not  appear  that  the
    appellant now (or before Judge Lever) relied upon the ECHR.  The appeal
    should be heard by a judge who has not previously  been  involved  with
    this appeal, namely not Judges O'Rourke, Frazer and Lever.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               11, June 2019
