
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09098/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2019                             |On 11 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (HA-J).  A failure to comply with
    this discretion could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Jordan who was born on [ ~  ]  1985.   He
    came to the UK some time in 2013 as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  On  15
    February 2016, the appellant claimed asylum on the basis  that  he  had
    denounced Islam.  On 15 August 2016, the Secretary of State refused the
    appellant's claim for asylum and humanitarian protection and under Arts
    3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  appellant  did
    not pursue his claim for asylum on the basis of his religious  beliefs.
    There was expert evidence before the judge that the appellant  suffered
    from paranoid schizophrenia which the judge  accepted.   The  appellant
    had a litigation friend and was represented  by  Counsel.   Before  the
    judge, the appellant's claim was that if he were returned to Jordan  he
    would be subject to persecution or serious ill-treatment because of his
    mental illness, in particular that he  would  be  of  interest  to  the
    Jordanian authorities (not least because of his expressed  delusion  to
    be linked to the royal family in Jordan) and would, as  a  consequence,
    be  detained  in  circumstances  amounting  to  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment.

 5. Judge A K Hussain accepted the appellant's  claim  on  this  basis  and
    allowed his appeal under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal.   Permission  was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lever) on 31 July 2018.

Submissions

 7. Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary of State, submitted that  the
    judge's decision was rather confused.  He pointed out that at para 6 of
    his determination, the judge had found  that  there  was  "no  credible
    evidence" that the appellant would be exposed to  persecutory  harm  in
    Jordan as a result of his mental illness.  However,  at  para  17,  the
    judge had gone on to find that the appellant would, indeed, be at  risk
    of being detained in circumstances breaching Art 3 of the ECHR  because
    of his mental health  problems.   Those  were,  Mr  Howells  submitted,
    inconsistent findings.

 8. In addition, Mr Howells submitted that in para 17 of his determination,
    the judge had provided no detail or explanation, based  upon  evidence,
    for his conclusion that the appellant's mental health would  bring  him
    to the attention of the authorities and  result  in  his  detention  in
    circumstances breaching Art 3 of the ECHR.

 9. Mr Howells acknowledged that the thrust of the  written  grounds  were,
    less appropriately, directed to a claim  based  upon  'health'  grounds
    when, in  fact,  the  judge's  decision  in  para  70  was  focused  on
    persecutory treatment arising  from  the  appellant's  behaviour  as  a
    result of his mental health.

10. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Rutherford sought (at  least  initially)
    to defend the judge's reasoning in para 17 leading  to  his  favourable
    decision in respect of Art 3.  In  response  to  enquiry  from  me,  Ms
    Rutherford acknowledged however that the judge  had  not  set  out  the
    evidence which led him to conclude that the appellant's  mental  health
    (paranoid schizophrenia) would manifest itself in Jordan in such a  way
    as to bring him to the  attention  of  the  Jordanian  authorities;  in
    particular the judge did not consider what, if any, treatment would  be
    available  and  what  effect  that  would  have  upon  the  appellant's
    behaviour.  In addition, apart from the reference to a report  entitled
    "shouting through the walls", she  accepted  that  the  judge  made  no
    reference  to  the  background  material   concerning   the   Jordanian
    authorities' attitude to a person suffering from mental health problems
    such as paranoid schizophrenia or the circumstances  in  which  such  a
    person might be detained.

Discussion

11. It is clear that the substance of the appellant's claim to be  at  risk
    on return to Jordan did change to, and focus upon, a  claimed  risk  of
    persecution because of  his  mental  health  (suffering  from  paranoid
    schizophrenia) and the delusional behaviour that he might engage in  on
    return (see paras 4-6 of the determination).

12. At para 5 of his determination, the judge summarised that as the  basis
    of his claim.  Then, at para 6 he said this:

         "Insofar as the new asylum and humanitarian protection claim relies
         upon the prospect of persecutory harm in Jordan because he  suffers
         from a mental illness or mental disability,  I  am  satisfied  that
         there is no credible evidence to this effect and  I  dismiss  those
         claims accordingly."

13. He then went on in para 6 to state that the appellant's claim  was,  in
    effect, therefore one relying upon Art 8 of the ECHR.

14. If one read no further, it would seem plain that the judge had,  albeit
    in  brief  terms,  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  on   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

15. However, the judge went on to allow the appellant's appeal under Art  3
    of the ECHR notwithstanding what he had said in para 6.

16. At para 15 of his determination, having previously set out  the  expert
    evidence, in particular that of a consultant psychiatrist, Dr Law,  the
    judge said this:

         "15. The incontrovertible  evidence  from  the  medical  and  other
             reports  is  that  the  appellant  has  a  psychotic   illness
             described  as  paranoid  schizophrenia.   He  is   delusional,
             obsessive, has delusions of connections to  authority  and  is
             obsessive about his inheritance that he  believes  his  family
             have  kept  from  him.   The  appellant's   behaviour   would,
             according to Ms Owens, at some point be  likely  to  create  a
             conflict in the way that he  interacts  with  people  and  the
             world and his idea of himself.   She  found  him  to  be  very
             assertive  and  that  he  challenged  everything  as  well  as
             believing that he  was  intellectually  superior  to  everyone
             else.  I am satisfied these traits of character and his mental
             disability will  bring  him  into  adverse  contact  with  the
             Jordanian authorities especially if he speaks of his  thoughts
             on Islam and his connections to the Jordanian Royal family, be
             it through the 3 Husseins prophecy or his claim to having been
             married to Princess Haya.  He will not have the support of his
             family in the circumstances because he  is  in  conflict  with
             them because he says they are withholding his inheritance from
             his Kuwaiti father from him."

17. In para 16, he referred to the Strasbourg Court's decision in  N  v  UK
    and then at para 17 he said this:

         "17. In the premises, for the appellant to succeed under article  3
             he must meet the 'very exceptional  circumstances'  criterion.
             I am satisfied that the appellant meets this criterion.  He is
             delusional to a considerable extent and identifies himself  as
             one of the 3 Husseins linking him with the Royal family,  also
             claiming that he was once married to Princess Haya as well  as
             making his adverse views on Islam plain,  all  of  which  will
             bring him into adverse contact with the Jordanian authorities.
              If they view him to have a mental health problem, the country
             report on mental health provision in Jordan contained provided
             by the appellant does not make for pleasant reading; it  shows
             that  those  with  mental  health  problems,  and  I  imagine,
             especially those who are viewed as anti-State because of their
             expressed views, may end up in unlawful detention and  inhuman
             and degrading treatment possibly indefinitely.  I am satisfied
             that the appellant faces a real likelihood of  this  happening
             to him if he is returned to Jordan.   He  is  particularly  at
             risk of being detained  under  Jordan's  laws  on  involuntary
             institutionalisation as identified  in  the  report  'Shouting
             through  the  walls'  in  conditions  which  would  contravene
             article 3."

18. It would appear, therefore, that having initially concluded that  there
    was "no credible evidence" to support  the  appellant's  claim  on  the
    basis that he would be persecuted because of  his  mental  health,  the
    judge nevertheless was satisfied that a real risk of persecution or, at
    least, serious ill-treatment contrary to Art 3 had been established.

19. Leaving aside this plainly obvious inconsistency in his  determination,
    when paras 15 and 17 of his determination  are  read  together,  it  is
    wholly unclear upon what basis he accepted that the appellant's  mental
    health problem would persist in Jordan such  as  to  draw  him  to  the
    attention of the Jordanian authorities.  That could  only  be  premised
    upon medical evidence that treatment was not available to alleviate his
    current symptoms or, even if available, would not adequately deal  with
    those symptoms.  As Ms Rutherford acknowledged in her submissions,  the
    judge did not refer to any evidence to support  such  a  premise  (upon
    which he would be required to make a sustainable factual  finding)  and
    no such evidence is readily apparent from the papers before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

20. Equally, even assuming  that  the  appellant's  paranoid  schizophrenia
    would continue to manifest itself in the same (or similar)  way  as  it
    has in the UK, the judge did not  identify  and  grapple  with  country
    background evidence which would support his conclusion that this  would
    bring him to the attention of the Jordanian authorities  such  that  he
    would be detained in circumstances breaching Art 3 of the ECHR.  It was
    not, in my judgment, sufficient for the judge to simply state that "the
    country report on mental health provisions" did not "make for  pleasant
    reading" (no further detail is given) or with a bare reference  to  the
    report "shouting through the walls" in the final sentence of para 17.

21. The judge's failure to grapple with any relevant evidence (and it  must
    be remembered that in para 6 he had previously said that there was  "no
    credible evidence" to support the claim), together with a clear failure
    to provide adequate reasons and findings in para 17  for  his  ultimate
    conclusion that a breach of  Art  3  was  established,  amounted  to  a
    material error of law.

22. For these reasons, the judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal
    is legally flawed and cannot stand.

Decision

23. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal under Arts 3 and 8  of  the  ECHR  involved  the
    making of a material error of law.  The decision cannot  stand  and  is
    set aside.

24. The proper disposal of this appeal  in  these  circumstances,  as  both
    representatives agreed, is that the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo re-hearing before a judge other than  Judge
    A K Hussain.

25. I would anticipate that the First-tier Tribunal would  be  assisted  by
    relevant medical and other expert opinion relating to the treatment  of
    the appellant's  paranoid  schizophrenia  in  Jordan  and  the  state's
    response to a person suffering from this mental illness.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             16 January 2019

