
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09663/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 March 2020                      |On 18 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                robel solomon
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Alex Burrett, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ross dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
    refusal of international protection or leave to remain on human  rights
    grounds based on the First-tier Judge's finding that the  appellant  is
    not as he asserts a citizen of Eritrea.

 2. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a  Pentecostal  Christian
    and that if he were able to establish Eritrean citizenship he would  be
    at risk of persecution on return in Eritrea.

 3. The appellant's account is that he was born in 1994 and arrived in  the
    United Kingdom in 2019 when he was 24 years old,  claiming  asylum  the
    same day.  The appellant speaks mainly Amharic and hardly any Tigrinya,
    which is the principal Eritrean language: he gave evidence in Amharic.

 4. The appellant's account of travels between Eritrea and  Ethiopia  as  a
    younger person was rejected by the First-tier Judge for the reasons  in
    his decision and, in particular, those given  in  the  summary  of  the
    appellant's  evidence  which  begins  at  paragraph  12  and   in   the
    conclusions which begin at paragraph 20, and conclude at paragraph  28.



Grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal challenge the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    in three ways.  First, the appellant asserts that it was  an  error  of
    law for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to approach this  appeal  on  the
    basis that the key issue was whether he came from Eritrea or  Ethiopia.
    That  ground  is  unarguable.   This  case  turns  on  the  appellant's
    nationality:  the appellant's case is that  he  is  Eritrean,  and  the
    respondent accepted that if he were Eritrean,  he  would  be  at  risk.
    That was the key issue and the Judge did not err in so concluding.

 6. Second, the  appellant  challenges  the   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    finding of fact that the appellant is not an  Eritrean  citizen,  which
    was made principally on the basis of his being an Amharic  speaker  and
    of his inability to  speak  Tigrinya,   the  main  language  spoken  in
    Eritrea. Again, that finding was unarguably open to the Judge.

 7. Thirdly, Mr Burrett argued in the grounds of appeal  (but  not  in  the
    First-tier  Tribunal)  that  in  applying  MA  (Disputed   Nationality)
    Ethiopia [2008] UKAIT 00032 the First-tier  Judge  failed  to  consider
    whether the appellant was de jure a national of  Eritrea.   Mr  Burrett
    accepted that when representing the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, he did not put the case in that way.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge cannot be expected to  make  findings  on
    arguments which were not put before  him,  and  there  was  and  is  no
    evidence before the Tribunal to establish whether the  appellant  meets
    any of the criteria for de jure Eritrean citizenship.   Nothing in  the
    evidence before me seeks to establish where the appellant was born, nor
    how that might engage the nationality law of Eritrea.   No copy of  the
    relevant legal provisions of Eritrean law, nor any international expert
    evidence as to how Eritrean nationality is acquired, has been  produced
    or relied upon in these proceedings.

 9. When I explored this with Mr Burrett, he said that the evidence  of  de
    jure nationality on  which  the  appellant  relied  was  his  own  oral
    evidence.  The appellant's oral evidence was considered by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, together with the oral  evidence  of  the  witness
    Thomas Solomon, which was given little weight for the reasons  set  out
    in paragraphs 24 to  26  of  the  decision.   The  Judge  made  proper,
    intelligible and adequate findings on the  appellant's  nationality  on
    the evidence before him.

10. The grounds of appeal ask the Upper Tribunal to go  behind  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's finding of fact as to nationality made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on grounds which are unarguable.  The high  standard  for
    interference with a finding of fact and/or credibility  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, set out by Lord Justice Brooke at paragraph 90  in
    R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA
    Civ 982 is not reached.

11.      This appeal is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    stands.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     8 March 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


