
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09521/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On : 24 January 2019                 |On 4 February 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  aftab [r]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of  22
July 2018 to refuse his protection and human rights claim.

The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 10 January  1975.  He  first
entered the UK on 12 April 2006.  He  was  granted  leave  to  remain  as  a
student nurse on 29  August  2007  until  30  June  2009.  He  travelled  to
Pakistan on 26 August 2008 and returned to the UK on 24 September  2008  and
was subsequently granted leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  student  until  22
August 2011. His application for further leave to remain as  a  student  was
refused on 3  February  2012  and  his  appeal  against  that  decision  was
dismissed on 19 September 2012. He became  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  25
January 2013. He claimed to have then travelled  to  Pakistan  on  a  stolen
British passport on 5 September 2013.

The appellant claims to have returned to the UK on  18  July  2017.  He  was
encountered  by  immigration  officers  on  21  August  2017  when   working
illegally and was arrested, detained as an overstayer and then  released  on
reporting conditions and served with removal papers. On 9  October  2017  he
claimed asylum.

The basis of the appellant's claim is as follows. He was involved  with  the
National Student Federation (NSF) when at college and was president  of  the
NSF from 1992 until 1993. He worked as a lawyer until he came to the  UK  to
study in 2006. He also owned a hotel which he managed and had land on  which
he grew vegetables. He returned to Pakistan from UK on 5 September  2013  to
visit his sick father. He joined the United Kashmir People's  Party  (UKPNP)
in February 2015 and became the president  of  the  Sarsawa  branch  of  the
UKPNP in May 2015. His problems began on 6 June 2017  when  he  spoke  at  a
conference in Rawlakot about a friend  who  had  been  killed  by  Pakistani
security agencies on 13 May 2013 and spoke out against the  government.  The
police tried to arrest him but he managed to run away. A  First  Information
Report (FIR) was filed against him for treason and  the  police  raided  his
house whilst  he  was  not  there.  He  stayed  with  friends  who  arranged
documentation through an agent to enable him to travel to  the  UK.  He  had
continued to be politically active in the UK.

The respondent did not accept that the appellant was a member of the  UKPNP.
The respondent noted that a document  verification  report  (DVR)  concluded
that the UKPNP membership form he had submitted was not  genuine  since  the
secretary general of the party had confirmed that there  was  no  record  of
him being a member and that  his  name  was  not  known  in  the  area.  The
appellant's claim to have become president of the UKPNP Sarsawa area in  May
2015 was considered to be inconsistent with his evidence  at  the  screening
interview that he had never been involved with any  political  organisations
and raised inconsistencies with a  letter  of  support  submitted  from  the
central senior vice chairperson of the UKPNP.  The  respondent  gave  little
weight to the newspaper articles produced by the  appellant  and  considered
that little weight could be  given  to  the  photographs  of  him  attending
demonstrations  in  the  UK.  The  respondent  considered  the   appellant's
Facebook activities, noting that the one post had been put up after  he  had
made his asylum claim and that he had  a  limited  audience,  and  concluded
that that would not put him at risk on return to  Pakistan.  The  respondent
noted that the FIR and arrest warrant which the appellant  had  produced  in
support of his claim had been found in a DVR not to be genuine and  rejected
his claim to have had problems as a result of his membership of  the  UKPNP.
The respondent considered that the appellant would be at no risk  on  return
to Pakistan and that his removal would not breach his human rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Nicholls  on  30  August  2018.  Judge  Nicholls
refused an adjournment request  which  was  made  towards  the  end  of  the
appellant's evidence for him to obtain additional evidence in regard to  the
provenance  of  the  FIR  and  arrest  warrant.  The  judge   recorded   the
appellant's evidence in his witness statement  and  asylum  interview  about
his involvement with the UKPNP in Pakistan and  his  activities  in  the  UK
which included  a  meeting  and  demonstration  outside  the  Pakistan  High
Commission in London on 22 October 2017 and a meeting  in  Birmingham  on  1
February 2018 which  was  attended  by  Sardar  Shaukat  Ali  Kashmiri,  the
founder of the UKPNP, as well as Facebook posts.  He  claimed  to  fear  the
Pakistani  security  and  intelligence  agencies  because  of   his   active
promotion of the independence of Azad Kashmir. The appellant relied  at  the
hearing upon letters from two senior officials of the UKPNP confirming  that
they had spoken to the British High Commission  and  could  not  recall  the
appellant and so could not confirm his membership of the party at the  time,
but were now confirming his role in the party. The  appellant  claimed  that
the FIR and arrest warrant were genuine and had been  sent  to  him  by  his
lawyer. He argued that the Pakistani security forces would not  be  prepared
to confirm to British government officials that there was an FIR and  arrest
warrant, as they wanted him to  return  to  Pakistan,  and  therefore  their
response to the enquiry could not be relied upon. The appellant referred  to
photographs of him at three different events and said that he  had  attended
five or more meetings and demonstrations  in  the  UK.  He  stated  that  he
started his activities for the UKPNP in the UK from October 2017. He  denied
having worked illegally in the UK. The FIR and arrest warrant had been  sent
to him by his lawyer in Pakistan and there were two letters from his  lawyer
in the bundle of evidence. The appellant also relied upon an  expert  report
from Professor Christopher Bluth, a  professor  of  international  relations
and security at the University of Bradford.

The judge concluded that the letters from the two senior  officials  of  the
UKPNP  confirming  the  enquiries  made  to  them  from  the  British   High
Commission carried little weight as they were not accompanied  by  any  form
of identification evidence and  there  were  no  documents  with  which  the
signatures could be compared. The judge considered that  the  provenance  of
the FIR and arrest warrant was a significant issue and  that  there  was  no
evidence to show that the person's name stamped on  the  documents  was  the
appellant's lawyer. He refused to grant  an  adjournment  requested  by  the
appellant to obtain further evidence of the  provenance  of  the  documents.
The judge did not accept the appellant's  explanation,  that  the  Pakistani
authorities would not confirm the documents because they wanted him back  in
Pakistan, noting that the DVR confirmed that the appellant's  name  was  not
given to the police. The judge concluded that the documents were  false.  He
accorded no  weight  to  the  newspaper  articles,  noting  that  they  were
inconsistent with the document verification enquiries. With  regard  to  the
expert report from Professor Bluth, the judge considered  that  he  had  not
seen the DVRs  and  in  any  event  that  it  was  not  for  him  to  assess
credibility. The judge considered that there was no evidence  to  show  that
the   Pakistan   intelligence   and   security   forces   were    monitoring
demonstrations and events in the UK and  would  be  likely  to  take  action
against  an  identified  activist  who  returned  to  Pakistan.  The   judge
concluded that the appellant was at no risk on return to Pakistan  and  that
his removal would not breach his  Article  2,  3  and  8  human  rights.  He
accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appellant then sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
four grounds. Firstly, that the judge's conclusion, that the  appellant  had
produced no evidence to show that the  Pakistan  intelligence  and  security
forces were monitoring activities in the UK and  would  be  likely  to  take
action on an  identified  activist  on  return  to  Pakistan,  was  arguably
perverse, since the expert report did provide such evidence. Secondly,  that
the judge erred by refusing an adjournment request to enable  the  appellant
to obtain corroborative evidence relating to the  FIR  and  arrest  warrant.
Thirdly, that the  judge  failed  to  consider  correspondence  from  senior
officials of the UKPNP corroborating the  appellant'  UKPNP  activities  and
supporting his fear of returning to Pakistan. Fourthly that the  judge  gave
no consideration to the expert's findings of plausibility and  wrongly  said
that Professor Bluth had not seen the  DVRs  when  he  had,  in  fact,  been
provided with the full respondent's bundle containing the reports.

Permission was refused in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  was  subsequently
granted in the Upper Tribunal on 7 December 2018.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The matter came before me on 24 January 2109. I heard submissions from  both
parties.

With regard to grounds 1 and 4, Mr Eaton submitted that the judge failed  to
deal with the evidence of the appellant's media interest at pages 38  to  60
of the appeal bundle and failed properly to deal  with  the  expert  report.
The judge considered there to be no evidence to suggest that  the  Pakistani
authorities monitored UKPNP activities in the UK, whereas  the  expert  said
that they did and found it highly probable that the authorities  would  have
a file on the appellant. The judge also considered that the expert  did  not
have  sight  of  the  DVRs,  whereas  he  did.  The  expert  considered  the
appellant's documentation to be genuine, but  the  judge  did  not  consider
that. Mr Eaton submitted, with regard to grounds 2 and  3,  that  the  judge
erred in his treatment of the corroborative evidence. There was no  analysis
of the appellant's evidence and  no  findings  on  the  credibility  of  his
evidence, but the judge only considered whether the appellant  had  rebutted
the presumption of the documents being false. The judge failed  to  consider
the letters from [NK] and [RK] at pages 21, 24 and 25 and therefore  ignored
cogent evidence which rebutted the DVR. There was  no  opportunity  for  the
appellant to rebut the judge's adverse findings on the  signatories  of  the
letters. The judge erred by dismissing the newspaper articles on  the  basis
of  contradictions  in  the  appellant's  evidence  when   there   were   no
contradictions. The judge also erred by refusing to adjourn  the  matter  to
enable the appellant to produce corroborative evidence from  his  lawyer  in
Pakistan. Therefore the judge erred by not dealing with  the  expert  report
properly and by giving spurious reasons for rejecting the appellant's  claim
as to his involvement with the UKPNP.

Mr Tarlow submitted that the challenge was little more than  a  disagreement
with the judge's decision. Whilst there was an error  in  the  judge  saying
that there was no evidence  of  the  Pakistani  security  forces  monitoring
activities in the UK, that was not material as the judge properly  concluded
that the appellant's evidence was not consistent  and  did  not  demonstrate
that the appellant was an activist. The determination,  taken  as  a  whole,
was sound and there were no errors of law.

In response,  Mr  Eaton  submitted  that  the  error  was  material  as  the
appellant was likely to be known to the Pakistani authorities on  the  basis
of his sur place activities.

Consideration and findings.

It is the appellant's case that the  judge  ignored  much  of  the  evidence
supporting the appellant's claim and instead focussed on the  DVRs  and  the
appellant's ability to rebut the findings  in  those  reports.  However  the
judge clearly gave detailed consideration to the evidence  as  a  whole  and
was fully entitled to give weight to the DVRs.

At [13] to [15] the judge considered in detail the appellant's  response  to
the DVR dealing with his UKPNP membership  form,  at  E45  and  E46  of  the
respondent's appeal bundle, and  the  evidence  he  had  submitted  in  that
regard, consisting of the letters at pages 22 and 23 of the  appeal  bundle,
purporting to come from  Sardar  Ishtiaq  Hussain  and  Syed  Tahir  Hussain
Gardaizi. The judge provided cogent reasons for rejecting that  evidence  at
[15] and [18]. Considering the evidence  as  a  whole  and  the  appellant's
previous use of forged  documents,  the  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
entertain doubts as to the authenticity of the two letters  and  to  require
more in order to be satisfied that they were genuine.   Mr  Eaton  submitted
that the judge failed to make any reference to the  letters  from  [NK]  and
[RK], at pages 21 and 24/5, which supported the appellant's rebuttal of  the
DVR. However the judge specifically referred at  [18]  to  the  document  at
page 21. The findings he made in regard to that document  apply  equally  to
the letter at pages 24 and 25. The judge  plainly  had  regard  to  all  the
evidence in any event and  was  not  required  to  address  each  and  every
document in detail. Furthermore, and whilst not an observation made  by  the
judge, it is of note that the previous letter  from  [NK],  at  M67  in  the
respondent's bundle, omitted to mention that  the  appellant  had  held  the
office of President of the UKPNP and referred to him only  as  a  member  of
the party whilst the second letter, at page  21  of  the  appellant's  appal
bundle, sought to amend that rather material omission. It seems to  me  that
that is another matter  supporting  the  judge's  adverse  findings  on  the
document and the documentary evidence as a whole.

At [16] and [17] the judge gave detailed consideration to  the  DVR  dealing
with the FIR  and  arrest  warrant  produced  by  the  appellant  and  again
considered and rejected the appellant's response. It seems to  me  that  the
reasons given in the DVR for doubting the authenticity  of  those  documents
were particularly strong and the appellant's explanation went  nowhere  near
undermining the outcome of  the  verification.  The  judge  found  that  the
appellant's explanation was "fanciful and flies in the face of the  reliable
evidence" and he was, in my view, fully and properly  entitled  to  conclude
as such. The appellant asserts that the judge unfairly deprived  him  of  an
opportunity to provide further evidence to support his claim as  to  how  he
obtained the documents. However the judge was fully entitled  to  refuse  to
adjourn the proceedings at the stage the request was made.  The  appellant's
evidence as to the provenance of the documents was inconsistent.  At  [9(l)]
he referred initially to the documents having been sent  by  the  author  of
the letter at K64, Ch. Muhammad Saddique Advocate, but when it  was  pointed
out to him that neither of the two letters written by the  lawyer  mentioned
obtaining such documents, he then relied upon a stamp on the documents  from
a different advocate, SM Mumtaz Khan. The  judge  expressed  concerns  about
the appellant's evidence in that regard at  [16]  and  properly  refused  to
adjourn the proceedings for the reasons given at [3] and [16]. There was  no
unfairness in him doing so. The suggestion, in the grounds, that  the  judge
refused to adjourn the proceedings because he was due to retire,  was  quite
rightly not raised by Mr Eaton and was entirely inappropriate.

As  for  the  newspaper  reports  produced  by  the  appellant,  the   judge
considered those at [19], noting inconsistencies and  discrepancies  in  the
reports  and  inconsistencies  between  the  reports  and  the  FIR  in  the
description of the events of 6 June 2017 and the resulting  charges  against
the appellant. Mr Eaton submitted that there was  no  contradiction  between
the documents, but I do not agree. The judge  properly  found  that,  whilst
the newspaper reports referred to treason charges being  registered  against
the appellant, that did not reflect the information provided in the FIR  and
arrest warrant.

The grounds assert that the judge, in making the adverse  findings  that  he
did about the reliability of the documentary evidence and the evidence as  a
whole, ignored the expert opinion of Professor Bluth on the plausibility  of
the appellant's claim and the authenticity of  the  documents.  However  the
judge  plainly  did  not  ignore  Professor's  Bluth's  conclusion  on   the
plausibility of the appellant's claim,  but  specifically  referred  to  his
observations in that  regard  at  [99(n)]  and  [99(o)].  As  for  Professor
Bluth's supporting comments at paragraph 5.5.5 of his report in relation  to
the documentary evidence, the judge observed at [20] that he had  apparently
not seen the DVRs. The grounds  challenge  that  observation,  pointing  out
that Professor Bluth  had  the  respondent's  bundle  containing  the  DVRs.
However it is of note that he  made  no  reference  to  those  reports  when
listing, in some detail, the materials he had read, at paragraph  4  of  his
report, and at no point in his report did he refer to the DVRs  or  indicate
that he had actually noted or had regard to them. On that basis it seems  to
me that the judge was perfectly entitled to accord the weight  that  he  did
to Professor Bluth's conclusions on the evidence.

For all of these reasons I reject the assertion made by  and  on  behalf  of
the appellant that the judge's approach to  the  evidence  was  flawed.  The
judge undertook a full and careful assessment of all the evidence, had  full
regard  to  the  appellant's  response  to  the  respondent's  concerns  and
provided cogent reasons for rejecting the appellant's explanations  and  for
according the limited weight that he did to the evidence.

It is also asserted that the judge erred in his assessment of the risks  the
appellant faced as a result of his sur place activities in the UK. Mr  Eaton
submitted that the judge did not consider the evidence  of  the  appellant's
media interest. However the judge referred  at  [9(e)]  to  the  appellant's
claim to be active on Facebook and at [21] considered all his activities  in
the UK, noting that he had no formal position within the  UKPNP  in  the  UK
and providing reasons for  concluding  that  he  would  not  be  of  adverse
interest on the basis of such limited activities.  It  is  asserted  in  the
grounds that the judge made a material error  by  finding  there  to  be  no
evidence of  the  Pakistani  intelligence  and  security  forces  monitoring
events in the UK when Professor Bluth made such references in his report  at
5.3.9 (and, I  note,  at  5.5.4).  However,  whilst  it  is  the  case  that
Professor Bluth confirmed that monitoring did take place, I  agree  with  Mr
Tarlow that that did  not  materially  undermine  the  judge's  conclusions,
given that Professor Bluth's conclusion on the risks faced by the  appellant
himself was very much predicated upon an acceptance  of  his  claimed  UKPNP
profile, a matter unequivocally rejected by the judge for the reasons  fully
and properly given.  There  was  nothing  in  Professor  Bluth's  report  to
suggest that a person of no previous  or  current  UKPNP  profile  with  sur
place activities undertaken on the limited basis as the judge found  in  the
appellant's  case  would  be  of  any  adverse  interest  to  the  Pakistani
authorities.

Accordingly I find there to be no  merit  in  the  grounds  challenging  the
judge's decision.  The  judge  had  full  and  careful  regard  to  all  the
evidence, provided cogent reasons for according the weight that  he  did  to
that evidence and was fully and  properly  entitled  to  reach  the  adverse
conclusions that he did. His conclusion, that the appellant would be  of  no
adverse interest to the Pakistani authorities, and at  no  risk  on  return,
was entirely open to him on the evidence before him.

For all of these reasons I do not consider there to be any errors of law  in
Judge Nicholls's decision which would require it to be set aside.  I  uphold
his decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  on  a  point  of  law
requiring it to be set aside. I do not set aside the decision. The  decision
to dismiss the appellant's appeal therefore stands.

Signed   [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 28 January 2019
