
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/09561/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 November 2020                 |On 16 November 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     PL

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. I am satisfied, having had regard to the guidance in  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No  1  of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders,  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to make an  order  in  accordance  with  Rules  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
         could lead to contempt of court proceedings."

 2. The appellant, a national of Iraq with date of birth given as  15.9.91,
    has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  4.12.19   (Judge   Turner),
    dismissing on all grounds his claim for international protection, first
    made in 2012 but repeated in  further  submissions  made  in  2019.  In
    short, he claimed that he had fled  Kirkuk  because  his  life  was  in
    danger due to his father's previous association with the Ba'ath  Party,
    for which reason two brothers had been killed, in 2012 and in 2016.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission on 9.1.20, finding
    it arguable that the decision disclosed a failure to afford the parties
    and their representatives, primarily the appellant, the opportunity  of
    representations concerning a material  matter  going  to  the  risk  on
    return, blood feuds in Iraq, and specifically  in  respect  of  country
    background  information  (CPIN)  "which  the  judge  appeared  to  have
    independently sourced and there was further assertion to the  exclusion
    of other relevant information (51, 52)."

 4. On 29.4.20, the Upper Tribunal issued  directions  proposing  that  the
    error  of  law  decision  be  made  without  a  hearing,  granting  the
    opportunity for further written submissions on the grounds of appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal. In his directions,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-
    Taylor observed  that,  "it  would  appear  as  though  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not simply consider a CPIN that was not relied on by
    either party, but also failed to consider the appropriate (or at  least
    more appropriate) CPIN relating to blood feuds in Iraq."

 5. Subsequent to the issue of the directions, the Upper Tribunal  received
    the following:

      a. The appellant's  further  submissions  on  errors  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal, dated 5.5.20, but raising from
         [22] onwards two further grounds in respect of which permission has
         not been sought or granted;

      b. A separate document of  the  same  date  submitting  that  an  oral
         hearing was necessary, stating that  the  appellant  wished  to  be
         given the opportunity to participate in the proceedings;

      c. The respondent's submissions, dated 18.5.20, resist  the  error  of
         law claims but do not  directly  address  whether  this  should  be
         determined without a hearing;

      d. Finally, the appellant has submitted a reply  to  the  respondent's
         submissions, dated 18.5.20.

 6. Having had regard  to  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals'  Practice
    Direction, Pilot Practice Direction: Contingency  Arrangements  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, to the  UTIAC  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2020, Arrangements during the COVID-19  pandemic,
    and to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    (as amended), and taking account of the views expressed or not  by  the
    parties as to whether to hold a hearing and the form of such a hearing,
    I was satisfied that it was appropriate to determine the error  of  law
    issue  without  a  hearing,  for  the  reasons  set  out  in   decision
    promulgated 1.7.20, including that the primary issue identified in  the
    grant of permission and the Upper Tribunal's directions  was  eminently
    capable of resolution on the written submissions and  did  not  require
    the taking of oral evidence.

 7. I found no merit in a second ground of appeal not referred  to  in  the
    grant of permission, namely that at [43] of the impugned  decision  the
    judge relied on an immaterial factor, namely the coincidence of  timing
    between  the  Home  Office's  refusal  of   the   appellant's   earlier
    submissions and the request for the production of investigation  papers
    through the appellant's uncle relating to the death of a second brother
    of the appellant. However, at [49] of the decision the  judge  accepted
    that the brother was murdered in 2016 but went on at [56] to reject the
    claim that this was connected with or related to their father's alleged
    involvement with the Ba'ath Party. It was is in relation to  the  death
    of the second brother that the judge went on to consider a  CPIN  which
    had not been before the parties.

 8. I also refused permission to add additional grounds  which  were  never
    previously pleaded and in respect  of  which  no  permission  has  been
    granted.

 9. In relation to the first and  primary  ground,  after  considering  the
    written submissions by both parties, I was satisfied  for  the  reasons
    set out in  my  error  of  law  decision,  promulgated  on  1.7.20  and
    summarised below, that there was a material error in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal which required the decision to be set aside and
    remade.

The Error of Law Finding

10. As noted at [51] of the impugned  decision,  the  appellant's  case  as
    advanced  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal   appeal   hearing   was   that
    circumstances relied on by the appellant were  tantamount  to  a  blood
    feud with male members of the family being targeted  because  of  their
    father's prior involvement with the Ba'ath  Party.  After  noting  that
    members of the appellant's family had been able to remain in Iraq after
    his first brother was killed in 2012, and only  relocated  from  Kirkuk
    after the second brother was killed in 2016, and  also  observing  that
    the appellant himself remained in Iraq for four months after the  first
    brother was killed without experiencing any personal threats, the judge
    made reference within the same paragraph of the decision to a CPIN from
    November 2016 addressing in part  the  risk  to  relatives  of  persons
    attacked or threatened because  of  Baathist  affiliation.  The  source
    cited stated that 'everything is possible'. The judge observed at  [52]
    that other than that short paragraph and sentence, there was little  in
    that CPIN to suggest that family members of Ba'ath Party  members  were
    at risk because of their relative's prior association. The  judge  also
    suggested that the passage did not appear to distinguish  between  male
    and female relatives. The judge  considered  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's mother had been able to remain in Iraq undermined the claim
    that the appellant's brothers were killed as a  result  of  the  family
    association with the Ba'ath Party.

11. It follows from the above that CPIN and this reasoning was relied on by
    the judge to undermine the credibility of this part of the  appellant's
    factual claim and was, therefore, directly relevant to the  outcome  of
    the  appeal.  However,  the  CPIN  referred  to  was  not  within   the
    documentation put before the Tribunal by either  party.  The  appellant
    argued that the judge acted unfairly in relying on  this  CPIN  passage
    without giving the appellant the opportunity to respond  to  the  point
    relied on. The grounds also pointed out that other passages within  the
    CPIN provided some (in my view limited)  support  for  the  appellant's
    claim. It was further submitted that the judge  should  have  addressed
    the more appropriate CPIN on blood feuds, which stated that  women  and
    children are unlikely to be victims of blood feuds, which fact arguably
    provided an explanation as to why the appellant's mother  was  able  to
    remain in Iraq without being harmed.

12. Although whether the appellant's brothers had been  killed  because  of
    their father's Ba'ath Party association was at large in the appeal, the
    ground as drafted concerns whether the judge acted fairly in  determine
    the issue in reliance on  material  not  before  the  Tribunal  at  the
    hearing and in respect of which the appellant has had no opportunity to
    respond.

13. I was not persuaded as to the materiality of the  other  extracts  from
    the CPIN relied on by the judge, or of the CPIN on blood  feuds  relied
    on by the appellant. The extracts cited by the appellant in the written
    submissions do not appear to  me  to  bear  directly  on  the  risk  to
    relatives of Ba'ath Party members. However, I was  satisfied  that  the
    reliance on a small extract from the CPIN to suggest that there was  no
    risk to family members of Ba'ath Party affiliates, and to do so without
    giving the appellant the opportunity  to  respond,  was  unfair.  As  I
    stated in the error of law decision, in general it is inappropriate for
    a judge to conduct any post-hearing research of their own and  to  rely
    on any such material identified  in  this  way  without  affording  the
    parties the opportunities  to  make  submissions  on  it,  such  as  by
    reconvening the hearing,  is  unfair  (see  EG  (post-hearing  internet
    research) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00015).

14. I was satisfied that the single error identified was  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal, because it went to the credibility of  the  core
    factual claim in the appeal. I concluded, however, that this was not  a
    decision that could be remade immediately and issued directions for the
    future conduct of the appeal, allowing for submissions  as  to  whether
    the decision could be remade in the Upper Tribunal  or  would  be  more
    appropriately remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, and if  retained  in
    the Upper Tribunal whether the decision could be  remade  in  a  remote
    hearing.

The Issue to be Resolved in the Resumed Hearing

15. Having taken into account responses from both  parties  to  my  earlier
    directions, with neither party objecting to the decision  being  remade
    in the Upper Tribunal in a remote hearing, on 17.8.20 I issued  further
    directions for the conduct of the resumed hearing.

16. In those directions, I confirmed that the only error of law  identified
    was the judge's reliance  on  a  CPIN  extract  without  affording  the
    appellant the opportunity to respond. As this  related  to  the  single
    issue as to whether the appellant's brothers were killed as a result of
    the family's association with the Ba'ath Party and whether there was in
    consequence any risk to the appellant on return  to  Iraq,  I  directed
    that all other credibility findings would be preserved.

Preliminary Matters

17. At the outset of the remote oral hearing, Mr Palmer  informed  me  that
    whilst the appellant was attending, it was not proposed to call him  to
    give oral evidence. I raised with Mr Palmer some concerns  I  had  with
    regard to the police documentation that had been produced to the First-
    tier Tribunal, which I shall further address below. Mr Palmer was given
    leave to take instructions from the appellant (who was in  an  adjacent
    room) on  two  separate  occasions  and  the  hearing  was  temporarily
    adjourned for that reason. There was no application for adjournment  or
    request for the appellant to give oral evidence.

Preserved Findings

18. The following findings are either not in dispute or are preserved:

      a. The appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity;

      b. The family home was in Kirkuk, a former contested area;

      c. The eldest brother was shot dead in 2012;

      d. The second eldest brother was killed in 2016;

      e. The appellant has an Iraqi National Identification Card;

      f. The appellant's claim as to being unable to redocument himself  has
         been rejected as not credible;

      g. The appellant has not lost contact with family members in Iraq  and
         in particular can call upon the practical assistance of  his  uncle
         in Sulaymaniyah which is within the IKR in obtaining a CSID  either
         before or shortly after return to Iraq;

19. Very late in the day and outside the time limits set by the  directions
    issued on 17.8.20, the appellant has submitted his consolidated  appeal
    bundle, together with a skeleton argument, dated 4.11.20. This includes
    the country expert report of Dr Joffre dated 1.11.20, the date of which
    may explain the delay in compliance with directions.

20. All of these matters have been  carefully  considered  and  taken  into
    account, together with the oral submissions made and evidence taken  in
    the remote hearing, before making any findings of fact or  drawing  any
    conclusions. I have borne in mind and applied  the  lower  standard  of
    proof when considering the appellant's claims. Whilst I have  addressed
    matters in the order set out below, I confirm that all of the  evidence
    has first been considered in the context of the whole, whether  or  not
    specifically addressed below.  I  have  also  taken  into  account  and
    applied the decisions in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  Iraq
    CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC) and SMO, KSP & IM (Article  15(c);  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 004100 (IAC), the latter  of  which  was
    issued after the impugned decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  which
    the present appeal relates.

21. The appellant is now 29 years of age. He claims to have  left  Iraq  in
    2012 at the age of 20 and came to the UK. His claim  for  international
    protection was refused by the Home Office and his appeal  against  that
    decision dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in  October  2012  (Judge
    Lea). That decision accepted that the appellant  was  from  Kirkuk  and
    that his eldest brother had been shot dead in February  2012.  However,
    Judge Lea rejected the claim that the family's alleged difficulties  in
    Iraq arose from his father's claimed involvement with the Ba'ath Party;
    concluding that he would not be targeted on return to Kirkuk and  could
    in any event relocate to the IKR.  Judge  Lea  specifically  noted  the
    vagueness of the appellant's account, and that he was unable to provide
    much detail of what precisely his father's role was.

22. The further submissions made  in  2019  relied  on  a  claim  that  the
    appellant's second eldest brother had been killed in  2016  at  a  time
    when the appellant had been in the UK for  approximately  4  years.  He
    also claimed to have lost contact with family members in  Iraq  and  to
    have no CSID to enable him to return to Iraq. However,  Judge  Lea  had
    found that the appellant had an Iraqi personal identification card.

23. In summary, the appellant asserts that the killing of a second  brother
    and the expert evidence country background information  in  the  public
    domain supports his claim that the killing of his brothers is  directly
    linked  to  their  father's  Ba'ath  Party  association  and  justifies
    departure from the  findings  of  Judge  Lea  and  which  render  Judge
    Turner's decision in error of law.

24. Pursuant to Devaseelan, the starting point is the  previous  First-tier
    Tribunal finding that the killing of the eldest brother, the  first  to
    be killed, was not related to the claimed  association  of  the  father
    with the Ba'ath Party. However, I have carefully considered whether the
    evidence now available to the  Tribunal,  including  the  fact  that  a
    second brother was been killed in 2016, as well as the expert  evidence
    and country background information now available,  justifies  departure
    from the previous findings of fact. For the reasons set  out  below,  I
    reach the conclusion that there is no adequate basis to depart from the
    findings of Judge Lea and the findings identified above must stand.

The Country Background Information

25. In considering the appellant's claim to be at risk on return because of
    his father's Ba'ath Party involvement, and his account of his  father's
    role, I  have  carefully  considered  the  current  country  background
    information.

26. Reference in the grounds has been  made  to  the  CPIN  on  Ba'athists,
    reissued in January 2020, which continues to refer to the now  somewhat
    dated Danish fact-finding mission of 2010. The  passage  relied  on  by
    Judge Turner is repeated at 6.4.5, to the effect that  when  questioned
    whether relatives of  persons  threatened  or  attacked  due  to  their
    professional background or Ba'athist affiliation may be  at  risk  from
    armed groups or criminal  gangs,  an  anonymous  'source'  stated  that
    'everything is possible.' As Judge Turner inferred, this  is  not  very
    helpful.

27. However, reference is also made to section 6.4.6 where it is noted that
    the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines identified political  opponents  as  a
    risk category and can  be  arrested  arbitrarily  on  vague  terrorism-
    related charges, often coupled with accusations of Ba'ath  Party  ties.
    In particular, "there are reports that they also single out  Iraqis  of
    various profiles for kidnapping  and  assassination,  including  former
    Ba'athists."

28. At 6.4.7, the source stated that today members  of  the  former  Ba'ath
    Party or the regimes armed forces or security and intelligence services
    "are reportedly no longer systematically  singled  out  for  attack  by
    armed groups. They may still be targeted in individual cases,  although
    the exact motivation behind an attack may not  always  be  known.  Many
    former Ba'athists have found new identities as politicians,  academics,
    tribal leaders, or members of the current Iraqi Security Forces  (ISF).
    It is difficult to determine if attacks against them are  motivated  by
    their role under the former regime or by the person's present profile."

29. I have also taken account of the references from [10]  onwards  in  the
    skeleton argument to other country background information now relied on
    by the appellant, including UNHCR reports and the updated CPINs on Iraq
    Baathists and on Blood Feuds.

30. I accept the country background information that there can be hostility
    to the Ba'ath Party and its former members. However, it is stated  that
    whilst former members of the government and Ba'ath Party continue to be
    targeted, the precise motivation is not clear. It also appears from the
    background information that those targeted are, in general,  those  who
    were in positions of authority or seniority.

31. Whilst it is clear that the appellant's mother has never been  targeted
    despite remaining in Iraq, I accept that the CPIN information is to the
    effect that women and children are unlikely to be the victims of  blood
    feuds; a situation that may have changed more recently. Nevertheless, I
    do not find any reliable or credible evidence to support the  claim  of
    the appellant and/or his family being the victims of a blood  feud,  or
    that the circumstances of this case either amount to or are akin  to  a
    blood feud. Whilst two brothers have been killed, one in 2012  and  the
    other in 2016, the reasons for those tragic events are neither  obvious
    nor objectively discernible from the evidence before the Tribunal.

32. None  of  the  country  background  information  directly  assists  the
    appellant's case. Whilst the information is consistent  with  risk  for
    former Ba'ath Party officials or those in higher roles, the information
    does not directly demonstrate or support the  appellant  claim  of  his
    family being targeted because  of  the  father's  former  Ba'ath  Party
    association and involvement. The Tribunal has to bear in mind,  as  did
    Judge Lea, that tens of thousands of Iraqis cooperated with the Regime.
    Mere assertion of some form of vague role of the father with the Ba'ath
    Party is inadequate to  establish  a  risk  for  this  appellant,  even
    against the background information  and  expert  evidence.  As  Mr  Tan
    pointed out, even now the father's role remains unclear but  could  not
    have been in a senior role or had a higher profile. The  CPIN  extracts
    relied on are suggestive of a risk for those  in  senior  positions  or
    with higher profiles, none of which reflect the account of the father's
    role, which even taking the appellant's case at its highest could  have
    been no more than an informant. That any risk arises now because of the
    father's role is entirely speculative. The assertion that either of the
    appellant's brothers was killed because of their father's Ba'ath  Party
    involvement is even more  speculative.  In  his  witness  statement  of
    23.7.19, the appellant stated, "I maintain that my brother  was  killed
    (by) unknown men but I believe they sought revenge against us due to my
    father's past activities with the Ba'ath Party. I cannot think  of  any
    other reason why would those people attack us and kill my brother other
    than my father's links  and  activities  with  the  Ba'ath  Party."  It
    follows that whilst he may suspect such a link, the appellant does  not
    know and is merely guessing as to the motivation for the two killings.

33. In the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing  before  Judge  Lea,  the
    appellant's account (summarised at [13] to [14] of that  decision)  was
    that his father had been employed by the Ba'ath Regime to spy on people
    and collect information  about  those  who  were  anti-Ba'athist.  This
    allegedly led to people he had reported being  arrested,  detained  and
    sometimes tortured and executed. His father did not wear a uniform,  as
    far as the appellant knew. It is significant that Judge Lea noted that,
    because of his young age at the time, the  appellant  did  not  know  a
    great deal of detail about what his father did.

34. According to the account summarised by Judge Lea, at the  time  of  the
    allied invasion of Iraq in 2003/2004 the appellant's father disappeared
    from the family home and the appellant understood he had fled to Syria.
    At that time, the appellant would have been around 13 years of age. The
    account given by the appellant was that about  6  years  prior  to  the
    hearing in 2012 some strange men came to the house as a result of which
    his family was shaken and upset, but he was not told what  it  was  all
    about. He claimed that occasionally people  would  come  to  the  house
    looking for his father and that this was to seek revenge for  what  had
    happened to their loved  ones  as  a  result  of  his  father's  spying
    activities. On a number of occasions men in a vehicle with a KDPI  flag
    attended the house to question the family about the whereabouts of  his
    father. On occasion they were violent. There was said to  be  telephone
    discussion between one of his brothers and his father, who  offered  to
    make peace by paying compensation, but the men wanted him to return  in
    person and threatened the family.  I  have  carefully  considered  this
    account in the context of the evidence as a whole but in reality  there
    is little if any support for this account.

35.  As stated above, Judge Lea rejected the appellant's factual account of
    the  family  being  targeted  because  of  the  father's  Ba'ath  Party
    activity. The judge found that there was not  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the father was actually  a  Ba'ath  Party  member.  The
    judge considered that there were any number of reasons why his  brother
    might have  been  shot  and  killed  in  2012.  When  interviewed,  the
    appellant was unaware whether the shooting of his brother had even been
    reported to the authorities or any protection sought. Subsequently,  he
    produced documentation suggesting that the killing had been reported in
    February 2012, whilst the appellant was still in Iraq. The judge  found
    it not credible that although he was still in Iraq, the  appellant  was
    unaware of the reporting of the brother's killing to  the  authorities.
    Neither was there any adequate explanation as to why the appellant  was
    to leave Iraq when the next to be targeted would  more  likely  be  the
    second oldest brother. The judge also  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    remained in Iraq for four further months without any  difficulty.  Even
    then, his leaving was not prompted by any attack or even threat; he was
    never threatened whilst in Iraq. I find these points made by Judge  Lea
    to have force and remain valid.

36. Taking  into  account  the  expert  evidence,  the  country  background
    information, the vagueness of the appellant's account and in particular
    as  to  his  father's  role,  there  is  in  reality  no  credible   or
    satisfactory evidence to support the claim that this first brother  was
    killed because of their father's Ba'ath Party membership  or  activity.
    As Judge Lea noted, there could  be  any  number  of  reasons  why  the
    brother was killed, and I am satisfied that the same  argument  applies
    to the killing of the second brother in 2016.

37. In summary, I can find nothing in the evidence sufficient  to  displace
    the finding of Judge Lea that the killing of the eldest brother in 2012
    was not related to any family Ba'ath Party association. Further, on the
    limited evidence, taken in the context of the whole, including  matters
    referred to below, and applying the  lower  standard  of  proof,  I  am
    unable to accept that the killing of the second eldest brother in  2016
    was in  any  way  related  to  their  father's  previous  Ba'ath  Party
    association or activity.

The Police Documentation

38. In assessing the credibility of the appellant's claim, I have carefully
    considered all the documentation adduced in support, including the more
    recent police documentation in relation to the killing of  the  second-
    eldest brother in 2016. Weight to be accorded to evidence is  a  matter
    for me to consider. However, for the reasons set out below, I find that
    only very limited weight can be given to this documentation in  support
    of the appellant's case.

39. Generally, this documentation is of very poor quality,  appears  to  be
    photocopied, and the dates on the documents vary and are to some extent
    inconsistent. In the refusal decision, the respondent has  pointed  out
    that the documentation  includes  a  judge's  investigation  dated  and
    stamped 11.4.16, which date in fact precedes the alleged date of  death
    of the second brother on 13.4.16,  rendering  the  document  unreliable
    and, in my view, not credible. It also tends to undermine the  rest  of
    the police documentation.

40. The testimony of the  appellant's  uncle  allegedly  taken  on  26.4.16
    asserted that both brothers had been killed a "while ago" by a group of
    unknown gunmen, because his sister's husband, the  appellant's  father,
    was a member of the Ba'ath Party who had escaped to Syria, fearing  for
    his life "because  he  was  a  member  of  the  former  system  of  the
    Ba'athists, also they the gangs claim that their  father  (of  the  two
    killed brothers) has tortured  their  family  and  insulted,  for  that
    reason they are taking revenge on his family." The translated  document
    dated 10.10.17 states that the gangs killed both sons  and  "chase  his
    family" but being chased  by  gangs  has  not  been  mentioned  by  the
    appellant. The reference to 'gangs' tends to undermine the  appellant's
    case, but in any event confirms that the assassins are unknown  persons
    and does not demonstrate that the killing was related to  the  father's
    Ba'ath Party involvement. Even  if  the  documents  are  accurate,  the
    assertion of motivation by the uncle making the report is no more  than
    that, an assertion. The theory advanced is not supported by the  Police
    or any investigation or other supporting evidence  and  can  be  little
    more than speculation.

41. The documents also include the appellant's uncle's claim that following
    the shooting, the uncle's brother (KTM)  and  this  appellant  had  not
    returned home and "we did not know their fate." This is repeated in two
    separate documents. However, at the time the appellant was in  the  UK,
    where he had been since 2012, which fact the uncle well knew. Concerned
    about this and the general reliability of the documentation,  I  raised
    this Mr Palmer at the outset of the hearing, resulting  in  his  taking
    further instructions. On return, he  informed  me  that  the  appellant
    could not account for what the documents as translated state  on  their
    face. I also raised concern that the documents relating to the  killing
    of the second eldest brother in 2016 included a map  which  was  marked
    with the legend, 'location of accident.' Despite  further  instructions
    taken, this could not be explained although Mr  Palmer  suggested  that
    his solicitor's reading of the original suggested the word  used  could
    also be translated as 'incident.'  I also pointed out to Mr Palmer that
    in the refusal decision, the respondent had also criticised these  same
    documents, so that the appellant was on notice about the issues. I find
    that the claim made by the uncle in  the  police  report  or  complaint
    about the disappearance  of  the  appellant  seriously  undermines  the
    reliability and credibility of these documents.

42. In summary, none of the documentation explains how the uncle making the
    complaint knows that the killing in either 2012 or  2016  was  for  the
    reasons stated, particularly when it is made clear that the attack  was
    by unknown gunmen. Neither is it explained why there was an  uneventful
    gap of some four years between the killing of  the  eldest  brother  in
    2012 and the second-eldest in 2016. There is  no  evidence  that  there
    were any ongoing threats or actions taken against any family member  in
    the intervening period. There is no credible evidence  to  support  the
    claim that these killings were motivated by the father's  Ba'ath  Party
    role. The issues with the police documentation highlighted  above  begs
    far more questions than it answered in support of the appellant's case.
    I reached the conclusion that the documentation is unreliable and  that
    little  weight  could  be  given  to  it  in  the  overall  credibility
    assessment.

The Expert Report

43. In assessing the claim overall, I have also considered and  taken  into
    account the very recent  country  expert  report  of  Dr  Joffe,  dated
    1.11.20. However, following a long discursive on the history, the  part
    dealing with the appellant's situation is relatively short. Mr Tan made
    a large number of criticisms of the expert report,  including  that  it
    does not appear to take into account the February 2020  CPIN  on  blood
    feuds, which suggest a resurgence  in  attacks  on  women  since  2014.
    Neither does the report engage with  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in 2012. Mr Tan pointed to other deficiencies in  the  report,
    including that it is not clear what materials were considered and  what
    specific instructions Dr Joffe was given or what questions he was asked
    to answer. Mr Tan  submitted  that  the  report  did  not  comply  with
    guidelines for expert reports and was worthy of little weight. For  the
    reasons set out below, I found force in these submissions.

44. The first sentence of the first paragraph at [50] of the  report  makes
    no grammatical sense. The overall impression created by this report  is
    that it has been rushed and is not a considered assessment or  opinion.
    Whilst the author takes his information from  the  appellant's  witness
    statements of 23.7.19  and  28.10.19,  neither  of  these  demonstrates
    anything other than  the  appellant's  speculative  belief  as  to  the
    motivation for the killing. In this regard, it  is  worth  noting  that
    according to the expert report it is stated that it is the  appellant's
    belief or suggestion that those responsible, "were unknown and (he) has
    suggested that they were either criminals or  connected  to  the  Shi'a
    militias that have now come to dominate the security forces  in  Kirkuk
    after the misconceived  independence  referendum  in  September  2017."
    However, the killings were in 2012 and 2016, not 2017. Not only are the
    reported facts inaccurate,  but  it  makes  clear  that  even  now  the
    appellant is unclear as to the motivation for the  attack.  The  report
    takes the appellant's belief at its highest and makes no allowance  for
    it being mere speculation rather than fact. Obviously,  the  assessment
    and expert opinion has to be based on the appellant's case, but took as
    fact assertions which have been rejected  as  not  credible,  including
    that he has lost contact with his family. Dr Joffe  does  not  seem  to
    have been apprised of that preserved finding.

45. It follows from the above that various premises relied on by  Dr  Joffe
    are incorrect or mere speculative and thereby undermine the reliability
    of his professional opinion as to the risk to this appellant. By way of
    further example, at [54(iv)] reference is made to personal  threats  to
    the appellant where there is no evidence of any such threats. Secondly,
    as already pointed out, the assumption that he had  lost  contact  with
    his family and would therefore be alone and lack all family support  is
    incorrect. All of the reasoning appears based on the  account  of  risk
    arising from the father's Ba'ath Party affiliation or activity; without
    which there is basis for any risk on return.

46. There are further difficulties with the report. At [54(v)] there  is  a
    footnote reference to the CPIN on Ba'athists at section 6. However, the
    sources referred to in the CPIN relate to 2015  and  the  treatment  of
    high-ranking officials of the Ba'ath Party. For example at  6.1.14  the
    risk to regular Ba'ath  Party  members  is  assessed  as  minimal.  The
    father's role does not feature in the ranking table  at  3.2.4  of  the
    CPIN. In reality the source relied on by the  expert  report  does  not
    support the point being made; it rather appears that  limited  evidence
    of risk of mistreatment of senior Ba'ath Party members or officials has
    been enlarged and expanded by the expert into risk for  family  members
    of low-level Ba'ath Party associates.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    expert has justified this by any adequate reasoning.  The CPIN does not
    in fact support the case of  their  being  any  real  risk  for  family
    members of low-level Ba'ath Party members.

47. More significantly in relation to risk on return, much of the focus  of
    the report where it addresses the appellant  specifically,  is  on  his
    return to Kirkuk and the single sentence suggesting that relocation  to
    the IKR would not be possible is entirely inadequate and unsupported by
    any evidence or reasoning.

48. In all the circumstances, only limited  weight  can  be  given  to  the
    expert report.

49. Considering the evidence as a whole, I  find  that  the  appellant  has
    failed to demonstrate to  the  lower  standard  of  proof  that  either
    brother's death related to any  alleged  Ba'ath  Party  affiliation  or
    involvement by his father or any  other  family  member.  I  reach  the
    conclusion that there is no real risk for him on return for that or any
    other reason.

Identity Documentation & Return to Iraq

50. In light of the above findings, there is no risk on return to Iraq  for
    the appellant. It follows that there is no basis for risk for actual or
    perceived association with the Ba'ath Party  or  ISIL.  Neither  is  he
    "embroiled in a blood feud" as the grounds assert.

51. Whilst the skeleton argument goes from  [21]  onwards  to  address  the
    issue of documentation, this was addressed by Judge  Turner  from  [57]
    onwards of the First-tier Tribunal decision and I  have  preserved  the
    findings that  the  appellant  has  an  Iraqi  National  Identification
    document and that his claim to be unable to redocument himself  is  not
    credible. It follows that the issue of documentation is  not  open  for
    debate in this decision. However, I note Mr Palmer's  early  submission
    was that the respondent has the  appellant's  CSID  card.  Mr  Tan  was
    unable to confirm this and when I  referred  to  the  findings  of  the
    previous Tribunal, Mr Palmer admitted that he  may  have  confused  the
    CSID with the national identity document referred to. In respect of the
    appellant's claim to have attended the Iraqi Consulate in Manchester in
    order to attempt redocumentation, I pointed out to Mr Palmer that it is
    known  to  the  Tribunal  that  the  Consulate  does  not   deal   with
    documentation and enquiries  are  referred  to  the  Iraqi  Embassy  in
    London. It follows that little significance  can  be  attached  to  the
    appellant's claimed attendance at the Iraqi Consulate.

52. In any event, on the evidence I am satisfied that  return  to  Iraq  is
    feasible. The appellant  has  some  form  of  Iraqi  national  identity
    document and with the support of his family either  in  Kirkuk  or  the
    IKR, he will be able to obtain a CSID  or  other  documentation  before
    leaving the UK to enable him to return to Iraq. SMO confirms that  most
    Iraqis will know their registration volume and page details  by  heart,
    but even if he does not, his family will be able,  either  directly  or
    with the use of an agent, obtain a replacement CSID from  the  Registry
    in Kirkuk, which is relatively close to the IKR. According to  SMO  the
    appellant will likely be able to redocument himself within the  UK,  as
    he will have access to all the information listed there as required.

53. As he does not emanate from the IKR the appellant's return will  be  to
    Baghdad but with a CSID he can travel onwards either to Kirkuk, if that
    is his choice, or to the IKR where he  will  be  admitted  as  a  Kurd.
    Whilst emanates from Kirkuk, he has an uncle in Sulaymaniyah, which  is
    within the IKR, and I have preserved the finding that he has  not  lost
    contact  with  this  uncle,  so  that  will  have  family  support  and
    assistance on return and relocation to the IKR, and will  not  be  left
    destitute or require critical shelter. He is physically able  and  will
    be able to seek  employment  to  sustain  himself,  or  pursue  further
    education.

54. In relation to return to Kirkuk, Mr Tan submitted  that  the  level  of
    Article 15(c) violence in Kirkuk has reduced so that there is  no  risk
    on return on the appellant's profile; the only  possible  risk  factors
    are that he is a Sunni Kurd, which is insufficient to establish a  risk
    on return. SMO held that Kirkuk is ethnically diverse, so that he could
    safely return to his family there. The headnote states, "Following  the
    military defeat of ISIL at the end of 2017 and the resulting  reduction
    in levels of direct and indirect violence, however,  the  intensity  of
    that conflict is  not  such  that,  as  a  general  matter,  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that any civilian returned  to  Iraq,
    solely on account of his presence there, faces a  real  risk  of  being
    subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious  harm  within
    the scope of Article 15(c) QD."

55. The situation in Kirkuk is more complex,  as  SMO  held.  "Whether  the
    return of an individual to such an area would be  contrary  to  Article
    15(c) requires a fact-sensitive, "sliding scale"  assessment  to  which
    the following matters are relevant."  However, the appellant  does  not
    have an actual or imputed association with ISIL. Neither do any of  the
    characteristics at [5] of the headnote  apply  to  this  appellant.  No
    evidence was adduced that the conditions now prevailing in Kirkuk  were
    such as to give  rise  to  an  Article  15(c)  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence. There are no factors  relevant  to  this  case  which  render
    return to Kirkuk unsafe.

56. Further, SMO held, "The living conditions in Iraq as a whole, including
    the Formerly Contested Areas, are unlikely to give rise to a breach  of
    Article 3 ECHR or  (therefore)  to  necessitate  subsidiary  protection
    under Article  15(b)  QD."  "With  the  exception  of  the  small  area
    identified in section A, the general  conditions  within  the  Formerly
    Contested Areas do not engage Article 15 QD(b) or (c) or Article 3 ECHR
    and relocation within the Formerly Contested Areas may obviate  a  risk
    which exists in an individual's home area."

57.  It follows that there is no reason why the appellant could not  return
    safely to Kirkuk. However, having considered SMO, I am  satisfied  that
    he will also be able to relocate to the IKR, if he chose to do so.

58. Neither human rights nor any  other  basis  for  the  appeal  has  been
    pursued.  It follows that the appeal cannot succeed on any basis.

DECISION

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be  set
aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it  on
                    all grounds.



                    Signed:     DMW Pickup

                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                    Date:  9 November 2020

