
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09755/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2019                   |On 6 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     M b
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Capel of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was born on  30  November
    1984.

 2. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision dated 29  July
    2018 to refuse his application for asylum, humanitarian protection  and
    human rights.

 3. Judge Housego  (the  judge)  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 3 December 2018.  The judge did  not  find  the
    appellant to be a credible witness.   The  judge  did  not  accept  the
    appellant would be at risk on return.  As regards Article 8, the  judge
    found the respondent's decision proportionate.

 4. The grounds claim that the judge misdirected himself in law,  that  the
    judge acted unfairly  in  relying  upon  an  unreported  error  of  law
    decision of the Upper Tribunal without giving the  parties  a  copy  of
    that decision or inviting oral submissions on  it  at  the  hearing  or
    subsequently, further that the judge failed to have regard to  relevant
    issues and failed to give adequate reasons.

 5. Judge Grant-Hutchison granted permission to appeal on 28 December 2018.
     She said inter alia as follows:

         "2.  It is arguable that the judge has erred in law

             (a)    by   using   an   unreported   decision   of   the   UT
                  (PA/06221/2017)  as  guidance  indicating  gay  people  in
                  Bangladesh are not generally at risk  without  giving  the
                  parties a copy or inviting submissions;

             (b)  in the interpretation of HJ (Iran) when the appellant has
                  given evidence that he keeps his sexuality  quiet  because
                  of social pressures both in the UK and Bangladesh;

             (c)  by  finding  that  psychiatric  reports  conclusions  are
                  'predicated on the appellant's account  being  true'  when
                  the report is based on the psychiatrist's observations and
                  other  sources  of  information  and  not  merely  on  the
                  symptoms described;

             (d)  by failing to engage in the appellant's explanation for

                  (i)  the timing of his asylum claim and  his  reasons  for
                  rejecting it;

                  (ii) the lack of corroborative evidence; and

                  (iii)     the  mischaracterisation  of   the   appellant's
                      claimed religious beliefs given the evidence that  he
                      has provided including evidence from two  theological
                      experts;

             (e)  by failing to have regard to the  country  expert  report
                  which discloses a risk on  return  for  LGBT  persons  and
                  those holding the appellant's religious beliefs from  both
                  state and non-state actors and

             (f)  by  failing  to  give  any  sustainable  reason  why  the
                  appellant's 'vitality and enthusiasm'  in  discussing  his
                  religious beliefs is  undermining  of  the  psychiatrist's
                  diagnosis of PTSD and depression or her conclusions as  to
                  the severity of his symptoms."

 6. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Ms Capel relied upon the  grounds;  misdirection  in  law,  unfairness,
    failure to have regard to relevant matters, failure to give reasons and
    irrationality.

 8. Mr Lindsay submitted that in the event that I found ground 1(a)  to  be
    made out, that is, the judge relied upon an  unreported  error  of  law
    decision  without  giving  the  parties  a  copy   or   inviting   oral
    submissions, that he accepted that the judge had materially erred.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. I do find that the judge materially erred.  At [57] he said inter  alia
    as follows:

         "57.  The  most  recent  guidance  from  the  Upper   Tribunal   is
             PA/06221/2017, promulgated in March 2018.  This indicates that
             gay people in Bangladesh are not generically  (sic)  at  risk.
             The appellant in that case asserted fear of his father.   Each
             case is fact specific is indicated by the extracts from the UT
             decision below:"

    The judge goes on to quote  extensively  from  [6],  [8]  and  [21]  of
    PA/06221/2017.

10. At [101] of his decision the judge says this:

         "As in the Upper Tribunal case cited above, dismissing an appeal, I
         have not cited the hundreds of pages of objective material provided
         to me individually.   They  are  in  any  case  irrelevant  as  the
         appellant has not passed tests  one  or  two  in  HJ  (Iran).   The
         decision would be excessively long  if  it  went  through  all  642
         pages.  Case law from the Upper Tribunal is set out above.   If  an
         asylum appeal  is  to  succeed  on  the  basis  that,  generically,
         bisexual people from  Bangladesh  are  entitled  to  asylum  or  to
         humanitarian protection then  that  will  have  to  be  decided  on
         appeal.  I am not persuaded  that  the  evidence  supplied  to  me,
         individually or collectively, is such that I should depart from the
         case law in the Upper Tribunal  so  recently  set  out  (above)  in
         PA/06221/2017, in March 2018.  In any event the appellant  has  not
         made out the basis of any of his various claims  for  international
         protection."

11. The judge materially erred with regard to this case as follows:

    (a)  He unfairly relied upon an unreported error of law decision of the
         Upper Tribunal without giving the parties a copy of  that  decision
         or inviting  submissions  on  it  at  the  hearing  or  in  writing
         subsequently.

    (b)  He relied upon such unreported error of law decision of the  Upper
         Tribunal as providing "guidance" on the position of LGBT persons in
         Bangladesh.

    (c)  He treated that unreported error of law  decision  as  having  the
         status of a country guidance case from which departure  had  to  be
         justified.



Notice of Decision

The judge's decision is set aside in its entirety and will be remade in  the
First-tier following a de novo hearing.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 4 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

