
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal Number: PA/09317/2017         |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2020                  |On 19 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                  AR (Iran)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This is an appeal against a reserved decision which was issued by Judge
    Mark Davies following a hearing in Manchester on 9 March 2020.   It  is
    agreed between the parties that the judge erred in  law  and  that  his
    decision falls to be set aside.  It was  in  those  circumstances  that
    Judge Keith considered (in contrast to another  Upper  Tribunal  judge)
    that the appeal was suitable for determination on the papers.  I agree,
    and have accordingly  exercised  my  discretion  under  rule  34(1)  to
    determine the appeal without a hearing.

 2. The appellant claimed asylum on  the  basis  that  he  was  an  Iranian
    national of Kurdish ethnicity who was suspected of association with the
    proscribed KDPI.  The respondent did not accept his nationality or that
    he was of any interest to the Iranian authorities.

 3. Before the judge, it was accepted by the Presenting  Officer  that  the
    appellant  was  an  Iranian  national  of   Kurdish   ethnicity.    His
    credibility remained in issue, however, and the judge ultimately  found
    that his account of events in Iran was  not  reasonably  likely  to  be
    true.  The reasons that the judge came  to  that  conclusion  were,  in
    full, as follows:

         "[25] Whilst  accepting  and  proceeding  on  the  basis  that  the
         appellant is an Iranian national of Kurdish ethnicity, I  find  his
         evidence regarding the activities of his brother and father  to  be
         somewhat vague and lacking in detail.  I do take into  account  the
         appellant's age at the time of those claimed activities.

         [26] I do not accept the appellant's account of why he left Iran.

         [27] The appellant's claim to have distributed leaflets  on  behalf
         of the KDPI is singularly lacking in detail and I  do  not  believe
         that the appellant has given truthful evidence in that regard.  The
         appellant's claim that his friend Ali gave his name to the  Iranian
         authorities is pure conjecture on the appellant's  behalf,  in  any
         event I do not accept that is reasonably likely as I do not  accept
         he distributed leaflets as he claims."

 4. The judge then took into account the appellant's sur place activity  on
    Facebook before dismissing the appeal.

 5. The first ground of appeal was to be expected,  in  the  circumstances.
    It is that the judge gave legally  inadequate  reasons  for  concluding
    that the appellant's account of events pre-flight  was  not  reasonably
    likely to be true.

 6. In her written submissions in response to the grounds  of  appeal,  the
    respondent accepts that the decision  is  flawed  and  that  it  cannot
    stand.  She does not set out which of the complaints in the grounds  is
    accepted to be made out but it is appreciably clear, given what I  have
    set out above, that the respondent could not sensibly submit  that  the
    judge's  conclusions  on  the  appellant's   pre-flight   account   are
    sustainable. He failed to set out with any clarity at all the  respects
    in which he considered the  appellant's  account  to  be  lacking.   He
    expected the appellant - who was a child at the material times and  was
    suffering from some mental health problems - to account for the actions
    of his family members.  There is, in  sum,  not  a  single  sustainable
    reason given by the  judge  for  the  conclusions  he  reached  in  the
    paragraphs I have reproduced above.

 7. It is unsurprising that Judge Norton-Taylor, who reviewed these  papers
    at an  earlier  stage  in  its  passage  through  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    considered the grounds to have real merit.  Whether as a result of that
    observation or otherwise, the respondent has  quite  properly  conceded
    that the decision cannot stand.  I agree, and the proper course is  for
    this appeal to be remitted to be heard again by another  judge  of  the
    FtT, given the absence of any real consideration  in  the  decision  of
    Judge Mark Davies.  It is regrettable that I am required to  make  that
    order, given that the appeal has been remitted  once  before,  but  the
    conclusion is inevitable in these circumstances.

 8. The parties are not fully ad idem as regards the scope of the remittal.
     The respondent submitted that the appeal should be remitted  de  novo.
    The appellant's solicitors (Greater Manchester  Immigration  Aid  Unit)
    objected to that course, noting that there was no principled basis upon
    which  the  respondent  could  resile  from  the  concession  that  the
    appellant is an Iranian national.  I agree, and  I  consider  that  the
    concession (which was made  by  a  Senior  Presenting  Officer)  should
    remain in place for the remitted hearing.   With  that  exception,  the
    appeal must be reheard afresh.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT is set aside because it contained an error  of  law.
The appeal is hereby remitted to the FtT to be heard  afresh,  although  the
respondent's acceptance of the appellant's nationality is preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                            19 November 2020
