
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09363/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                         |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On: 6th December 2017                        |On: 11th December 2017        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Ms Evans, Waddell Taylor Bryan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran, born  in  1994.  He  appeals  with
    permission[1] against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    O'Brien) to dismiss his appeal on human rights and protection grounds.





    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 2. When he claimed asylum on the 10th March 2016  the  Appellant  asserted
    that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in Iran for  reasons  of
    his political opinion,  namely  association  with  the  banned  Kurdish
    militant group 'PJAK' ('Free Life Party of Kurdistan').  In particular,
    he claimed that he had sheltered an injured  PJAK  peshmerga  and  that
    this had come to the attention of the Iranian security services who had
    raided his home, and in his absence arrested  his  mother  and  sister.
    The Respondent did not find the claim to be plausible, questioning  how
    the Iranian authorities could possibly  have  known  that  the  injured
    fighter was in the Appellant's  house.   She  further  noted  that  the
    Appellant had been unable to identify where the PJAK headquarters  are.
    Protection was refused.


 3. The Appellant pursued an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, which  came
    before Judge O'Brien on the 11th January 2017. The Appellant gave  live
    evidence.  The Tribunal attached little weight to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant  had  not  mentioned  that  PKAJ  are  based  in  the  Qandil
    mountains; he was asked about their activities in Iran so could not  be
    expected to have mentioned their base in Iraq.  Nor  did  the  Tribunal
    think that the Appellant could be expected to know how the Etelaat knew
    that the man was on his property.  That said,  the  determination  goes
    on:


         "However, of more concern to the Tribunal is  how  the  authorities
         came to search the shop  of  a  person  previously  unsuspected  of
         illegal activities within only a short  time  of  an  injured  PJAK
         member having arrived there. It was the Appellant's  evidence  that
         he left the shop 15 minutes after the injured man had  arrived  and
         gone to his nearby friend's house, and that he had asked his friend
         to check up on his shop  only  30  minutes  later.  Therefore,  the
         authorities must have raided the shop well within an  hour  of  the
         injured man arriving. Given that the man arrived  in  the  dead  of
         night in a small rural village,  I  find  it  incredible  that  the
         authorities could have found out so quickly".


 4. The Tribunal made two further negative credibility findings. First,  it
    was not credible that  the  Appellant  would  have  left  the  property
    himself, fearing implication, but left his mother and sister  there  to
    be arrested. Second, there  were  significant  inconsistencies  in  the
    account given. In oral evidence he had said that he had been visited by
    a man whom he recognised to be a PJAK contact because  he  had  used  a
    known code word; this man had told him that the injured  fighter  would
    be coming, which he did a few minutes later. In  his  asylum  interview
    the Appellant had made no mention of this first man,  stating  that  it
    was the peshmerga who had given the code.  These  matters,  taken  with
    the fact that the Appellant failed to claim asylum in a safe country en
    route, meant that he had failed to discharge the burden  of  proof  and
    the appeal was dismissed.


 5. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on the 24th July
    2017 on the grounds that it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had made  findings  on  the  basis  of  what  it  thought  the  Iranian
    authorities might do, without identifying any proper  evidential  basis
    for  its  conclusions.  Before  me  Ms  Evans  adopted  that  grant  of
    permission and argued that the bulk of the findings in this  case  were
    premised on what the judge thought might plausibly  occur  in  a  rural
    village in Iranian Kurdistan. She argued that it was settled  law  that
    decision-makers in this jurisdiction should be slow  to  project  their
    notions of reasonable, or probable behaviour, into other contexts  with
    which they may not be familiar. She placed particular reliance  on  the
    decision in HK v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA
    Civ 1037.

 6. Mrs Aboni agreed that the use of the term "incredible" (in the  passage
    set out above) was unfortunate, but that the Judge had been entitled to
    evaluate the plausibility of the overall claim. The findings  had  been
    open to the First-tier Tribunal and the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department asked that I uphold the decision.



    Discussion and Findings


 7. The first point taken against the Appellant by the First-tier  Tribunal
    is the issue about how and why the security  services  arrived  at  his
    door in order to apprehend the peshmerga. I confess to  being  somewhat
    baffled by the seemingly contradictory findings between  paragraphs  41
    and 42. At 41 the Tribunal states "the Appellant can  be  forgiven  for
    not knowing how the authorities were alerted to  the  presence  of  the
    injured PJAK member in his shop", only to go on, at  paragraph  42,  to
    find it "incredible" that they would arrive on the  scene  so  quickly,
    given that it was the dead of night in the middle of the countryside. I
    think it at least arguable that these are two sides of the  same  coin.
    If he could be forgiven for not knowing how they were  on  to  him,  it
    seems churlish not to forgive him for not knowing how they were  on  to
    him so quickly. I can think of at  least  one  possible,  and  obvious,
    explanation for their appearance, which is that the peshmerga was being
    followed.  That might in itself raise other questions but it serves  to
    illustrate  why   decision-makers   should   avoid   using   the   term
    "incredible".     It is not impossible to believe this account, because
    there is at least one obvious explanation for what happened.


 8. Similarly, the term "incredible" is  used  again  in  paragraph  43  in
    relation to the Appellant's decision to leave his mother and sister  in
    the  flat  above  the  shop  where  the  peshmerga  was  resting.   The
    Appellant's explanation for this is  quite  straightforward.  They  had
    nothing to do with his shop, which is a separate property. He assumed -
    rightly as it turns out - that the security services would be satisfied
    that  the  women  were  innocent  (although  they  were  taken  in  for
    questioning they  were  quickly  released).  It  is  not  evident  from
    paragraph 43 that this explanation was considered.  It was, I  suspect,
    these passages that led Judge Rintoul to grant permission.

 9. They are not however the only points taken against the Appellant in the
    determination. Paragraph 44 notes a significant  inconsistency  in  his
    account in that in his asylum interview he explained that  the  injured
    man came to his door and he let him in because he gave a PJAK codeword;
    whereas in oral evidence he asserted that another man had come  to  his
    house first, he had given the codeword and then explained that in a few
    moments the peshmerga  would  arrive.   In  her  submissions  Ms  Evans
    suggested that the asylum interview [at Q64-65] is ambiguous about  how
    many men there were,  and submitted that there may not in fact  be  any
    inconsistency at all. I am afraid I am unable to share her  reading  of
    those answers. At Q62 the Appellant is asked how he came  to  help  the
    injured party member.  The Appellant explains that it was about 9pm  on
    a winter's night. He is then asked:

         "Q64. How did you come to help him what happened?


            He knocked on our door and gave the name of  a  person  I  knew,
         that
           he's sent him. At first I was concerned I said I don't know him,
           then he said the code word 'is your black cow still alive?' then
           I realised its safe, he belonged to the party"


         Q65.  How was he injured?


            He was shot in the leg"


    It is quite apparent from these answers that "he" is a reference to the
    injured party member, who had been shot in the leg. I am satisfied that
    the Tribunal was correct to have identified  the  introduction  of  the
    second man as a significant inconsistency in the account,  and  it  was
    one that the Tribunal was entitled to find  considerably  lessened  the
    weight to be attached to the Appellant's evidence.


10. A further discrepancy is identified in the same  passage  in  that  the
    Appellant had given variant evidence about how many  code  words  there
    were. In both interview and in his statement dated 20th  December  2016
    the Appellant had said that there was one codeword "is your  black  cow
    still alive" whereas in his oral evidence the Appellant had  said  that
    was one example and that they had used multiple codewords.    Of  this,
    and the preceding matter, the First-tier Tribunal  found  "it  is  such
    inconsistencies, which the Appellant was given an opportunity to answer
    today, which lead me to conclude that the account is false and that the
    Appellant has forgotten what he had previously told the Respondent".


11.  Caution  should  always  be  exercised  when   attaching   weight   to
    inconsistencies in evidence.  False accounts can be expertly  delivered
    with precision, just as perfectly true accounts  can  be  confused  and
    contradictory. In this case however I am satisfied that the  First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled to treat the two discrepancies that it identified
    in the evidence as determinative. The Appellant is not someone who  has
    suffered ill-treatment, nor has far as we are  aware,  does  he  suffer
    from any mental health issues or cognitive impairment. The Tribunal had
    to ask itself whether this account was reasonably likely  to  be  true,
    and given the nature of those discrepancies, which  went  to  the  very
    core of the claim, it was entitled to find that even  that  low  burden
    had not been discharged.  Accordingly  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    unfortunate use of the term "incredible", discussed above, can  vitiate
    this decision.



    Decisions


14. The First-tier Tribunal decision does not contain an error of law  such
    that it should be set aside.

15. There is an order for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           7th December 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 24th July 2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge
Rintoul


