
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09825/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2019                  |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     N J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons, Counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow office)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Afghanistan, has permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge Black of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 12
    October 2018 dismissing his appeal against the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on  4  October  2017  refusing  to  grant  protection.   The
    appellant's appeal had originally come before another Judge of the  FtT
    but his decision had been set aside.

2.   The grounds of appeal on which permission was granted were twofold,  it
    being alleged:

    (1)  first, that the judge's approach  to  credibility  was  flawed  by
         virtue  of  failing  to   take   into   account   the   appellant's
         vulnerability as attested to by the medical evidence, in particular
         the ("uncontradicted") report of Professor Katona; and

    (2)  that the judge made inconsistent and/or inadequate findings on the
         appellant's relationship with his uncle, and failed  to  apply  the
         lower standard of proof.

3.   I express my gratitude  to  both  representatives  for  their  targeted
    submissions.

4.   I am not persuaded ground (1) is made out.

5.   First of all, the judge clearly did take into  account  and  apply  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 on vulnerable  witnesses:
    see paragraph 6 and other paragraphs I shall refer to next.

6.    Second  whilst  the  judge  plainly  attached  significant  weight  to
    Professor Katona's report, noting at 39  that  his  "expertise  is  not
    challenged before me" and that "due weight" was to  be  given  to  "his
    opinion on the impact of symptoms of PTSD on the  ability  of  a  young
    person to give a full and  clear  account  and  being  able  to  answer
    questions in a perceived adversarial environment", the  judge  did  not
    consider Professor Katona's report conclusive and in the same paragraph
    spelt out very clearly her reasons why:

         "39. However, Professor  Katona  says  himself  he  has  given  his
             opinion both on the basis of what he  has  been  told  by  the
             appellant and on his own observations.  He first examined  the
             appellant  in  January  2018,  about  eight  years  after  the
             appellant  claimed  asylum.   As  Professor   Katona   himself
             observes, there were significant discrepancies in the  account
             as to where the appellant's father  was  killed  and  while  I
             accept "people who  have  been  traumatized  may  be  markedly
             suggestible when under pressure and say what they think  their
             questioner wants to hear", this is a case where the  appellant
             has given various accounts in different environments:  in  two
             interviews,  in  his  asylum  statement  and  in  two   appeal
             statements  and  in  oral   evidence.    He   has   had   many
             opportunities over the years to provide a coherent account and
             to address the discrepancies identified by Judge Page.   While
             I accept he was probably suffering from "full-blown  PTSD"  at
             the time of  the  interviews,  the  inconsistencies  are  very
             significant indeed and go to the core of his  claim  that  his
             father was shot by the Taliban.   I  take  Professor  Katona's
             opinion into account in the round but do  not  consider  that,
             without more, it is sufficient to  explain  or  undermine  the
             findings  of  the  Judge  on  the   existence   of   "massive"
             discrepancies in the appellant's evidence given over time."

7.   In several subsequent paragraphs the judge makes abundantly clear  that
    she did not consider the report of Professor Katona afforded sufficient
    basis   to   explain   the   breadth   of   the   appellant's   various
    inconsistencies: see especially paragraphs 54, 67, 68 and 74.

8.   Third, as Professor Katona himself acknowledged in his  report,  it  is
    ultimately a matter for the judge taking into account the  totality  of
    the evidence, including the medical evidence to assess credibility  and
    it  is  entirely  clear  that  the  judge  did  approach  the  evidence
    holistically.

9.   Fourth, the judge did not simply place the professor's opinion  on  one
    side and her overall assessment on the other, but went through  all  of
    the main shortcomings in the appellant's evidence (vagueness  and  lack
    of detail as well as inconsistencies).   In  this  regard,  the  judge,
    noted specifically that, despite having the opportunity to explain  the
    discrepancies identified in his account, first by  the  respondent  and
    then by Judge Page, the appellant had  been  unable  to  satisfactorily
    explain them: see paragraph 56.  That was clearly a  correct  approach,
    particularly given that there was no medical evidence before Judge Page
    and so the new medical evidence had to be assessed as to its  relevance
    to credibility.  At paragraph 63 the judge concluded:

         "63. Whilst I take into account the psychiatric evidence  and  give
             it evidential weight, there are so many inconsistencies in the
             appellant's  evidence  that  it  calls   into   question   his
             reliability and credibility as a  witness.  The  core  of  the
             appellant's claim is not complex yet it is inconsistent.   The
             appellant's illiteracy, lack  of  education  and  poor  mental
             health   do   not   sufficiently   explain   the   significant
             discrepancies and inconsistencies in his account."

10.  I  consider  that  assessment  to  be  entirely  within  the  range  of
    reasonable responses.

11.  In light  of  my  foregoing  observations,  I  regard  Ms  Fitzsimons's
    submissions as  essentially  asking  me  to  set  aside  Judge  Black's
    decision simply because she did not consider Professor Katona's opinion
    determinative of credibility.  Yet the judge's  credibility  assessment
    was entirely within the range of reasonable responses.   Ms  Fitzsimons
    submitted that Judge Black misunderstood Professor Katona and  had  not
    given his report a "fair reading".   She  pointed  in  this  regard  to
    paragraph 55 where the judge said:

         "55. I take into account that the appellant's account of  his  life
             in Afghanistan  is  broadly  consistent  with  the  background
             material: his inability to go to school due to the  prevailing
             conditions in his home area; his experience of explosions  and
             the presence of the Taliban in Nangarhar.  I also  acknowledge
             that these experiences  would  have  been  traumatic  for  the
             appellant as would his experiences  while  travelling  out  of
             Afghanistan and to the UK, the refusal of  his  asylum  claim,
             the  dismissal  of  his  appeal,  his  precarious  immigration
             status, his departure from the home of his foster  parents  in
             the UK and his inability to finish  his  course  of  education
             here.  The medical evidence does not  suggest  that  his  poor
             mental health is due to any single event and particularly  not
             one which occurred in Afghanistan, such as the  death  of  his
             father or any threats by the Taliban.  The medical evidence is
             not sufficient  to  demonstrate  a  causal  link  between  the
             claimed past persecution and his present symptoms."

    I am unable to agree that this constitutes an  unfair  reading  of  the
    Professor's report.  Nowhere in the Professor's report  does  he  state
    that the appellant's PTSD was caused  by  his  adverse  experiences  in
    Afghanistan; at paragraph 7.3.6 he  simply  states  that  they  can  be
    attributed to "medication, substance abuse or other illness".

12.  Turning to ground (2), this outlines that  one  of  the  key  arguments
    before Judge Black was that since the hearing before Judge  Page  there
    was now new evidence showing that the appellant had made  contact  with
    an uncle who was able to corroborate his claim.  It was submitted  that
    a French asylum court had found Mr AKJ to be credible and  had  granted
    him asylum and that this was very pertinent  to  the  appellant's  case
    since  this  man's  evidence  was  consistent  with  the   appellant's,
    describing threats to his family, departure from Afghanistan  with  his
    nephew.  The common circumstances were listed as being:

    a)   Both share the same surname;

    b)   Both are from Nangarhar;

    c)   Both left Afghanistan at the same time;

    d)   Their accounts about the core index events are broadly consistent;



    e)   They both disclosed in different jurisdictions that they had  fled
         to Kabul: in the Appellant's case, with his uncle, and in Mr  AKJ's
         claim, with his nephew;

    f)   Mr AKJ was found to be credible by the French  court  and  granted
         asylum on that basis;

    g)   The Appellant was arrested and detained  by  the  Respondent  when
         seeking to depart the UK for France, at the time he claims  he  re-
         established contact with his uncle.

13.  It was said that the judge' s reasons for disbelieving  that  this  man
    was the appellant's uncle were internally inconsistent  and  relied  on
    too high a standard of proof.

14.  I am unable to accept the proffered criticisms.   In  the  first  place
    the judge gave sound reasons for disbelieving the  claimed  connection,
    noting inter alia that the appellant had given a different  reason  for
    his flight than that provided in the evidence from the  uncle  and  his
    family (paragraph 42); that the appellant had not made mention prior to
    1 October 2018 of having a brother, Adil  and  had  given  inconsistent
    accounts of his siblings (paragraph 43); that the appellant's  previous
    mention of a maternal uncle  was  of  someone  of  very  different  age
    (paragraph 44); that the appellant's and this man's evidence as to  the
    date the appellant's father was killed and whether  the  appellant  had
    gone  to  school,  was  different  (paragraphs  45-46,;  and  that  the
    appellant had referred to fleeing Afghanistan with his maternal  uncle,
    whereas he said this man was his paternal  uncle  (paragraph  51).   At
    paragraph  58  the  judge  properly  concluded  in   light   of   these
    shortcomings, that Mr AKJ (who gave evidence by way of video link)  was
    credible in relation to the appellant's claim.

15.  Secondly, the only substantive  challenge  to  these  adverse  findings
    (separately from ground 1) was to  assert  that  they  were  internally
    inconsistent in view of what the judge had said at paragraph 65

         "65. In his statement dated 5 October 2016 the appellant refers  to
             staying with an elderly and distant relative in Kabul. He  has
             telephone contact with his mother.  His  mother  and  siblings
             live in Nangarhar. Mr [AKJ] also told me that the  person  who
             put the appellant and [him]in contact on  facebook,  lives  in
             Afghanistan. This suggests the appellant has retained  contact
             via social media and telephone  with  family  and  friends  in
             Afghanistan and undermines his evidence that he has no support
             there."

    I do not accept that there is internal  inconsistency.   Ms  Fitzsimons
    argues that this shows that the judge must first have accepted that  Mr
    AKJ was in fact his uncle and that "that is the only  logical  reading"
    of the said paragraph.  However, the function of  paragraph  65  is  to
    highlight a further point of internal inconsistency in the  appellant's
    and AJK's evidence; it is not to make a judicial finding of  fact.   It
    refers first of all to what  the  appellant  said  about  relatives  in
    Afghanistan and then to what Mr AJK "also told me".

16.  As regards the contention that the judge imposed too  high  a  standard
    of proof, that is not borne out by the decision.  The  judge  correctly
    identified at paragraph 17 that the standard of proof she had to  apply
    was the lower standard and there is nothing said elsewhere  to  suggest
    that any standard other than the low one was applied.

17.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law in either of the two respects  contended  for  in  the  grounds.
    Accordingly the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must
    stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 8 March 2019
           [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
