
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09580/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th January 2019                          |On 12th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     SKN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen of Counsel instructed by Warnapala &
Company
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge James made
    following a hearing at Birmingham on 23rd October 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan with a disputed age, but  the
    judge accepted the respondent's contention that  he  was  born  on  1st
    August 1999.  He comes from the  Kunduz  province  of  Afghanistan  and
    arrived in the UK when he was 12 years old.  The judge accepted that he
    was to be treated as a vulnerable witness since he has had  significant
    health issues including  a  period  of  six  months  in  a  psychiatric
    hospital, having been diagnosed as a paranoid schizophrenic.

 3. The judge relied in the main on the  credibility  findings  made  by  a
    previous judge at a hearing in April 2016.

 4. The judge wrote:

         "I have considered all of the  evidence  before  me  but  with  the
         exception of finding that the appellant is an  Afghan  national,  I
         find no basis to depart from the findings  of  Judge  Sullivan.   I
         find that the appellant has not discharged the  burden  of  proving
         his claimed date  of  birth,  his  father's  involvement  with  the
         Taliban,  his  father's  death  or  that  he  has  no   family   in
         Afghanistan".

 5. He said that he was mindful of the  decision  in  N  v  UK  Application
    26565/05 and the decision in KH (Afghanistan) v SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    1354.  He considered that asylum seekers with mental  illness  with  no
    families could not be  considered  to  be  very  exceptional.   He  was
    satisfied that there were medical facilities  including  mental  health
    facilities in Kabul.  His condition was not such that on  a  return  to
    Afghanistan that he would reach the threshold of a breach of Article 3.
     He was satisfied that the appellant  did  not  face  a  real  risk  of
    persecution on return to Kabul.

 6. He dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had not properly assessed the viability of the  appellant's  return  to
    Kabul.  He appeared to have considered Kabul through applying a test of
    exceptionality rather than reasonableness.  Neither had the judge  made
    any reference to the argument made in the grounds  that  the  appellant
    could  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  by  reference  to  very
    significant obstacles.  His conclusions in respect of  the  appellant's
    age were also challenged.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Smith on 6th  December  2018,
    on the basis that the First-tier original judge had arguably  erred  in
    respect of his  consideration  of  the  viability  of  the  appellant's
    returning to Kabul and had  arguably  misapplied  the  decision  in  AS
    (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118.

 9. Mr Walker did not seek to defend this determination.

Consideration as to whether there is a Material Error of Law

10. Undoubtedly the judge erred in his analysis of  the  viability  of  the
    appellant's return to Kabul, appearing to  apply  the  wrong  test  and
    failing to have proper regard to a material factor, namely that this is
    an appellant with a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia  who  has  been
    sectioned for a period of six months in the recent past.  The  decision
    is set aside.

Further Submissions

11. Mr Walker acknowledged that the appellant comes from one  of  the  most
    troubled areas of Afghanistan where there has  been  a  great  deal  of
    displacement.  He recognised that the appellant left there  many  years
    ago when he was only 12 and that there was no proper basis  upon  which
    it could be concluded that there was a support network for  him  either
    in his home area or in Kabul.  He did  not  take  any  issue  with  the
    medical evidence and did not seek to  persuade  me  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for him to return.

12. Ms Allen took  me  through  the  medical  evidence  and  the  objective
    evidence and the relevant passages of AS and  asked  me  to  allow  the
    appeal.

Findings and Conclusions

13. First, the home area where the appellant comes from is Kunduz.   It  is
    an area of high Taliban activity.  The Country  of  Information  Report
    Afghanistan describes a number of serious incidents  and  accepts  that
    the Taliban continue to pose serious threats.  It  names  a  number  of
    different kidnappings, capturing of the bazar  in  Qala-e-Zal  district
    and fighting with government forces through drone strikes and other air
    attacks throughout the province.  From 2015 there  has  been  a  strong
    Taliban presence and activity there, and  access  to  the  province  is
    limited.  Taliban fighters have  looted  and  tortured  houses  of  ALP
    personnel and other pro-government people in the city  as  well  as  in
    outer districts.

14. The latest  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  dated  April  2018
    describes the Taliban fully controlling 34 districts and controlling or
    contesting nearly all of the districts in  the  northern  provinces  of
    Kunduz and Baghlan.  As a consequence, there has been a great  deal  of
    displacement following an escalation in the conflict with at least  100
    families being displaced in April 2016.

15. The Tribunal in AS also refer to the UNOCHA Humanitarian Needs Overview
    2018 which includes Kunduz as one of the four provinces in the  highest
    category for severity of needs where multiple  needs  converge  and  an
    integrated response is required.  In fact, there have  been  airstrikes
    on the appellant's  own  area  of  Dashti-i-Archi  reported  in  Hoping
    against Hope Afghans in Kunduz trapped by conflict, a report dated  4th
    April 2018.  There are over 13,000 internally displaced Afghans in  the
    province and Kunduz hosts the highest number of Afghans who  have  left
    their homes due to the ongoing conflict, according to a  recent  report
    from the UN Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

16. Mr Walker did not seek to argue that the appellant could return to  his
    home area.

17. This is not simply because he comes from a very  violent  province  and
    that he left there when he was 12 years old in 2012, but  also  because
    of his specific medical needs.

18. The appellant produced a detailed psychiatric report  for  the  hearing
    before  the  judge  compiled  by  Dr   Ranbir   Singh,   a   consultant
    psychiatrist, dated 14th September 2018.  The report states that he has
    a limited ability to live independently, possibly  due  to  his  mental
    health needs and related vulnerabilities.  The psychiatrist  said  that
    he continues to be a very vulnerable individual  and  could  easily  be
    influenced and led by others which needs to be monitored very  closely.
    He considered that it was highly  likely,  in  the  absence  of  mental
    health services input and stable accommodation, that his mental  health
    would disintegrate, escalating risks to his own  health  (illicit  drug
    use), own safety (vulnerability, suicidal risk, easy target by  radical
    groups), and safety of others (assaultive behaviour) both in the UK and
    Afghanistan.  In the psychiatrist's view  he  would  continue  to  need
    similar care that he is receiving at present.

19. The Tribunal in AS considered what medical care was available in Kabul.
     At paragraph 141 the Tribunal wrote:

         "141.    In summary, that report recorded evidence that Afghanistan
                had made  progress  in  providing  healthcare,  but  serious
                obstacles persisted.  A Basic Package of Healthcare Services
                system was introduced in 2003 with the aim of providing  the
                minimum essential health services in all primary  healthcare
                facilities.  The  Essential  Package  of  Hospital  Services
                followed in 2005.  These have  improved  the  situation  but
                there is inequality of access to healthcare for  women  (due
                to a lack of female healthcare professionals) and  those  in
                rural areas; there are financial barriers to individuals and
                problems of  corruption,  insecurity  and  poor  regulation.
                Separately there is a private healthcare system, but  it  is
                very expensive.

         142. In terms of mental healthcare, the same EASO  Report  recorded
                very high levels of mental health  problems  in  Afghanistan
                (particularly  depression,  anxiety   and   PTSD)   creating
                significant needs but that  there  was  a  lack  of  trained
                professionals (psychiatrists, social workers, psychologists)
                and  an  inadequate  infrastructure.   Although  the  Public
                Health Minister reported that  psychological  services  were
                available at some 1,500 health centres  around  the  country
                with 300 dedicated mental health clinics; there was only one
                dedicated mental health hospital in Kabul and Samual  Hall's
                study in 2016 referred to there  being  only  three  trained
                psychiatrists  and  ten  psychologists  in  the   whole   of
                Afghanistan.

         143. In Kabul specifically, there is better  access  to  healthcare
                than in the provinces and  the  most  qualified  staff  work
                there with specialist clinics and hospitals; albeit there is
                still significant room for  improvement.   There  remains  a
                shortage of equipment and  demand  which  outstrips  supply.
                Nearly  half  of  Kabul  residents  cannot  afford   medical
                treatment (as patients need to buy their own medicines  and,
                in any event, pharmacies are poorly  equipped).   There  are
                also instances of health facilities being targeted by  armed
                groups, including in Kabul".

20. The reasons  for  refusal  letter  refers  to  a  single  facility  for
    inpatient treatment  by  a  psychiatrist  available  at  the  Ali  Abad
    Hospital, Kabul University and outpatient treatment  and  follow-up  by
    psychiatrists available at a private clinic.

21. The question here of course is whether the appellant would in fact have
    the ability to access the very limited  treatment  that  is  available,
    particularly since the psychiatrist who provided the  report  considers
    him to be extremely vulnerable and not able to live independently.

22. The Tribunal in AS concluded at paragraph 230 as follows:

         "230.    Our findings above show that it is not generally unsafe or
                unreasonable for a single healthy man to internally relocate
                to  Kabul.   However,  we  emphasise  that  a   case-by-case
                consideration of whether internal relocation  is  reasonable
                for a particular person is required  by  Article  8  of  the
                Qualification Directive and domestic  authorities  including
                Januzi and AH (Sudan).  When  doing  so,  we  consider  that
                there are a number of specific factors which may be relevant
                to bear in mind.  These include,  individually  as  well  as
                cumulatively (including consideration that the  strength  of
                one factor  may  counteract  and  balance  the  weakness  of
                another factor):

                (i)    Age,  including  the  age  at  which  a  person  left
                    Afghanistan.

                (ii)    Nature and quality of connections to  Kabul  and/or
                    Afghanistan.

                (iii)   Physical and mental health.

                (iv)   Language, education and vocational and skills".

    Applying those considerations, the appellant left Afghanistan  when  he
    was 12 and is now 19 years of age.  He  therefore  did  not  spend  his
    formative years in Afghanistan.

23. He has no connections with Kabul, his own evidence is that  his  mother
    left for Iran and his contention that he has no relatives left  in  his
    home area is wholly consistent with  the  significant  displacement  in
    Kunduz.  His mental health is extremely poor.  It is quite  clear  that
    he  is  very  dependent  on  significant  medication  and  has   needed
    significant intervention in order to function.  He is currently on anti-
    psychotic and anti-depressant medication.  He is  not  highly  educated
    and has no particular skills.

24. The Tribunal in AS  were  quite  clear  that  their  conclusions  refer
    throughout to a single male in good health.   They  said  at  paragraph
    234:

         "We were not provided with any  specific  evidence  of  the  likely
         impact  of  poor  physical  or  mental  health  on  the  safety  or
         reasonableness of internal relocation  to  Kabul  but  consider  it
         reasonable to infer that this could be relevant to  the  issue  and
         the specific situation of the individual would need to be carefully
         considered".

25. Mr Walker quite properly did not seek to argue that relocation to Kabul
    would be reasonable for this appellant.  I agree.

Notice of Decision

26. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is set aside.  It is re-
    made as follows.  The appellant's appeal is  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.

27. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed[pic]                             Date 7 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor






