
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09608/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th January 2019               |On 6th February 2019               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                  HAMID [N]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms H Cosgrove, Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Juliet Grant-Hutchison dismissing an appeal on protection and
      human rights grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity.  His appeal
      was originally heard before the First-tier Tribunal in March 2017 but
      the resulting decision was set aside on appeal by the Upper Tribunal
      and the appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. According to the appellant, in Iran he became involved in KDPI
      activities.  He was detained and mistreated.  After being released on
      bail he left Iran to avoid a long prison sentence.  In the UK he has
      been involved in KDPI activities and has posted information about his
      involvement on Facebook.

   4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not find credible the
      appellant's evidence of his activities in Iran for the KDPI or of his
      alleged detention there.  The judge found the authorities in Iran had
      no adverse interest in the appellant before he left.  Her findings in
      this regard are not challenged.

   5. The judge further found that there was no reasonable likelihood the
      appellant would come to the attention of the authorities on his return
      to Iran due to his sur place activities in the UK on behalf of KDPI.

   6. A challenge has been brought against this finding.  Permission to
      appeal was granted on several grounds.  It was arguable that the judge
      had failed to consider the totality of the appellant's evidence
      relating to his sur place activities and, in particular, his
      explanation for not producing up-to-date letters from the KDPI about
      his support for this organisation.  It was arguable that the judge had
      failed to consider the appellant's evidence with reference to the
      decisions in SSH & HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) [2016] UKUT
      00308 and AB & Others (internet activity - state of evidence) [2015]
      UKUT 257.

Submissions

   7. Mr Govan referred to the respondent's rule 24 response dated 12th
      September 2018.  He was prepared to acknowledge that the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal erred in law as contended in the second ground of
      the application for permission to appeal.  This ground relied upon AB
      & Others in relation to the possible examination of Facebook material
      by the authorities at the airport on return to Iran.  Mr Govan
      referred to the "pinch point" at the airport where a returnee is
      brought into contact with the authorities.  According to the decision
      in AB & Others, at paragraph 467, if questioned a returnee was likely
      to be asked about their internet activity and, if they had any, it was
      likely to be exposed and, if critical of the government, to lead to a
      real risk of persecution.  Mr Govan submitted that although the judge
      had failed to address this issue, if it was the only error the
      decision might be re-made before the Upper Tribunal.

   8. For the appellant, Ms Cosgrove pointed out that all the grounds of the
      application related to the appellant's sur place activities.  She
      indicated her intention to pursue them all.  The first ground related
      to the appellant's attendance at demonstrations outside the Iranian
      Embassy.  The appellant had attended four such demonstrations,
      although the judge referred to only one in her decision.  The
      appellant's evidence was that these demonstrations were photographed
      and filmed from inside the Embassy.  The appellant had posted on
      Facebook photographs of him demonstrating.  The judge did not take
      this evidence into account.

   9. The third ground concerned the two letters of support from KDPI
      officials relied upon by the appellant.  These were referred to by the
      judge at paragraphs 21 and 22 of her decision.  The judge referred to
      a lack of specificity in the first letter about the appellant's
      activities and pointed out that according to the appellant's
      supplementary statement the first activity in which he claimed to have
      participated post-dated the letter by nine months.  It is contended
      that the judge failed to have regard to the appellant's first
      statement, where he stated that his KDPI participation in the UK
      started more than a year earlier, in October 2016.  The judge failed
      to take into account the appellant's evidence in his first statement
      about when his KDPI participation in the UK began.

  10. The fourth ground referred to paragraph 23 of the decision, where the
      judge questioned why the appellant had not produced up-dated letters
      of support from KDPI.  It is contended that the judge failed to take
      into account the appellant's explanation that the office-bearers who
      had written the letters produced no longer held their posts within the
      KDPI and the UK branch of KDPI had taken a decision no longer to
      provide letters of support in this form.

  11. Ms Cosgrove further submitted that the appellant had no passport and
      was likely to be questioned on his return.  It was not disputed that
      the appellant left Iran illegally.  The questioning on return would
      include questions about his Facebook account and his activities in the
      UK and would therefore give rise to a real risk of persecution.
      Reliance was placed upon paragraphs 114 and 117 of HB (Kurds) Iran CG
      [2018] UKUT 00430.  As discussed at paragraph 472 of the decision in
      AB & Others, the authorities would not distinguish between someone who
      was posting in an opportunistic manner to bolster an asylum claim and
      someone who was following a genuine conviction.

  12. Mr Govan responded to the matters pursued by Ms Cosgrove.  The first
      ground of the application contended that the judge ignored evidence of
      surveillance by the Iranian authorities.  Mr Govan submitted that the
      judge considered the relevant facts, which were that the appellant had
      attended demonstrations and provided letters of support from the KDPI.
       The approach to sur place activities set out in BA (Demonstrators in
      Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 had not changed.
      There was not a real risk on the basis of illegal exit and there was
      no reason for the authorities to have any interest in the appellant
      prior to his arrival at the airport.  In terms of HB, Kurdish
      ethnicity would not create a risk of persecution.  The Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal found at paragraph 20 of her decision that the
      appellant did not have a high profile which would bring him to the
      attention of the authorities on return.  He had little role at the
      demonstrations apart from mere attendance.

  13. Turning to the third ground of the application, Mr Govan submitted
      that the point about the dates of the appellant's sur place activities
      was only one of a number of issues and did not give rise to a material
      error.  In relation to the fourth ground and the lack of up-to-date
      letters from the KDPI, the judge noted at paragraph 23 the appellant's
      explanation that no further letters of support were being provided.

  14. Mr Govan observed that unlike the appellant in HB, this appellant's
      evidence about his political activities in Iran was rejected.  Mr
      Govan submitted that even without a passport the appellant's Kurdish
      ethnicity would not put him at risk.  It seemed to be the appellant's
      case that if he had put information on Facebook then he would be
      identified and questioned by the authorities as a matter of course but
      this did not follow from the decision in HB.  If he was questioned the
      authorities would have to ask the appellant for his Facebook password.
       Mr Govan acknowledged that if the appellant refused to provide a
      password this might give rise to suspicion.  However, the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal did not accept that the appellant was a genuine
      supporter of KDPI.  If the appellant was acting in bad faith then he
      could delete his Facebook account.  The appellant had acknowledged
      having a passport in Iran and he could ask his family to send him this
      to avoid being targeted as someone returning on a laissez-passer.  The
      authorities would have no knowledge of the appellant's sur place
      activities if the proper approach was taken to his attendance at
      demonstrations and the letters of support from KDPI.

  15. Ms Cosgrove pointed out that the issue was the attention the
      authorities would give to the appellant.  They had the time to make
      inquiries and were interested in Kurds.  Even if the appellant had
      been disbelieved about his activities in Iran, it did not necessarily
      follow from this that he should be disbelieved about his activities in
      the UK or his motives for undertaking them.  Reliance was placed upon
      TF & MA [2018] CSIH 58 at paragraphs 59 and 60.

  16. I informed the parties that I was satisfied that the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in her consideration of the risk
      arising from the appellant's sur place activities.  I would proceed to
      re-make the decision as no further fact-finding was required.  In
      response Mr Govan stated that he relied upon the submission he had
      already made, to which he had nothing to add.  He submitted that the
      evidence should be considered holistically.

Discussion

  17. The parties are agreed that the Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal erred
      by not properly considering the risk to the appellant arising from his
      Facebook activities in the event that he were to be questioned about
      these at the airport on his return to Iran.  Mr Govan's submission, to
      which I will return, was that even though the judge did not consider
      this as she should have, the appeal would not succeed upon its merits.
       Ms Cosgrove submitted that having regard to the risk factors arising
      from the appellant's illegal exit, his Kurdish ethnicity, and his sur
      place activities, including his Facebook posts, the appeal should
      succeed.

  18. I consider that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a further
      error of law, identified in the third ground of appeal.  The judge did
      not take account of the appellant's evidence in his first statement as
      to when his activities in the UK on behalf of KDPI first began.  If
      the judge had considered this, she could not have recorded at
      paragraph 21 of her decision that these activities began in December
      2017 instead of October 2016.

  19. At paragraph 20 of her decision the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      considered the appellant's Facebook posts.  She noted that according
      to the printout of these posts only 8 people had commented online that
      they liked the posts.  The judge questioned how the Iranian
      authorities would be able to pick out the appellant from these posts
      when Facebook was used by millions of people.  The judge further
      stated that as the appellant cannot read or write he could do no more
      than "like" or "share" photographs or other materials.

  20. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal assessed the risk to the
      appellant from his Facebook posts on the basis that the Iranian
      authorities were unlikely to find these among the millions of others
      posting on Facebook.  The judge failed to consider how a risk might
      arise for the appellant from being questioned at the airport on his
      return about his online activities.  The judge accordingly neglected
      to take into account a relevant consideration or to direct her mind to
      the material issue and thus erred in law, as the parties are agreed.

  21. Mr Govan's submission was that even though the judge had erred in law
      in this manner, the appellant was not reasonably likely to be picked
      out for questioning at the airport on his return.  He had no prior
      political profile and neither his Kurdish ethnicity nor his having
      exited Iran illegally were sufficient to trigger questioning by the
      authorities.  Mr Govan further submitted that the appellant's sur
      place activities were not undertaken out of genuine conviction but
      were undertaken in bad faith to bolster his asylum claim.  The
      appellant could ameliorate any risk by deleting his Facebook account
      and asking his family in Iran to send him his passport so that he
      would not be returning on a laissez-passer as someone who was clearly
      a failed asylum seeker and who had left Iran illegally.

  22. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a clear finding on
      the appellant's motives for his sur place activities.  The judge seems
      to have accepted at paragraph 20 of the decision that the appellant
      had attended four demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy in London
      and had posted pictures on Facebook showing his participation.  At
      paragraphs 21 and 22 the judge questioned the reliability of the two
      letters of support provide for the appellant by KDPI office bearers in
      the UK.  At paragraph 23 she questioned why there were no up-to-date
      letters before her and observed that the lack of such letters
      adversely impacted upon the appellant's claim to be a "genuine
      supporter".  The judge stopped short of making a finding that the
      appellant's sur place activities were undertaken only to bolster his
      asylum claim.

  23. Of course, a person may act with more than one motive.  It would not
      be contradictory for the appellant both to be a supporter of Kurdish
      rights and to have sought to bolster his asylum claim.  The position
      is that findings have been made that the appellant participated in
      demonstrations and posted evidence of his participation on Facebook.

  24. In principle a person may establish a sur place claim for protection
      even if the person has acted entirely in bad faith.  Mr Govan
      suggested that if the appellant acted in bad faith he could take
      action to reduce any risk to him on return, such as, for example,
      deleting his Facebook account.  If the Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal had made a clear finding that the appellant was acting in bad
      faith, Mr Govan's suggestion might have carried more weight.  As
      matters stand, however, the position is that as an Iranian Kurd the
      appellant demonstrated in the UK for Kurdish rights, as well as
      against other policies or actions of the Iranian authorities, as found
      by the judge at paragraph 20.

  25. The position of the appellant has many similarities to the position of
      the appellant in HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430.  It is
      unfortunate that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had to make her
      decision without having the advantage of seeing this decision, the
      hearings for which were held before the most recent hearing of this
      appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  Although in HB the appellant's
      evidence was accepted as credible and he was found to be a supporter
      of Kurdish rights, it was also found that he had never had any
      involvement in Iran in political activities, although his parents had
      been so involved 23 years earlier.  This was so long ago there was no
      real likelihood the authorities would have an adverse interest in the
      appellant on this account.

  26. At paragraph 114 of HB the Tribunal stated: "However, we noted at [97]
      above that it is not disputed that a returnee with no passport is
      likely to be questioned on return, confirmed in the expert evidence
      before us and recognised in existing country guidance, for example SSH
      and HR.  Ms Enayat's evidence was that it is part of the routine
      process to look at an internet profile, Facebook and emails of a
      returnee.  A person would be asked whether they had a Facebook page
      and that would be checked.  When the person returns they will be asked
      to log onto their Facebook and email accounts.  That is also the
      effect of her evidence given in AB and Others which was accepted by
      the Tribunal in that case (see [457])."

  27. The Tribunal in HB went on to find that the content of the appellant's
      Facebook page would become known to the authorities on return as part
      of the process of investigation of his background.  It was no step
      from here to the conclusion that this would give rise to a real risk
      of persecution or of Article 3 ill-treatment.  The Facebook material
      was not only critical of the regime but showed support for Kurdish
      rights.  The Tribunal considered the question of what the appellant
      would reveal under questioning and concluded, though this was not
      essential to the decision, that the appellant could not be expected to
      lie about his support for Kurdish rights, about which it was
      reasonably likely he would be directly questioned.


  28. The circumstances of the present appellant are not wholly identical to
      the circumstances of the appellant in HB but they are sufficiently
      close to enable a direct comparison to be made.  Were this appellant
      to return to Iran it is reasonably likely he would face the same
      inquiries as the appellant in HB and would be required to give access
      to his Facebook account.  The photographs he has posted on Facebook
      showing his support for Kurdish rights and his opposition to the
      Iranian regime would give rise to a real risk of persecution or ill-
      treatment.  On this basis his appeal will succeed on protection
      grounds.

Conclusions

  29. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  30. The decision is set aside.

  31. The decision is re-made by allowing the appeal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and see no reason of substance for
doing so.

Fee Award               (N.B. This is not part of the decision)
No fee has been paid or is payable so no fee award is made.


M E Deans
                                31st January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
