
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09924/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th June 2019                    |On 24th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     AI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza of JKR solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  AI.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. The appellant's claim for international protection  and  his  human
         rights claim were refused by the respondent for reasons set out  in
         a decision dated 31st July 2018. His appeal against  that  decision
         was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wood on 28th  February  2019
         and dismissed for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on  1st
         April 2019.

      2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found;

           . The appellant is a Bangladeshi National;

           . He was secretary to his local BNP in Bangladesh until he  came
             to the UK in 2005;

           . He was not a controversial figure within the BNP;

           . He was a  BNP  member  of  relative  low  importance  when  in
             Bangladesh and of lesser importance when in the UK;

           . The documents relied upon to support his  claim  that  he  had
             been  charged  and  convicted  for  political   reasons   were
             unreliable;

           . Although accepted that the appellant had diabetes, it was  not
             accepted that he had memory loss as a consequence;

           . The appellant gave confusing  and  inconsistent  answers  that
             were a clear attempt to mislead the Tribunal;

           . The Facebook messages were created primarily with  a  view  to
             bolstering the appellant's claim;

           . The appellant did not  make  social  media  criticism  of  the
             Bangladeshi government or attend  demonstrations  or  meetings
             prior to his detention in the UK in May 2017;

           . The appellant was not and is not prominent within the BNP;

           . The  judge  placed  very  little  weight  on  the  appellant's
             accounts of attacks on him in 1997/8 and 2004/5;

           . There is no question of the appellant facing criminal charges;

           . There is no real risk of him suffering serious harm,  even  if
             he were imprisoned;

           . The public interest lies overwhelmingly in  his  removal  from
             the UK.

      3. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  the  asylum  decision,
         submitting that it was unlawfully reliant  on  inconsistencies  and
         the documentary evidence, and that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         had failed to  approach  the  issue  of  sur  place  activities  in
         accordance with well-established jurisprudence.

      4. The appellant was refused permission, by First-tier Tribunal  judge
         Gumsley, to appeal the decision in so far  as  it  related  to  the
         conviction, documents and other evidence  of  claimed  activity  in
         Bangladesh and ongoing criminal charges. The appellant did not seek
         to renew his application for permission on  those  grounds  to  the
         Upper Tribunal.

      5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge granted  permission  on  the  grounds
         that it was  arguable  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  failed  to
         properly assess the effect of the appellant's sur place  activities
         by focussing on the motivation  rather  than  the  consequences  on
         return.

      6. Mr Reza confirmed that the only live issue was the question of  sur
         place activities.

         Error of law

      7. Mr Reza submitted that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed  to
         consider whether, despite the lack  of  other  political  activity,
         arrests and conviction, the Facebook posts made by him  were  such,
         given the background  country  information,  as  to  place  him  at
         serious  risk.  He  drew  attention  to  the  postings  and   their
         translations. This was, he submitted not considered by  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge who focussed solely on the motivation  for  the
         postings. Anti-Government activists were targeted and the  offences
         for which a person could be charged in such cases were in the  main
         not bailable and no warrant  is  required.  He  submitted  that  an
         ordinary person could bring an action.

      8. Ms Jones acknowledged that the judge had not made specific findings
         on the impact of the  Facebook  postings  but  submitted  that  the
         appellant could not and cannot show that any Facebook  posts  would
         place him at risk.  The starting point was, she submitted the  lack
         of credibility on the part of the appellant. He had signed  up  for
         Facebook in the UK and the evidence was that  Facebook  refused  to
         sign up in Bangladesh. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
         did not show that the Bangladeshi authorities were able to  or  did
         monitor Facebook, irrespective of the credibility findings. In such
         circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal judge would, she  submitted,
         have rejected the claim in any event; the error is not such  as  to
         merit the setting aside of the First-tier Tribunal decision.

      9. There is no doubt  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  did  not
         address  in  his  determination  what  the  consequences  for   the
         appellant may be if he were returned to Bangladesh having made  the
         Facebook posts he made. The judge did not address the evidence that
         was before him in relation to Facebook  and  social  media  issues.
         Although Ms Jones submitted that the error was not  'material'  the
         materiality or the lack of materiality  requires  consideration  of
         the country material relied upon by the appellant, a  matter  which
         is not superficial.

     10. I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law such that
         I set aside the decision to be remade.

         Remaking the decision

     11. At the end of the hearing on 10th June I  invited  observations  on
         the future conduct of the  appeal  if  I  were  to  set  aside  the
         decision. Mr Reza said the appellant would want to  submit  further
         evidence to the effect that he continues to make Facebook posts  in
         the same vein and referred to  a  threat  that  the  appellant  has
         received, a copy of which is in the bundle.

     12. I expressed the view that  there  would  be  no  need  for  further
         evidence to be submitted,  on  the  basis  that  I  would  reach  a
         decision, if I set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision,  on  the
         basis  that  the  appellant  had  continued  to  make  postings  as
         previously. Neither party objected to  my  taking  this  course  of
         action.

     13. I therefore remake the decision taking account of the findings made
         by the First-tier Tribunal as outlined in  [2]  above  and  on  the
         basis  that  the  appellant  has  continued  to  make  postings  as
         previously, and the claimed receipt of a 'threat letter'.

     14. I have had regard to the two bundles  of  documents  filed  by  the
         appellant with the First-tier Tribunal  (the  supplementary  bundle
         being sent to me following the hearing on 10th June, it not  having
         been in my file although it was before the First-tier Tribunal) and
         the case of MA (AP) [2019] CSIH 13 and to the submissions  made  by
         the representatives.

     15. The CPIN  Bangladesh  Opposition  to  the  Government  Version  2.0
         January 2018 refers to inter-party violence  being  continuous  but
         most prevalent during the months leading up to  national  or  local
         elections. The number of  people  affected  by  political  violence
         remains low in proportion to the size of the major parties and  the
         evidence does not indicate  a  real  risk  of  state  or  non-state
         persecution  or  serious  harm  for  ordinary  party   members   or
         supporters. Party leaders and  activists  may  face  harassment  or
         arbitrary arrest and detention. Political affiliation at times is a
         motive for arrest and prosecution on criminal charges. If the  fear
         or persecution or serious harm is from non-state agents, the threat
         may be localised, and relocation is likely to  be  reasonable.  The
         authorities are able to provide protection, but  their  willingness
         may depend on the political profile of the person seeking  it.  The
         effectiveness  of  the  police  and  criminal  justice  system   is
         undermined by poor infrastructure and endemic corruption. There are
         reports of thousands of arrests after the 2014 elections  (although
         in general they were not charged or imprisoned; some were  released
         after paying a bribe) with key BNP leaders and activists either  in
         prison, facing criminal charges or forced into exile.

     16. A report submitted to the UN Human Rights Council by ODHIKAR  dated
         13 February 2019 drew attention to what it described as  systematic
         violations to freedom of speech and expression;  that  restrictions
         and pressure on mainstream and social media  hinders  accurate  and
         impartial reporting and proper journalism. The report refers to 'at
         least 63 people including online and  cultural  activists,  lawyers
         and journalists' being arrested since the Digital Security Act came
         into force on 8 October 2018  'mostly  for  criticising  the  Prime
         Minister, her father and the Government on social media and even in
         TV talk shows.' The report refers to  the  government  blocking  58
         news portals and websites on 10 December 2018 which were  re-opened
         several hours later after protests. The bundle does not  include  a
         document showing the response of the UN  Human  Rights  Council  to
         this report.

     17. A further report by  ODHIKAR  refers  to  disappearances  which  it
         states are not fully reported as a result  of  government  enforced
         restrictions and self- censorship in the media. It  gives  examples
         of  two  well-known  individuals  who  were   abducted   and   then
         resurfaced. The report refers to 90 individuals who were picked  up
         by the  security  forces,  a  third  of  whose  whereabouts  remain
         unknown.

     18. A Human Rights Watch report dated 8 May 2018 refers  to  scores  of
         individuals being arrested  for  political  and  social  commentary
         critical of the current Government. Those targeted are described as
         journalists and editors for writing critical articles and 'numerous
         individuals for allegedly  offending  religious  sentiment  or  for
         defamation...a significant number of those arrested are  linked  to
         Bangladesh opposition parties'. The examples given  in  the  report
         include one person  who  'shared'  a  Facebook  post;  others  were
         individuals who were involved with opposition parties.  The  report
         sets out the background to and breadth of potential offences  under
         the legislation and the scope for it to be used to hinder and limit
         freedom of expression and speech. The report identifies the use  of
         the legislation for political reasons, to silence opposition to the
         government.

     19. Other documents, including a Freedom on the Net  report  2018,  HRW
         report 22 December 2018 and 17th January  2019,  that  are  in  the
         supplementary bundle catalogue numerous arrests  of  activists  and
         leaders in political activity.

     20. The first ODHIKAR report is rather contradictory: it refers to  the
         banning of Facebook, YouTube and other mobile applications as being
         'innocuous' because government cyber security 'was not  up  to  the
         mark' but also refers to the government having  "purchased  several
         sophisticated surveillance tools to monitor social  media  and  gag
         dissenting voices". The second  ODHIKAR  report  on  disappearances
         does not identify the status or role of those who are said to  have
         disappeared and remain missing.

     21. The HRW report has  virtually  no  detail  on  the  nature  of  the
         offences committed by individuals which led to arrest.  The  person
         who 'shared a post' was detained for three  months  then  released;
         the author of the post went into hiding. The report is  drawn  from
         interviews of activists.

     22. MA (AP) refers to  the  well-established  principles  to  be  found
         within YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ 360 in the consideration of sur
         place activities. The  factual  matrix  of  a  claim  includes  the
         motivation behind the  activities  but  to  be  considered  in  the
         context of an applicant's political activity  in  general  and  the
         country information available.

     23. AI relies  upon  the  threat  he  claims  to  have  received  as  a
         consequence of his postings. There may have been a threat  received
         from  someone  in  Bangladesh  although  I  do  not  rule  out  the
         possibility  that  this  has  been  manufactured  given  his   pre-
         disposition to rely on documents that were unreliable and the  lack
         of credibility in his claim overall. The threat, if it does  exist,
         is online to his Facebook  account  and  there  is  no  significant
         evidence that the whereabouts of the appellant would  be  traceable
         when he arrives back in Bangladesh unless he posts his  whereabouts
         or in some other way publicises that he is back there.

     24. The postings by the appellant are opportunistic and are  not  as  a
         result of his political convictions.  Although he has continued  to
         post, there is no credible evidence that he will continue  to  post
         these opportunistic  posts  once  in  Bangladesh  and  no  credible
         evidence  that  he  is  posting  now  because  of   his   political
         convictions. He does not otherwise make a credible claim that he is
         politically active. He can stop posting. He can close his  Facebook
         account. He has no BNP activity and the postings themselves do  not
         make him an activist. Although for some individuals, their postings
         may bring that person to the adverse attention of the  authorities,
         the evidence this appellant  relies  upon  does  not  suggest  that
         Facebook accounts of individuals  in  the  diaspora  are  routinely
         monitored or that on arrival in Bangladesh he will be asked  for  a
         Facebook account or  other  social  media  password;  the  evidence
         suggests that the social media  accounts  that  are  monitored  are
         those within Bangladesh and, generally, those who have  a  link  to
         opposition political activism or political activism that  could  be
         perceived  as  being  in  opposition  to  the  Government  or   its
         ministers. The appellant does not  fall  within  that  category  of
         individuals. My attention was  not  drawn  to  background  evidence
         which  indicated  that  even  those   who   were   plainly   making
         opportunistic claims in order to remain  abroad  were  at  risk  if
         returned.  If  he  chose  to  disclose  his  whereabouts   or   his
         whereabouts became known, there is no credible  evidence  that  his
         postings whilst in the UK would become known or cause him to be  at
         risk. If he chose to disclose postings which are opportunistic  and
         not reflective of his political views and which do not reflect real
         political activity, that is a matter for him.

     25. It follows that the appellant is not a risk of being persecuted  on
         return to Bangladesh.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


                                    Date 18th June 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
