

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09362/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 3 February 2017                            |On 8 February 2017           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                    M. Q.
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Elliott-Kelly, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. Having heard submissions made by Ms Elliott-Kelly  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant, Ms Fijiwala confirmed that the respondent would not  resist
      the appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge   Phillips.   That   concession   was   properly   and
      realistically made because, in her submissions, Ms  Elliott-Kelly  has
      clearly identified a number of material errors  of  law  made  by  the
      judge, the effect of which is that nothing at all can be salvaged from
      her determination.


   2. In the face of  such  consensus  that  the  appeal  will  have  to  be
      determined afresh by a different judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  it
      is necessary for me only briefly to identify the nature of some of the
      errors of law made by the judge.


   3. First, it was not reasonably open to the judge to refuse to grant  the
      adjournment sought by the appellant. That was  because  the  need  for
      expert evidence was plainly established and the interests  of  justice
      demanded that a reasonable opportunity be provided to obtain it.  This
      appeal had been listed unusually quickly following the decision  under
      challenge, there had been no undue delay by the appellant's solicitors
      in seeking and obtaining instructions from the appellant and they  had
      taken all appropriate steps to secure  funding  to  commission  expert
      evidence in support of the appellant's case.  Given  that  he  was  an
      unaccompanied minor with no documentary evidence  to  call  upon,  the
      nature of the expert evidence sought was clearly of central importance
      to his claim. Further, it was a material error of law for  the  judge,
      having refused to grant an adjournment to obtain expert  evidence,  to
      then find lacking in credibility the appellant's account  of  life  in
      Iran concerning matters which were precisely those in respect of which
      an expert would have been asked to provide evidence.


   4. It had been made clear to the judge that  expert  evidence  was  being
      sought  in  respect  of  two  distinct  issues.  One   concerned   the
      appellant's disputed Iranian nationality and the other the appellant's
      account, disputed by the respondent, of  his  experiences  of  various
      events and occurrences in Iran. She gave  reasons  for  refusing  that
      application in respect of the  nationality  issue,  which  as  I  have
      explained were legally insufficient, but gave no reasons  at  all  for
      refusing the adjournment in respect of the expert evidence  sought  on
      the other issue.


   5. This is sufficient in itself to establish that  the  decision  of  the
      judge cannot stand.  It  is,  though,  unambiguously  clear  that  the
      reasoning of the judge leading to adverse credibility findings is  not
      legally sufficient and is simply not sustainable. When considering the
      nationality issue the judge concluded that the  appellant  "was  being
      untruthful" when answering questions concerning Iranian  currency  and
      it is clear that she took this finding of his untruthfulness to inform
      her conclusion that the appellant was not a credible witness and so to
      reject his factual account. But it is impossible  to  understand,  and
      the judge does not seek  to  explain,  why  an  appellant  seeking  to
      persuade a doubtful interviewer that  he  is  of  Iranian  nationality
      should  untruthfully  give  inaccurate  answers   about   a   question
      concerning  Iranian  currency  which,  if  answered  correctly,  would
      support his claim to be Iranian. It is simply not rational to conclude
      from this that the appellant was an untruthful witness.


   6. There are a number of other examples of the  reasoning  of  the  judge
      which, with respect, it is simply not possible to follow. For example,
      at paragraph 60 the judge examines the appellant's evidence about  the
      smuggling activities of his family in Iran. Despite having  read  this
      part of the judgment repeatedly, I have to say that I  simply  do  not
      understand the point being made or why this is thought to  damage  the
      appellant's credibility.


   7. It is clear also that the judge failed to engage adequately  with  the
      case that the appellant sought to advance. This was set out clearly to
      the judge in counsel's skeleton argument, but there is  no  discussion
      of that in the judgment.  The  issues  not  adequately  addressed,  or
      addressed at  all,  included  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  an
      unaccompanied minor who had not had any education. The judge said that
      she had given the appellant the benefit of the doubt but  in  refusing
      to allow him an adjournment and then, having adopted  the  credibility
      points taken by the respondent but not taking any  real  note  of  the
      points made in favour of the appellant  by  counsel  in  her  skeleton
      argument, it is very hard to see how that can be  said  to  have  been
      done.


   8. As both  parties  recognise  from  the  discussion  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal on 2 February, more can be said about the decision  of  Judge
      Phillips that gives rise for concern but it is not necessary to do so.


   9. As I have made clear that there will have to be a de novo hearing  and
      that nothing can be preserved from the judgment of Judge Phillips, the
      parties should ensure that their respective positions  concerning  the
      appellant's nationality are known to  each  other  now,  so  that  if,
      despite Judge Phillips' acceptance of the appellant's asserted Iranian
      nationality, the respondent seeks to maintain her refusal to recognise
      it, the appellant is ready to adduce whatever evidence is sought to be
      relied upon in that regard.


Summary of decision:

  10. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made  a  material  error  of  law
      error of law and her decision to dismiss the appeal is set aside.

  11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.

                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 3 February 2017

