


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09402/2019 (P[1])


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules   |On 02nd July 2020              |
|2008                                        |                               |
|On 12th May 2020                            |                               |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                    Mr BM
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Submissions received:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon on 16th April 2020
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety on 27th April 2020


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity owing to the sensitive matters within  the  decision.   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

I have had regard to the Pilot Practice Direction: Contingency  arrangements
in the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal 2020 and the  Presidential
Guidance Note No. 1 2020.


 1. The Tribunal may pursuant to Rules 34 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules  2008  (as  amended)  ("the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules") make decisions in appeals without a hearing. The Upper Tribunal
    gave the provisional direction owing to the Covid-19 pandemic that  the
    decision on the error of law in this matter could be determined on  the
    papers and invited submissions from both parties.  I have had regard to
    the views of both parties pursuant to rule 34(2) of The Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules.

 2. Mr Solomon submitted that the matter could be determined on the  papers
    and the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal should the First-
    tier Tribunal decision be set aside.

 3. Mr McVeety noted that owing to the lengthy grounds and that  permission
    had been granted on all points and stated that an oral hearing would be
    'preferable' but in the  event  the  Tribunal  was  minded  to  proceed
    without an oral hearing he  attached  further  submissions.   In  these
    terms I consider that the Secretary of State consented to the error  of
    law being determined on the papers.

 4. Further, I bear in mind the principles  established  in  Osborn  v  The
    Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61.  I have concluded that the matter although
    complex factually does not require, in the  interests  of  justice  and
    fairness, a hearing to determine the matters.  Both parties are legally
    represented, and issues have been clearly explained and their views  on
    the grounds fully set out.  As a result, I find that the  legal  issues
    have crystallised and lend  themselves  to  a  paper  distillation  and
    analysis. Both parties have had a fair opportunity to put their case in
    advance of the determination on the type of hearing for  the  error  of
    law determination and I am not persuaded that  an  oral  hearing  would
    make a material difference.

 5. The appellant appealed with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal promulgated on 20th December 2019 which
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.

 6. The appellant a Sri Lankan national arrived in  the  UK  on  a  Tier  4
    student visa in September 2010 and his asylum claim refused. He claimed
    that he had been a supporter of the LTTE and was  at  risk  on  return.
    His appeal was dismissed by Designated Immigration Judge  Woodcraft  in
    March 2012, who made adverse credibility findings.   The appellant made
    further submissions in 2019 which were refused.  He again  asserted  he
    had been detained and mistreated by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  and
    further he had engaged in political activity in support  of  the  Tamil
    cause since he had been in the UK.  In his  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in 2019 he  provided  extensive  further  evidence  from  that
    considered in 2012, in the form of  medical  evidence  which  diagnosed
    PTSD (Drs Goldwyn and Dhumad), an expert report  from  Mr  Chris  Smith
    dated 25th November 2019, a copy of a complaint made by the appellant's
    aunt to the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka dated  9th  June  2017
    and country background material including reports by the  USSD,  UNHCR,
    Amnesty International,  Human Rights Watch and  the  respondent's  most
    recent Country Policy and Information Notes ("CPIN") on Sri Lanka.

    Grounds of Appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal  submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  the
    following respects.

         Ground 1

         The judge had misapplied the guidance issued in Devaseelan v SSHD
         [2002] UKIAT 00702 when deciding that the "new evidence" did not
         include the new medical reports, the country expert report and the
         new country guidance of GJ and others (post civil war: returnees)
         Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

         (i)  there was a strong medical evidence to explain the appellant's
             memory problems and this had an impact on any previous alleged
             evidential discrepancies. The medical evidence found the
             appellant with "significant cognitive impairment" PTSD, severe
             depression and memory loss which were not feigned or
             exaggerated.  The judge had not engaged with this evidence
             adequately or at all.

         (ii) the country expert Chris Smith found that the payment of a
             bribe and ability to leave on the appellant's passport did not
             undermine his case and was plausible and that approach was
             confirmed in the country guidance of GJ.

         (iii)    there was clear medical evidence of physical and
             psychological injuries sustained during detention and it is
             noteworthy that the judge accepted at paragraph 38 that the
             appellant may well have been detained during a roundup.

         The new evidence affected the findings of the Judge Woodcraft and
         the starting point principle was not a legal straitjacket but
         permitted judicial fact finders to depart from earlier judicial
         decisions.  The judge had not followed the guidance.

         Ground 2

         At paragraph 39 the judge erred in treating the new expert evidence
         regarding paying a bribe and being able to leave on a  passport  as
         neutral. This was a not a neutral matter.

         Ground 3

         The judge  failed  to  give  anxious  scrutiny  and  proper  weight
         consideration to the medical evidence and stated  at  paragraph  38
         "he may well have been detained,  but  there  is  no  new  evidence
         before me to indicate that he was tortured or released upon payment
         of a bribe".

         (i)  the judge failed to address the very clear  finding  that  the
             scarring and mental  health  evidence  was  new  evidence  and
             overall typical of the account of torture and failed  to  give
             clear reasons for  doing  so  in  line  with  BN  (psychiatric
             evidence-discrepancies) Albania  [2010]  UKUT  279(IAC).   The
             judge  further  erred  in  considering  the  scars  separately
             without considering the evidence overall. The  reports  should
             have been dealt with as an integral part of  the  findings  on
             credibility as per Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

         Ground 4

         The judge erred in her assessment of scar evidence  which  extended
         to 8 scars not to two and KP (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ  62
         identified that physical scarring was consistent with the  type  of
         treatment meted out in Sri Lankan cases involving ill-treatment  in
         detention.

         Ground 5

         The judge failed to assess the new evidence  particularly  the  CID
         book and complaint by the aunt to the Human  rights  Commission  of
         Sri  Lanka  in  the  context  of  country  information  and  expert
         evidence, ignoring in particular, at paragraph 22 the  respondent's
         CPIN at 13.1.2 which identified that  in  several  cases  witnesses
         mentioned that members of their family had  been  questioned  about
         their participation in anti-government activities  abroad  and  had
         been shown photographs. This  indicated  the  Sri  Lankan  security
         forces were monitoring gatherings outside the country and the judge
         had country evidence which explained why the authorities  would  be
         interested in the appellant but failed to give  this  consideration
         or explain why the evidence was rejected.

         Ground 6

         The judge failed to consider the medical  evidence  and  failed  to
         address the impact of the severity of the appellant's mental health
         and his ability to deal with questioning on arrival  regarding  his
         history. This point was  raised  by  the  expert  Mr  C  Smith  and
         relevant to risk on return but was not addressed at paragraph 48 of
         the decision under challenge.

         Ground 7

         The judge failed to assess the expert evidence of Mr  C  Smith  who
         provided detailed report which supported  the  appellant's  history
         was plausible in the context of the country evidence.  That failure
         was contrary to Detamu v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 604 and FS (treatment
         of expert evidence) Somalia [2009} UKAIT 00004.




         Ground 8

         In the light of the above, the judge failed  to  properly  evaluate
         the evidence from the appellant  and  failed  to  engage  with  the
         letter and copy ID card from the aunt when recording the attendance
         of  the  authorities  at  her  home,  failed  to  engage  with  the
         'diagnosis card' and birth certificate and failed  to  engage  with
         the letter and copy ID card from the advocate saying  he  contacted
         the local police where the book extract was taken. The  letter  was
         discounted because the attorney speculated that the  appellant  was
         still on the "watch" list without  any  evidence  to  support  that
         belief but that approach was contrary to  RS  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
         [2019] EWCA Civ 1796.

         Ground 9

         The   judge   accepted   the   appellant   had   attended   several
         demonstrations that refused to depart from the earlier decision and
         thus rejected any risk arising of his sur place activities.

         Ground 10

         Given the judge found the  appellant  had  not  been  detained  and
         tortured and any risk of self-harm was not caused by the action  of
         Sri Lankan authorities the conclusions on suicide at  paragraph  59
         and 61 could not be maintained and was contrary to AXB  (article  3
         health: obligations: suicide).

    Written Submissions

 8. Mr Solomon in his written submissions emphasised that the appellant was
    from the North of Sri Lanka where the  authorities  had  a  history  of
    rounding up Tamils.  There was no medical  evidence  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Woodcraft to address the  appellant's  mental  condition
    and his  ability  to  recall  events  and  Judge  Woodcraft  found  the
    appellant's claim to have been released  on  payment  of  a  bribe  and
    having left on his own passport not credible.  He rejected the claim to
    have been detained  because  there  was  no  medical  evidence  of  any
    physical injuries or ailments.

 9. Mr McVeety asserted that the grounds in effect stated that because  the
    appellant had been diagnosed with a medical condition which may  result
    in confused recollection. The judge however was not bound to adopt that
    conclusion. The fact that the appellant may have  been  diagnosed  with
    PTSD did not mean that the judge was bound to conclude he  was  telling
    the truth. The respondent relied on  JL  (medical  reports-credibility)
    China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) such that whether an appellant's  account
    of the underlying events was credible or not, was a question  of  legal
    appraisal and a matter  for  the  judge,  and  further,  where  medical
    experts relied heavily on the account given by a person concerned  that
    might reduce very considerably the weight could be  attached  to  them.
    This appeal the appellant was not called upon to give oral evidence and
    the judge was denied the opportunity of assessing  the  credibility  of
    his  evidence.  The  medical  reports  here  relied  heavily   on   the
    appellant's own testimony and should have been given limited weight and
    the judge was entitled to find that the further evidence  produced  was
    not sufficient for her to depart from  the  findings  of  the  previous
    tribunal.

10. In respect of ground 5, it was self-evident  at  paragraph  41  of  the
    decision why the judge rejected the appellant's evidence regarding  the
    alleged interest in the appellant's family in Sri Lanka. In the context
    of the appellant's account that he was not an LTTE member and had  low-
    level attendance of demonstrations in the  UK,  the  security  services
    were unlikely to draw on to the government's attention  the  fact  they
    released him on a bribe when he was of such low-level in terms  of  his
    opposition activities.

11. The respondent further submitted that ground 10 was evidently misplaced
    and confused as the judge did find the appellant had not been  tortured
    or abused in the manner claimed and therefore the decision appeared  to
    be entirely correct in the context of AXB and the high standard applied
    in article 3 cases where the appellant  was  not  at  risk  of  hostile
    actions from the state.

12. In terms  of  the  appellant's  sur  place  activities  the  judge  had
    correctly relied upon the country guidance case of GJ finding that low-
    level attendance that UK demonstrations was insufficient to establish a
    risk of adverse attention from the Sri Lankan authorities  and  country
    guidance should be followed unless strong reasons were put forward  for
    not doing so.  In this case, the  expert  report  offered  a  differing
    opinion as to the risk of attendances at demonstrations but  the  judge
    was entitled to rely on country guidance case  of  GJ  and  reject  the
    expert evidence  that  appeared  to  contradict  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    findings in that case.

    Analysis

13. The judge at paragraph 36 recorded when referring to Devaseelan  placed
    heavy emphasis on the decision of Judge Woodcraft [my underlining]

         "36. ... in other words, if the appellant is relying upon the  same
         evidence to support his claim to be at risk upon  return  from  the
         authorities as was considered by designated Judge Woodcraft in  his
         asylum  claim,  those  issues  have  already  been   dismissed   by
         designated Judge Woodcraft and cannot be looked at again.   What  I
         can look at is any new evidence which has come to light  since  the
         promulgation of that determination and that  is  what  Miss  Mensah
         submits has been produced before me today by way of the report from
         Dr Dhumad as to the appellant's worsening mental  health,  his  sur
         plus activities and the fact that, since the previous decision  was
         made, GJ has been promulgated which puts a different complexion  on
         the matters placed before Designated Judge Woodcraft.

         37.  Designated Judge Woodcraft did not find the  appellant  to  be
         either credible or consistent in his claim to  have  been  detained
         and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities and did not accept  that
         he had been a member or a sympathiser of the LTTE and  nor  did  he
         accept that he had been released from detention upon payment  of  a
         bribe. Miss Mensah seeks to persuade me that, in the light  of  the
         evidence accepted in GJ which was promulgated after the appellant's
         appeal, I should revisit that evidence and  reconsider  it  in  the
         light of GJ. Having read  the  determination  of  designated  Judge
         Woodcraft and GJ, there is nothing which  persuades  me  to  depart
         from the conclusions of designated Judge Woodcraft in  relation  to
         the appellant's claim to have been detained, tortured and  released
         on a payment of a bribe.

         38.  Miss Mensah submits that given the roundup  of  those  in  the
         north of Sri Lanka at the end of the war it is highly unlikely that
         the appellant, living in Vavuniya was not caught up in them and was
         thus detained and re-educated. He may well have been detained,  but
         there is no new evidence before me to indicate that he was tortured
         or released on payment of a bribe. Designated Judge Woodcraft notes
         that he claims to have scarring, including a large one on his  head
         but notes that he made no mention of this to any of the doctors who
         saw him in 2012. The report from Dr Goldwyn from March 2017,  which
         was submitted to the respondent with the further submission,  notes
         that the 5 cm scar on his head is typical of a blow  to  the  head.
         She considers that it could have been caused by someone hitting him
         on the head but that there is also a distinct possibility  that  it
         could have been caused by a road traffic  or  industrial  accident.
         There is also a scar to the knee which is  diagnostic  of  a  knife
         wound. She considers that these  wounds  are  consistent  with  his
         claim to have suffered torture. I do not consider that this  report
         of his scars takes his claim any further than that which was before
         Designated Immigration Judge  Woodcraft  because  the  skull  wound
         could have been caused by other things and the fact that he  has  a
         knife wound scar on his knee is not  determinative  of  him  having
         suffered torture."

14. In relation to ground 1 the judge considers the  psychological  medical
    evidence predominantly in categorising the appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness. The  underlined  sections  of  the  decision  under  challenge
    indicate that the judge effectively considered at the outset that there
    was no new evidence to justify a departure from the previous  decision.
    The findings fail to engage  with  the  mental  health  aspect  of  the
    medical reports including that of Dr Goldwyn in terms of  new  evidence
    or explain adequately why this did not permit a  departure  from  Judge
    Woodcraft's decision.   The effect of Dr Dhumad's (Psychiatrist) and Dr
    Goldwyn's reports on the discrepancies and  thus  credibility  findings
    was a fundamental part of the submissions made  by  Ms  Mensah  and  as
    described by the decision but  effectively  ignored  and  not  properly
    addressed by the judge.

15. The evidence of the scars is addressed piecemeal and without a holistic
    assessment. The assessment of the scars was undertaken by  Dr  Charmian
    Goldwyn in her report dated January 2017 at paragraphs 70  to  81  with
    reference to the Istanbul Protocol.   The judge appears  to  adhere  to
    the findings of Judge Woodcraft on the basis  that  the  appellant  had
    made no mention of his scars in 2012.  Once again this  does  not  take
    into account the possible impact of the mental health of the  appellant
    and his ability to recall as explained by the medical reports.  It  may
    be dismissed by legal analysis but needs to be addressed.

16. As indicated the judge appeared to accept that the appellant  had  been
    detained.  KV v SSHD [2019] UKSC 10  held  that  the  conclusion  about
    credibility always rests with the decision maker following a survey  of
    the critical evidence but nonetheless it incumbent  upon  the  decision
    maker to weigh the evidence.  As  pleaded  in  the  grounds  the  judge
    addressed two scars out of eight and just because the scars could  have
    been caused by other methods did not mean that they  were  inconsistent
    with appellant's account or not supportive.  As Lord Wilson  opined  at
    paragraph 21 onwards

         '21. ... It is clear that in the protocol the word also covers  the
         wider circumstances in which  the  injury  is  said  to  have  been
         sustained. Paragraph 188 of the protocol, set out in para 16 above,
         which Sales LJ had himself quoted  in  para  31  of  his  judgment,
         guides the expert towards the type of evaluation which is important
         in assessing "the torture story". Paragraph  105  of  the  protocol
         recommends that, in  formulating  a  clinical  impression  for  the
         purpose of  reporting  evidence  of  torture,  experts  should  ask
         themselves six questions,  including  whether  their  findings  are
         consistent with the alleged  report  of  torture  and  whether  the
         clinical picture suggests a false allegation of torture.  Paragraph
         122 says:

             "The purpose of the written or oral testimony of the physician
             is to provide expert opinion on the degree  to  which  medical
             findings correlate with the  patient's  allegations  of  abuse
             ..."

         22.  In another case of alleged  torture,  namely  SA  (Somalia)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1302;
         [2007] Imm AR 1 236, the Court of Appeal, by the  judgment  of  Sir
         Mark Potter, President of the Family Division, held in paras 27 and
         28 that the task for which  an  asylum-seeker  tendered  a  medical
         report was to provide "a clear statement as to the  consistency  of
         old scars found  with  the  history  given  ...,  directed  to  the
         particular injuries said to  have  occurred  as  a  result  of  the
         torture  or  other  ill  treatment  relied  on   as   evidence   of
         persecution". In paras 29 and 30 Sir Mark quoted paras 186 and  187
         of  the  Istanbul  Protocol  and  commended  them  as  particularly
         instructive for  those  requested  to  supply  medical  reports  in
         relation to alleged torture. In RT (medical reports - causation  of
         scarring) Sri Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00009 the Asylum  and  Immigration
         Tribunal in para 37 described the SA (Somalia) case as  a  landmark
         authority in the identification of the purpose of a medical  report
         in relation to alleged  torture  and  in  the  indorsement  of  the
         Istanbul Protocol'.

17. The judge failed to give any weight to  the  medical  report  that  the
    scars were  consistent  with  torture  and  merely  dismissed  the  new
    evidence.

18. The judge fails to recognise that the conclusions of GJ, and which  was
    decided subsequent to the determination of Judge Woodcraft, with regard
    bribery on release and exit from Sri Lanka would be bound to  influence
    the credibility findings.   Once  again,  those  issues  needed  to  be
    adequately addressed.  GJ held that the prevalence of bribery  made  it
    possible to leave the country legally even when of adverse interest  by
    the authorities, paragraphs 146 and  170.   That  is  not  a  'neutral'
    issue.

19. The judge propounds

         'GJ now notes that the ability to leave  Sri  Lanka  on  one's  own
         passport bears no relation to the seriousness of the charge against
         you nor does it mean that the authorities are not interested in you
         because bribery is commonplace in Sri  Lanka  as  confirmed  by  Dr
         Smith in his report.

    yet proceeds

         'This therefore does not assist the appellant because  his  ability
         to leave on his own passport can either mean that  the  authorities
         were interested in him but let him go because of the bribe or  they
         were not interested in him. In this case designated Judge Woodcraft
         considered the authorities were not interested in him. The issue of
         using one's own passport to leave Sri Lanka is now really a neutral
         issue'.

20. As can be seen from above the expert report of Mr Smith,  attracts  one
    line of consideration at  paragraph  39,  as  detailed  below,  and  is
    inadequate to explain why it was rejected.

21. The judge appears to accept that the appellant was detained although it
    is not a clear finding - 'He may well have been detained' [38].  If  it
    is accepted that the appellant was released by payment of a  bribe,  in
    line with RS (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1796 it  might  be  inherently
    likely that the authorities would retain interest in the appellant  and
    do so by issuing an arrest warrant.  That should have been considered.

22. Paragraph 25 of RS (Sri Lanka) states:

      "I have no reason to doubt that the sequence of events from escape  to
      arrest warrant to stop list was not  specifically  articulated  before
      the FTT judge.  Further, I have already explained that the  judge  did
      not have the Country of Origin Information Report because of a failure
      by the Secretary of State to draw it to  the  court's  attention.   It
      also seems likely that the passages from GJ on which  RS  relies  were
      not  specifically   brought   to   the   judge's   attention   either.
      Notwithstanding these points, I consider that the FTT  judge  made  an
      error of law.  In looking for positive reasons to find that an  arrest
      warrant had been issued, the judge has,  in  my  judgment,  completely
      overlooked the inherent  probabilities  of  the  case.   RS  had  been
      arrested after the end of  the  war  (although  I  would  accept  only
      shortly after) and remained of sufficient interest to the  authorities
      to be detained for some 18 months thereafter during which time he  was
      tortured.  This period extended up to and beyond the  commencement  of
      the release of LTTE detainees.  He  had  not  been  released  but  had
      escaped from custody with the help of a visiting contractor.  It seems
      to me, based  on  those  facts,  to  be  inherently  likely  that  the
      authorities would seek to recapture him and do so by issuing an arrest
      warrant."

23. Moreover, the judge failed to assess the CID book and complaint to  the
    Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka in  the  context  of  the  country
    information and expert evidence.  At paragraphs 40 and  41,  the  judge
    dismissed the evidence of the aunt's complaint and the CID book in  the
    following terms 'if her complaint states he is out of the  country  why
    would they be interested  in him because evincing an  interest  in  him
    will raise the issue of his release on payment of  a  bribe',  but  the
    judge did not refer to the CPIN which confirmed that in  several  cases
    witnesses  mentioned  that  their  family  members  had   indeed   been
    questioned about  their  participation  in  anti-  government  protests
    abroad and shown photographs of the  same,  which  indicated  that  the
    authorities were monitoring gatherings outside the country.

24. As Mr McVeety rightly observes the judge was not  bound  to  adopt  the
    conclusions of the various reports but she must at least  address  them
    adequately and when applying Devaseelan  assess,  adequately,  the  new
    evidence particularly the medical evidence and the expert evidence. The
    new  evidence  was  not  considered  holistically  and  without  proper
    explanation as to why  the  new  evidence,  which  was  extensive,  was
    insufficient and rejected, the  judge  conjured  the  impression  of  a
    strait jacket reliance on Judge Woodcraft's determination which was  an
    error of law.  Further, in that context proper regard was not  accorded
    to GJ.  Those errors are material.

25. I do not address the remaining  grounds  because  I  conclude  that  my
    findings above are sufficient to determine  errors  of  law  which  are
    fundamental and material and render the determination  unsafe.   I  set
    aside the decision in its entirety.




    Notice of Decision

26. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for redetermination.


Signed   Helen Rimington   Date 12th May 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

-----------------------
[1] The coding in this order is in accordance with the Senior President's
Judges' and Members' Administrative Instruction No.2

