
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/09753/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 25 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     P K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 23 September 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Turnock, promulgated on 20 December 2019.



     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 3 January 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 20 February 2020.

     vi) The UT's note and directions, issued on 6 April 2020, with  a  view
         to deciding without a hearing whether the FtT erred in law and,  if
         so, whether its decision should be set aside.

    vii) The appellant's written submissions in response, filed on 20  April
         2020.

   viii) The SSHD's response, filed on 28 April 2020.

     ix)  The  appellant's  notification  on  4  May  2020  of  no   further
         submissions.

 2. Parties have raised no objection to a decision without  a  hearing,  as
    contemplated above.  It is appropriate to proceed accordingly.

 3. The first and main point in the grounds, which triggered the  grant  of
    permission, is  also  contained  at  [6]  of  the  appellant's  written
    submission: whether the FtT erred at [61 - 64]  by  taking  "section  8
    issues" as the starting point.

 4. The decision at [61 - 63] is essentially narrative.  The judge's  point
    at [64] is based not on failure to claim in other safe  countries,  but
    on the appellant's motivation to vary his  claim  from  one  which  had
    failed in Sweden, and on lies told  at  screening  interview  (although
    later corrected).

 5. Prior to that passage, the FtT directed itself at [59 - 60] on  general
    principles of credibility assessment, with no suggestion that  "section
    8 issues" had any priority.

 6. At [65] the FtT referred to case law that section 8 is not  a  starting
    point.

 7. Absence of a claim in  other  countries  is  mentioned  early  on,  but
    matters have to be addressed in some order.

 8. As the SSHD submits, the decision was based on numerous and  cumulative
    reasons.

 9. The decision does not disclose that the FtT fell into the error against
    which it expressly directed itself.

10. Ground 2 does not specify any failure to consider the evidence  in  the
    round, or any error of principle by reference to TF & MA.  This is  not
    an appellant who sought to show that he is a believing  and  practising
    Christian.  He said that he is indifferent  to  both  Christianity  and
    Islam.  His claimed  "conversion",  such  as  it  was,  came  not  from
    conviction but with a view to marriage.  I accept that  some  cases  of
    even formal or perceived apostasy might present a risk in Iraq; but the
    appellant was not in the class of persons envisaged by TF & MA, and the
    FtT did take an holistic approach.

11. Ground  3  complains  of  "cherry-picking"  by  overlooking  background
    evidence about  the  law  against  conversion  from  Islam,  and  about
    persecution of apostates; but this overlooks that the appellant  failed
    to show that he is an apostate, or likely to be perceived as one.

12. Grounds 2 and 3, in any event, show nothing wrong with the  alternative
    finding at [110-111] based on relative tolerance in Kurdistan.

13. The grounds do not show that the FtT erred on any point  of  law.   Its
    decision shall stand.

14. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  Parties have not  addressed  that
    matter in the UT.  Anonymity is preserved herein.

15. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.


        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman                                 15 June 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.


