
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09057/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th March 2019                             |On 21st March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [B H]
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Durance, promulgated on 17th September 2018, following a  hearing
    at Manchester on 4th September 2018.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iran, and was born on  [~]  1988.
    He appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  refusing  his
    application for asylum and  for  humanitarian  protection  pursuant  to
    paragraph 339C of HC 395.  The decision under challenge is  dated  29th
    June 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is a farmer.  His  work  consisted  of
    helping his father in farming.  His parents and siblings  still  reside
    at the same address.  He had not been involved in any demonstrations in
    Iran.  He had assisted PJAK, although he was not a member.  He provided
    them with provisions.  He left Iran on 2nd October 2016, travelling  to
    the Turkish border, and onwards to Italy.   He  stayed  there  for  two
    days.  He then went to France, where he stayed for two years.  He fears
    the Iranian secret services.  He states that they  came  to  his  home.
    They had an arrest warrant.   In  the  UK,  he  has  been  involved  in
    internet activity, where he has denounced the authorities in  Iran,  as
    is clear from his Facebook posts.

The Refusal Letter

 4. The refusal letter states that the Appellant could have claimed  asylum
    in France where he was resident for two years.   With  respect  to  his
    Facebook page, where he is engaged in anti-Iranian  rhetoric,  this  is
    not in his own name, but in the derivative name of "[BHZ]", and  it  is
    unlikely that his account would be monitored in Iran in any event.  The
    authorities would not be able to identify the Appellant  at  all.   The
    Appellant also had not disclosed his full Facebook account.  The burden
    of proof is on the Appellant.  Within the context of a "pinch point" it
    was necessary to evaluate what the Iranian authorities would see.   The
    posts were opportunistic.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge held that there was no reason why  the  Appellant  could  not
    delete his posts, or delete his account entirely.  His  Facebook  posts
    had been created so as to generate a risk on return and  they  did  not
    form part of an innate characteristic and there was no reason  for  the
    Appellant to maintain those posts on return at all.  Moreover, the tags
    on his account were opportunistic.  They had been created to generate a
    sur place claim in a similar manner to  the  fabrication  of  his  PJAC
    claim (see paragraph 25 K to J of the determination).

 6. The judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 7.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  two
    fundamental respects.   First,  he  failed  to  consider  the  material
    matter, namely, the Facebook content in detail.  In  assessing  whether
    the Facebook posts were opportunistic or a product  of  genuinely  held
    beliefs, the judge had failed to refer  to  highly  relevant  evidence,
    which the grounds of  application  referred  to  as  "the  unconsidered
    evidence".  This involved (a) page 1 of the Facebook  posts  where  the
    Appellant wrote condemning the Iranian regime for  execution  of  three
    Kurdish civilians,  and  where  there  were  44  reactions  from  other
    Facebook users; (b) page 2 of the Facebook posts, where  the  Appellant
    wrote condemning the killing of a Kurdish civilian by Iranian  security
    forces, and where there were 52 reactions from  other  Facebook  users;
    and (c) page 19 of the Facebook posts, where the Appellant had  written
    "may God's damn be on you for  how  long  you  would  do  that  to  our
    brothers.  Damn you and your filthy leaders", and where there had  been
    54 reactions from other Facebook users.

 8. The second ground in the application for permission concerned a failure
    to give adequate reasons.  It was alleged that the judge  had  accepted
    (at paragraph 25(g)) that the Appellant  had  engaged  in  anti-Iranian
    rhetoric in the UK, and yet the only reasons given  by  the  judge  for
    finding that the Facebook posts were  opportunistic  can  be  found  at
    paragraphs 47 to 48,  where  the  judge  states  that  he  had  already
    rejected the Appellant's credibility insofar as  events  in  Iran  were
    concerned, and he had concluded that the Appellant had manufactured his
    claim of events in Iran and  his  activity  in  France  for  two  years
    indicated that he was  in  the  UK  solely  for  purposes  of  economic
    betterment.

 9. On 19th December 2018, permission to appeal was granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 8th  March  2019,  Mr  Holt,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, drew my  attention  to  paragraph  43  of  the
    judge's determination where he had concluded that, "all of the  content
    which has been selected is content which is critical of the Republic of
    Iran", and that, "as such, I accept that if on return  the  authorities
    encountered these posts  that  this  would  cause  the  Appellant  some
    difficulties and a genuine risk of harm" (paragraph  43).   That  being
    so, submitted Mr Holt, it was necessary for the judge to  consider  the
    genuineness of the Appellant's belief  of  being  against  the  Iranian
    authorities.  This was important for two reasons.  First,  whether  the
    Appellant would  actually  delete  his  Facebook  account.   The  judge
    concluded that he would.

11. Secondly, however, in order for the judge to come to  this  conclusion,
    he had to consider all of the evidence.   That  evidence  included  the
    "reactions"  to  the  posts  that  the  Appellant  had  put  up.    The
    significance of this was to do with  the  "pinch  point",  namely,  the
    point at which the Appellant would be exposed to risk.  What the  judge
    states here is that,

         "Whilst the Appellant's posts might form  part  of  someone  else's
         pinch point, the Appellant has not used his full  name.   I  should
         note that the Appellant has not discharged the standard of proof in
         terms of identifying who the people are who have 'liked' his  posts
         so as to demonstrate that they would contribute to the pinch point"
         (paragraph 46).

    The issue that the judge  had  not  considered  here  was  whether  the
    reactions of other Facebook users,  to  the  Appellant's  posts,  would
    actually increase the risk to the Appellant upon return.

12. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that around 50 people had reacted to
    the Appellant's Facebook posts.  That did not mean to say that they had
    read these posts.  All it means is that they  had  "liked"  the  posts.
    The judge was entitled to come to the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant
    would not be at risk.  This is because the judge  comes  to  the  clear
    view that the Facebook posts provided are  selective.   He  had  in  no
    uncertain terms stated that,

         "It is also highly unsatisfactory to only have the documents  which
         an Appellant has selected for the Tribunal to see  not  least  when
         issues of credibility have  been  raised  within  the  reasons  for
         refusal letter.  Given my findings insofar as  credibility  of  the
         Appellant is concerned and given that I simply have a  snapshot  of
         what the Appellant has chosen for me to see, I give  little  weight
         to the Facebook posts as the Appellant has not been fully candid in
         his disclosure" (paragraph 45).

13. Added to this, submitted Mr McVeety, was the fact  that  the  Appellant
    had used somebody else's name, namely, the name of "[BHZ]" of which the
    judge is very critical (at paragraph 38).  Although the judge does  not
    go so far as to so say, one cannot rule out the possibility  that  this
    is not even the Appellant's own account, but the  account  of  somebody
    else.




14. But in any event, the Appellant cannot be exposed to  a  risk  of  ill-
    treatment or persecution on the basis of the principles  in  HJ  (Iran)
    because what he has posted is not in his own  name,  and  there  is  no
    reason why he would himself  be  apprehended  upon  arrival  at  Tehran
    Airport for having put up a post that can be associated with him.

15. In reply, Mr Holt, who has conducted this  appeal  in  a  measured  and
    thoroughly professional manner, went on to say that, "I agree that  the
    Appellant's level of English seems to  contradict  the  low  levels  of
    literacy that he has claimed to hold".  Mr Holt also submitted  that  I
    agree also that the reactions are from people who have liked the  post,
    without these people being  identified.   However,  none  of  this,  he
    submitted, is part of the judge's decision.  The judge had to  look  at
    the "genuineness of political belief" of the Appellant, and  if  having
    done so, he had come to the view  that  the  Appellant  generally  held
    those beliefs, then he would clearly be at risk.

16. He asked me to allow the appeal.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

18. First, in what is a clear, comprehensive, and  detailed  determination,
    the judge considers  the  evidence  carefully.   Mr  Holt  took  me  to
    paragraph 43 of the determination.  This is  where  the  judge  at  the
    outset makes it clear that, "all of the content which has been selected
    is content which is critical of the Republic of Iran".  That being  so,
    the fact that, (as the grounds of application allege) there has been  a
    failure by the judge to have regard to "the unconsidered evidence" (see
    paragraph 7 of the grounds), is neither  here  nor  there.   The  judge
    accepts precisely that which the Appellant  would  wish  the  judge  to
    accept, namely, that the evidence relied upon is all "critical  of  the
    Republic of Iran", and indeed, the judge also  accepts  that  if  these
    posts were encountered by the authorities it would place the  Appellant
    in "some difficulties and a genuine risk  of  return"  (paragraph  43).
    However, the judge then goes on to say, for precisely the reasons which
    she sets out carefully, that the Appellant would not be exposed to such
    a risk.  This is because the Facebook  accounts  are  in  the  name  of
    someone else, namely, [BHZ].

19. Second, as Mr McVeety pointed out, (and which Mr  Holt  did  not  demur
    from), the Appellant has presented himself  as  an  illiterate  farmer.
    Yet, the Facebook posts refer to criticism in language that states "let
    it be destroyed the fascist regime of Iran" (paragraph 38).  The  judge
    found the Appellant's claim to be opportunistic, his having  spent  two
    years in France, and then having used somebody else's name, and came to
    the conclusion that the  Appellant  could  delete  his  Facebook  posts
    (paragraph 40), and this was a conclusion that he was entitled to  come
    to.  The judge also considered what the  "pinch  point"  would  be  and
    again,  the  judge  referred  to  a  country  guidance  decision  which
    concluded that "Facebook posts in the UK would not of  itself  generate
    an interest in Iran" (paragraph 42).

20. In short, and finally, the judge's conclusion (at paragraph  50),  that
    the Appellant had used an alias, and not disclosed his full  name,  was
    meant to be,

         "An insurance policy in the event of return - i.e. if  returned  he
         can deny that this is his particular Facebook account as it is  not
         in his name.  This insurance policy supports my conclusion that  he
         would delete his posts out of self-preservation" (paragraph 50).

21. All in all, therefore, there is no reason whatsoever why the judge  was
    not entitled to come to the conclusions that he did.  He  did  come  to
    the firm view that the Appellant's views were not genuine in  terms  of
    his political belief.  Those views are based upon the use  of  language
    in the Facebook posts, the selective nature of the Facebook posts,  and
    the use of an alias by the Appellant.   The  conclusions  are  entirely
    sustainable.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

23. An anonymity direction is made.



    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

24. This appeal is dismissed


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th March 2019

