
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09759/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 April 2018                               |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, MD, is a male citizen of Sudan who was born in 1991.  He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 22 September 2017
    to refuse his fresh claim for asylum.  An earlier refusal of asylum had
    been the subject of  an  appeal  which  was  dismissed  in  2011.   The
    appellant's appeal against the decision of September 2017 was dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hands) in a decision which  is  dated
    27 December 2017.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission  granted
    in respect of grounds 1 and 3 only, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In summary, grounds 1 and 3 are as follows.  First, there  was  medical
    evidence relating to scarring on the appellant's body.   At  [36],  the
    judge wrote:

         "The doctor was only able to attribute some of the scars  had  been
         consistent with the cause attributed  to  them  which  means  those
         scars could have been caused by the trauma described but it is non-
         specific and there are many other probable causes.  This conclusion
         is too wide to enable me to  depart  from  the  findings  of  Judge
         Gordon [who heard the first appeal in the First-tier Tribunal]  and
         in my judgment, the contents of  the  report  are  insufficient  to
         establish, even to the very low burden of proof required, that  the
         appellant  was  beaten  whilst  being  detained  by  the   Sudanese
         authorities."

 3. In his medical report at [55], Dr Moulson wrote:

         "On physical examination I found two scars that were characteristic
         of major abdominal surgery.  In addition  there  were  three  marks
         that I considered typical of whipping injuries.  Four other lesions
         were consistent with their  attribution.   Seven  lesions  were  of
         uncertain attribution  and  a  further  five  were  definitely  not
         attributed to torture."

 4. Ms Pickering submitted that the judge had mis-described the outcome  of
    the doctor's physical examination of the appellant.  The judge appeared
    to have regarded all the various lesions on the  appellant's  torso  as
    being "consistent"  only.   By  reference  to  the  Istanbul  Protocol,
    typical scars have "an appearance that is usually found with this  type
    of trauma but there  are  other  possible  causes."   Scars  which  are
    consistent with an account  "could  have  been  caused  by  the  trauma
    described but it is non-specific and then many other possible causes."

 5. On the face of the decision, the judge appears to have categorised  all
    the scars as consistent  and  has  not  specifically  referred  to  the
    "typical" scars.  The question is whether the judge has  erred  in  law
    and, if she has done so, whether her error is material to  the  outcome
    of the appeal.  It must be remembered that the judge has  concluded  at
    [39] that the medical report had not moved the judge from  her  overall
    finding, drawn from all the available evidence  including  the  medical
    report, that the appellant had not been beaten whilst detained.   Given
    that the judge has, quite properly, considered the  medical  report  as
    part of the overall relevant evidence in this case, I do  not  consider
    that the judge would, in  the  light  of  her  other  findings  on  the
    appellant's account and the findings of  the  previous  Tribunal,  have
    concluded that scars which may have been "typical"  of  whipping  would
    have enabled the appellant to cross the  low  threshold  of  reasonable
    likelihood.   In  essence,  the  difference   between   "typical"   and
    "consistent" scarring is that both types scars could have  been  caused
    as described by an appellant whilst  a  "consistent"  scar  might  have
    "many other possible causes" a "typical" scar has an appearance that is
    usually found with the type of injury described  yet  may  have  'other
    causes'; the main difference is in the number of possible other causes.
    Given her very detailed findings in respect of  other  aspects  of  the
    appellant's account and her legitimate reliance also on Judge  Gordon's
    earlier findings, I do not find that any  oversight  or  error  by  the
    judge in respect of the medical evidence is likely to have changed  the
    outcome of the appeal.  Had the judge overlooked a  "diagnostic  scar",
    that may have been a different matter.  In such a  case,  other  causes
    would have been excluded.  Given the judge's findings on the  remainder
    of the evidence, whether there were "many other causes" or simply  some
    other possible causes for the injuries described makes no difference to
    the outcome of the appeal.

 6. Ground 3 concerns an alleged failure  by  the  judge  to  consider  the
    evidence.  There is a  letter  from  a  Sudanese  political  opposition
    organisation (JEM) which the judge considered at [46]:

         "The biggest issue in respect of the information contained  in  the
         letter  of  JEM  is  that  the  organisation  has  confirmed   [the
         appellant's]  attendance  at  a  demonstration  when  in  fact  the
         appellant was in detention and could not possibly have been at that
         demonstration.  This places all the evidence in  the  remainder  of
         that letter to be found at page E4 of the  respondent's  bundle  in
         doubt and renders it unreliable."

 7. The appellant asserts that the judge either failed to consider or  does
    not record having considered a correcting letter  from  JEM  in  London
    which sought to reconcile the anomaly in the earlier letter.

 8. I find that the ground has no merit.  First, I am satisfied  the  judge
    has considered all the evidence in what  is  a  thorough  and  detailed
    decision.  Secondly, even if the judge has  overlooked  the  correcting
    letter, any error  is  not  material.   At  [47]  and  [49]  the  judge
    considers the appellant's sur place activities in  the  United  Kingdom
    "at the highest" and on the basis [49] that they had been  "brought  to
    the attention of the Sudanese authorities".  In other  words,  even  if
    the judge has overlooked the apparent anomaly which  she  describes  at
    [46] and she were  to  accept  the  JEM  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    attendance at demonstrations  in  the  United  Kingdom,  she  did  not,
    applying the relevant country guidance,  conclude  that  the  appellant
    would face a real risk on account of those sur  place  activities.   In
    the light  of  that  alternative  finding,  the  judge's  view  of  the
    correcting letter from JEM or her overlooking  of  the  letter  is  not
    relevant.

 9. This appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 12 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


