

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09221/2017
                                                             & PA/09138/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 April 2018                    |On 30 April 2018                      |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                       MUHAMMAD ASHRAF & ABEER ASHRAF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, instructed by Maguire, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are father and daughter, citizens of Pakistan.

 2. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decisions refusing the protection  claims  of  the
         two appellants, both dated 8 September 2017.

     ii) The appellants' grounds of appeal to the FtT (in generic terms).

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Handley, promulgated on 27 December 2017,
         dismissing both appeals.

     iv) The appellants' grounds of appeal to  the  UT,  attached  to  their
         applications dated 9 January 2018 (in substance, the  same  grounds
         for each appellant).

      v) The grant of permission by Designated FtT Judge  Shaerf,  dated  22
         January 2018.

     vi) The SSHD's rule 24 response, dated 13 February 2018, to  the  grant
         of permission.

 3. Having heard the submissions, I indicated that the  appeal  to  the  UT
    would be dismissed, for the following reasons.

 4. Ground 1 is at paragraph number 2 of the application, directed  against
    paragraphs 30 and 33 of the decision.

 5. This ground includes the most likely of the  points  advanced  for  the
    appellants. The question asked at the  screening  interview  invited  a
    brief explanation only.  An attempt to force the second appellant  into
    a marriage might be thought to go little further  than  the  threat  to
    abduct her which was stated by the first appellant.

 6. Mrs O'Brien argued that he  did  outline  his  case  quite  clearly  if
    succinctly, and that it was reasonable for the judge  to  have  thought
    that such an important matter would have emerged.  She also  said  that
    he clearly referred at the first stage  to  his  step-brother,  in  the
    singular, which was different from a threat later said to come from his
    brother and three step-brothers, and no error by the judge.

 7. The statement at the end of the ground 1, "... there is  no  indication
    if the screening interview was  read  back  to  the  first  and  second
    appellant".  The forms do not provide for  interviews  to  be  to  read
    back.   As Mrs O'Brien pointed out, the interview was  carried  out  in
    accordance with usual practice and is signed by the  appellant  at  the
    end.  Mr Winter said nothing further on this part of  the  ground.   It
    leads nowhere.

 8. Ground 2 is paragraph number 3 of the application  (last  sub-paragraph
    only relied upon), directed against paragraph 34.

 9. This ground misrepresents the judge's point.  He did not say,  contrary
    to the culture, that the second appellant and  her  mother  would  have
    lived on their own.  He thought it unlikely that  the  first  appellant
    would not have asked until 2015 to see property for which he  had  send
    significant sums of money over a 15 - 20  year  period,  and  that  the
    second appellant and her mother would not have asked to see it over a 5
    year period.  As Mrs O'Brien submitted, no case was advanced that  they
    were so culturally subdued as not to ask an obvious question.

10. Ground 3 is paragraph number 4 of  the  application,  directed  against
    paragraph 37.

11. Mr Winter submitted that it was unclear whether the judge rejected only
    the evidence of the claimed attack on the  appellants,  or  the  entire
    account of hostility towards them.

12. As Mrs O'Brien argued, the judge did not take the simplistic view  that
    if intended as a lethal assault that must have been accomplished.  What
    was found concerning was that this was said to be a genuinely  intended
    lethal assault, yet the attempt was abandoned on one  potential  victim
    suffering a panic attack, which made little sense.

13. It emerged in course of submissions that although the  appellants  said
    they moved before the attack, that was only within their home  town  of
    Sargodha, where the family members from whom they claim to be  at  risk
    also live.

14. The judge at paragraph 36 rejected the claim that the appellants  might
    be at risk anywhere else in Pakistan.  This was based in  part  on  the
    substantive interview record - see Q/A 118 - 128.

15. The appellants made no case that they could not safely live in Karachi,
    Lahore, or elsewhere in Pakistan. As specified in the refusal decisions
    and in the FtT's decision, this was a case which even  at  its  highest
    failed on grounds of internal relocation.

16. The grounds do not represent the decision fairly or as a whole, and  do
    not amount to more than selective disagreement on the facts.  At  best,
    the first part of ground  1  might  be  established.   That  would  not
    suffice to overturn the generally adverse credibility findings.

17. The grounds make no challenge to  conclusions  on  internal  relocation
    which were inevitably fatal to the case.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            26 April 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




