
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09220/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing, 29th May 2020     |On 2nd June 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     HJJ
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in this  determination  identified  as  HJJ.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. FtT Judge O R Williams dismissed HJJ's appeal against  the  refusal
         of his international protection and human rights claim for  reasons
         set out in a decision promulgated on 29th January 2020. He  allowed
         the appeal  on  humanitarian  protections  grounds.  Permission  to
         appeal was  granted  by  FtT  judge  Chohan  on  10th  March  2020.
         Directions for the further conduct of the appeal were sent on  28th
         April  2020  and,  in  the  circumstances  surrounding  COVID   19,
         provision was made for the question of whether there was  an  error
         of law and if so whether the decision of the FtT  Judge  should  be
         set aside to be determined on the papers.

      2. The appellant made no further submissions either with regard to the
         grounds upon which permission to  appeal  had  been  sought  or  on
         whether or not the issues could  be  decided  on  the  papers;  the
         respondent filed  written  submissions  dated  14th  May  2020  and
         expressed no strong view on the future conduct of the  appeal.  The
         respondent did not seek permission to appeal the  findings  of  the
         FtT judge on humanitarian protection grounds. The appellant was, on
         the date of the making of this decision, aware of the  respondent's
         position but has not chosen to respond. No  application  to  extend
         time to respond to the respondent's submissions has been made.  The
         respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

      3. I  am  satisfied  that  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent together with the papers before  me  are  sufficient  to
         enable me to be able to take a decision  on  whether  there  is  an
         error of law in the decision of the  FtT  and  if  so  whether  the
         decision should be set aside, on the  papers  and  without  hearing
         oral submissions.

         FtT decision

      4. The appellant, whose previous claim  for  international  protection
         was refused and dismissed for reasons set out in a  decision  dated
         26th January 2011, claimed protection on the grounds,  in  essence,
         that he sought humanitarian protection only, that he was unable  to
         obtain a CSID card and had no one who was able to help  him  obtain
         one and that as a Kurd from Kirkuk he would be targeted as a  Sunni
         Muslim Kurd if returned to Baghdad and  he  would  be  at  risk  in
         Kirkuk (as summarised in paragraphs 14-17 of the FtT decision).

      5. The FtT Judge found, inter alia,

          a) The appellant is not in contact with his family, most probably
             because of the passage of time and the effect of  fighting  in
             the appellant's home area;

          b) It is reasonably likely the appellant's home area of Kirkuk is
             a contested region and  a  return  there  would  constitute  a
             breach of Article 15(c) Qualification Directive;

          c) There is no prospect of the appellant being issued with a CSID
             whilst he is in the UK and it is reasonably likely he will not
             be able to secure a CSID in Baghdad;

          d) The appellant is likely to face  destitution,  and  this  will
             amount to a breach of Article 3;

          e) It would be unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to  the
             IKR.

      6. The FtT judge dismissed the appeal on refugee grounds, allowed  the
         appeal under Article  15(c)  Qualification  Directive,  stated  the
         respondent's decision was not a breach of s6 Human Rights Act  1998
         and stated the appellant will be at risk on return.

         Error of law

      7. The appellant did not seek, in his grounds  seeking  permission  to
         appeal, to challenge the FtT judge's summary of the basis of claim.
         Nor did he challenge the reference in the decision to the appellant
         not seeking protection under the Refugee Convention on the basis of
         "risk from the Obedi  tribe  and  the  claim  was  in  relation  to
         Humanitarian Protection only" ([15] FtT decision).

      8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds:

          a) That although the appeal was determined on 29th January  2020,
             the FtT judge made no findings with respect to the CG case  of
             SMO (Article 15(c) identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400
             (IAC); that a pivotal question was whether the appellant would
             be able to obtain a CSID card; that the appellant's return  to
             Iraq is subject to an assessment in line with the CG which the
             FtT judge failed to conduct.

          b) That the judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  find  in  the
             appellant's favour re the credibility of  his  account  merely
             because he did not accept the core of the claim; the issue  of
             being documented ought to  be  considered  under  the  correct
             Country Guidance.

      9. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable  that  the
         FtT judge failed to consider extant CG but also notes that although
         the judge allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds, he
         then went on to dismiss the appeal as a whole.

     10. The respondent in her submissions notes that the appellant  is  not
         seeking permission to  appeal  the  finding  that  the  appeal  was
         dismissed on refugee grounds and that the appeal has  been  allowed
         on humanitarian protection grounds. She states that given the  lack
         of consideration  by  the  FtT  judge  of  SMO  and  that  SMO  may
         materially affect the position on obtaining a CSID, she accepts the
         FtT judge materially erred in law.

     11. The  respondent  does  not  accept  the  FtT  judge  erred  in  his
         consideration of the  credibility  findings,  submitting  that  the
         judge assessed the evidence and reached findings that were open  to
         him.

         Discussion

     12. The respondent has not sought permission to appeal the decision  by
         the FtT allowing the appeal on humanitarian  protection  -  Article
         15(c) grounds.

     13. It may be that in some way the appellant is seeking  permission  to
         challenge the dismissal of the appeal on refugee grounds.  This  is
         not however stated in terms. In any event  the  appellant  conceded
         before the FtT judge that he could not succeed  in  his  appeal  on
         refugee grounds and he  cannot  therefore  successfully  pursue  an
         appeal against the decision to dismiss his asylum-based appeal.

     14. The final numbered paragraph of the FtT decision reads as follows:

             "52. The respondent's decision was not unlawful under  section
             6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. For the reasons  stated  above
             the appellant will be at risk on return."

         The judge goes on to state:

             "Notice of decision

             The appeal is dismissed".

     15. The position therefore is that:

          A) The appeal on humanitarian protection grounds (Article  15(c))
             was allowed and there has been no challenge to  that  decision
             by the respondent.

          B) The appeal on refugee protection grounds  was  dismissed.  Any
             purported appeal  against  that  decision  is  dismissed;  the
             appellant having conceded he was not  pursuing  his  claim  on
             refugee grounds.

          C) No grounds have been submitted by  the  appellant  seeking  to
             challenge the decision by the FtT that the  decision  was  not
             unlawful under s6 Human Rights Act 1998.

     16. The reference to credibility in the grounds seeking  permission  to
         appeal seems to be unrelated to a challenge to the  final  decision
         made by the judge. In any event the grounds do no more than set out
         some legal principles and assert that the appellant's  account  was
         consistent. Consistency does not equate with credibility. The judge
         addressed the appellant's evidence and addressed that  evidence  in
         the context of the previous asylum decision and  reached  findings,
         as stated by the respondent, that were plainly open to  him.  There
         is no error of law by the judge in the findings he  reached  as  to
         the credibility of the appellant's account as  it  related  to  his
         family, risk in the contested area, ability to  obtain  a  CSID  or
         internal relocation.

     17. In granting permission to appeal, the judge stated that "the matter
         needs to be explored further". It is unclear what is meant by that.
         The appellant has sought permission to appeal; the  respondent  has
         not. The grounds relied upon  by  the  appellant  are  inadequately
         formulated and could not possibly succeed as a successful challenge
         to the findings of the judge on the decision on asylum  grounds  or
         s6.

     18. I dismiss the appellant's appeal.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision; the decision of the FtT  allowing  the
    appeal on Article 15(c) Qualification Directive grounds but  dismissing
    the appeal on refugee grounds and s6 Human Rights Act 1998 stands.




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




    Jane Coker


    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
    Date 29 May 2020
