
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09936/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 26 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     T O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Profumo instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant. A failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 25 October 1992.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 January 2018 and claimed asylum.

 3. On 26 July 2018, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent  on  7  February  2019,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lever)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 5. First, the judge made an adverse credibility finding and  rejected  the
    appellant's account that he was at risk on return to Iraq as  a  result
    of an incident in 4 November 2017 when he worked in a hotel  in  Kirkuk
    when he had unwittingly assisted three men who were members of ISIS  by
    providing transport to bring them to the hotel.  They were subsequently
    arrested by the police and he feared ISIS who believed he had  informed
    on them  and  he  also  feared  the  government  because  he  would  be
    associated with ISIS.

 6. Secondly, the judge accepted that the appellant was a Kurd from Kirkuk.
     He also accepted that the appellant, on return  to  Kirkuk,  would  be
    exposed to a risk of indiscriminate violence contrary to Art  15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC).

 7. Thirdly, however, the judge found that the appellant could  safely  and
    reasonably internally relocate either to Baghdad or to the IKR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on a number of grounds.

 9. First, in ground 3, the appellant contended that the judge had erred in
    law in reaching his adverse  credibility  finding  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's asylum claim.

10. Secondly, in grounds 1 and 2, the appellant contended  that  the  judge
    had failed to apply the relevant country guidance cases in reaching his
    adverse findings in respect of internal relocation, namely:

      1) BA (Returns to Baghdad)  Iraq  CG  [2017]  UKUT  0018  (IAC)  -  in
         relation to return to Baghdad; and

      2) AA (Art 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (and [2017]  EWCA  Civ  994)
         and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - Internal Relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT
         00212 (IAC) - in relation to relocation to the IKR and whether  the
         appellant would have a CSID on return.

11. Finally, in ground 4, the appellant contended that the judge had failed
    properly to consider the medical evidence concerning his mental  health
    in assessing his circumstances in Baghdad or the IKR.

12. On 13 March 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

13. The respondent did not file a rule 24 response.

Discussion

14. At the hearing, I  heard  detailed  submissions  from  Ms  Profumo  who
    represented the appellant.  Having heard her  submissions,  Mr  Howells
    who represented the Secretary of State  accepted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in reaching his adverse findings in  respect  of  internal
    relocation to Baghdad and the IKR.  He accepted that in para 26  -  28,
    the judge had failed to have proper regard to the CG decisions  in  BA,
    AA and AAH in assessing the appellant's circumstances if  he  relocated
    to either Baghdad or the IKR.

15. Mr Howells accepted that, as a consequence,  the  judge's  decision  in
    relation to Art 15(c) should be set aside and remade.  He accepted that
    none  of  the  judge's  findings  in  relation   to   the   appellant's
    circumstances on return to Iraq, including the judge's finding that  he
    would have, or be able to obtain shortly after return to Iraq,  a  CSID
    should stand.  Mr Howells accepted that, in remaking the decision,  new
    findings should be made,  in  accordance  with  the  CG  decisions,  in
    relation to what, if any, documentation the  appellant  would  have  on
    return.

16. In the light of that, I do not need to deal further with grounds  1,  2
    and 4.  It is accepted that  the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  in
    dismissing the appellant's humanitarian protection claim on  the  basis
    that, although an Art15 (c) risk existed in Kirkuk, he could safely and
    reasonably internally relocate either to Baghdad or the IKR.

17.  To that extent, therefore, the decision must be remade.

18. There remains, however, ground 3 which challenges the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding in relation to the appellant's asylum claim.

19. The judge's reasoning in relation to this is set out at paras 15  -  21
    and 24 as follows:

         "15. I have carefully considered all the  evidence  in  this  case.
             The Respondent accepted the Appellant  was  from  Iraq,  there
             appears no dispute that he is Kurdish.  The Respondent did not
             accept the Appellant was from Kirkuk because although  he  had
             some knowledge of that city there was a  few  inconsistencies,
             notably  regarding  the  location  of  the  hotel  where   the
             Appellant claimed to work.  The Respondent  noted  that  hotel
             appeared  to  be  based  in  another  city  although  did  not
             specifically assert the Appellant was from that area.   Having
             looked at all of the evidence available including the prospect
             there is a hotel of the name given by the Appellant in  Kirkuk
             I find applying the lower standard of  proof  that  for  these
             purposes the Appellant is from Kirkuk.

         16.  The Appellant's fear is based upon a fear of both ISIS and the
             government  arising  essentially  out  of  one  incident.   He
             claimed that the  hotel  manager  had  asked  him  to  provide
             transport to bring three men  to  the  hotel.   It  transpired
             those three  men  were  members  of  ISIS.   ISIS  wanted  the
             Appellant because they believed he had  told  the  authorities
             about them,  and  the  authorities  wanted  him  because  they
             believed he had helped members of ISIS.

         17.  On the Appellant's account he had worked in a hotel in  Kirkuk
             for one and a half to two years.  His jobs  including  manning
             the front desk and checking in guests, acting as a porter  and
             on a regular basis collecting guests from the airport or other
             locations and delivering them  to  the  hotel.   He  had  also
             claimed in interview to have been a  cleaner.   The  Appellant
             claims that he speaks  a  little  Arabic.   I  find  that  the
             Appellant would have a reasonably good grasp of conversational
             Arabic in order to fulfil the various jobs he is  required  to
             do on his account and had done for that period of time.

         18.  His claim, based upon this single  incident  on  4th  November
             2017 is not in my view credible.  The manager of the hotel had
             instructed the Appellant to collect the three  men  and  bring
             them to the hotel.  They were unknown to the Appellant  as  no
             doubt he was unknown to them.  The Appellant had no  knowledge
             they were alleged members of ISIS and he  had  no  connections
             with that group.   If, as he claims, they were arrested by the
             authorities at the hotel as suspected or known members of ISIS
             that  suggests  some  advanced  intelligence  known   to   the
             authorities.  Logically the person the  authorities  may  have
             had most interest in was the manager of the hotel.

         19.  The Appellant claims, and it is a coincidence  that  following
             the end of his work that day he  went  to  his  uncle's/aunt's
             home rather than his own  house.   He  further  claims,  again
             coincidently that a great friend Assad telephoned him from the
             hotel where they both worked to advise the Appellant that  the
             police wanted the Appellant because they had arrested the men,
             discovered they were members of ISIS and were  carrying  money
             in their luggage.  It would appear to follow that all of these
             discoveries were made after the Appellant had left the  hotel.
             I do not accept as credible that even if such  event  occurred
             it would be in circumstances where the friend Assad  would  be
             privy to that level of information.  I do not accept that  the
             discovery and search of those individuals would have been done
             in the presence of Assad as claimed (question  27).   Further,
             it the police were so keen to interview the Appellant they  do
             not appear to have questioned  Assad  as  to  the  Appellant's
             whereabouts or indeed spoken to the hotel manager.   It  could
             hardly be said the Appellant was in hiding  by  being  at  his
             aunt's/uncle's home.  Indeed, at question 37 he refers to  the
             police going firstly to that house before going to his  family
             home.  Although he claims to  have  obtained  the  information
             from his uncle who was apparently present when the police came
             to the house the Appellant does not suggest with  any  clarity
             that the police actually wanted to arrest him.  He referred on
             a number of occasions to the CCTV showing him bringing the men
             to the hotel.  Even assuming the existence of CCTV in  working
             order it would do no more than show the Appellant doing a task
             as part of his employment for which he  was  directed  by  the
             manager.

         20.  The Appellant claims to have left Iraq the day after the event
             (i.e. 5th November) with sufficient  monies  and  planning  in
             place that  allowed  him  to  be  taken  by  a  smuggler,  and
             potentially his uncle, from Iraq through to  Turkey  and  then
             ultimately to the UK.  That in my view is not consistent  with
             a sudden departure.  I find the event on the 4th  November  to
             be an invention of  the  Appellant.   Even  if  there  was  an
             element of truth it still does not begin to explain how either
             the police wold necessarily associate him  with  ISIS  and  it
             certainly does not  explain  how  ISIS  would  even  have  any
             knowledge of the Appellant.

         21.  It should also be noted that in November  2017  ISIS  were  no
             longer the threat they may have been a few year  earlier.   As
             an occupying force with control they have largely  disappeared
             and reverted more to a classic terrorist group.   Indeed,  the
             Appellant's own evidence of ISIS in  [2016]  when  he  claimed
             they took over the hotel, disclosed that the authorities  were
             able to take back control of the hotel and free all hostages.

         ....

         24.  I further make an adverse credibility finding  from  the  fact
             that the Apellant clearly passed through safe countries before
             arriving in the UK, was fingerprinted in at least one of those
             countries and spent one month in France but  failed  to  claim
             asylum.  I make an adverse credibility finding in  respect  of
             that matter under Section 8.  The failure of the individual to
             claim asylum in a safe country such as France for a protracted
             period is in my view cogent evidence  that  individual  is  an
             economic migrant."

20. The grounds, upon which Ms Profumo relied, raised  a  single  point  in
    relation to the judge's reasoning.  It related to the final sentence in
    para 18 were the judge said: "logically the person the authorities  may
    have had most interest in was the manager of the hotel."

21. Ms Profumo submitted that there was no basis for this  final  sentence.
    It was an assumption based upon no evidence or authority.  It  amounted
    to speculation about a material fact.

22. Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  judge  gave  a  number  of  reasons,
    particularly in para 19 of his determination, why he did not accept the
    appellant's account.  None of these  reasons  were  challenged  in  the
    grounds.  He submitted that it was properly open to the judge to state,
    as a matter of common sense, that the authorities  were  likely  to  be
    most interested in the  manager  of  the  hotel.   The  judge  had  not
    materially erred in reaching his adverse credibility finding.

23. I accept Mr Howell's submissions.  The judge gave a number of  reasons,
    now unchallenged, why he did not accept the  appellant's  account.   It
    was, in my judgment, open to the judge to state as a matter  of  common
    sense that when the authorities came to the hotel it  was  most  likely
    that, as the incident involved the hotel, that the authorities would be
    most interested in the individual in charge, namely the manager of  the
    hotel.  But, in truth, this comment even if not properly  open  to  the
    judge, did not materially affect his adverse  credibility  finding  and
    his rejection of the  appellant's  evidence  that  the  incident  on  4
    November 2017 occurred.  The judge's reasoning, in particular at  paras
    19, 20, 21 and 24 were, in my judgment, more than  an  ample  basis  to
    legally sustain his adverse credibility finding.

24. Consequently, I reject ground 3.  The judge did not materially  err  in
    law in reaching his adverse findings in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    asylum claim and in dismissing the appeal on that ground.

Decision

25. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

26. Having heard the representatives' submissions, the proper  disposal  of
    this appeal is to remit it to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  order  to
    remake  the  decision  in  respect  of  the  appellant's   humanitarian
    protection claim under Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

27.  In remaking the decision, the judge's finding that the appellant is  a
    Kurd from Kirkuk shall stand.  Likewise, his finding,  based  upon  the
    respondent's position before him, that there is an Art  15(c)  risk  in
    Kirkuk shall also stand subject to any future CG decision  relevant  to
    that issue.  None of the judge's finding in paras 25 - 29  relating  to
    the internal relocation issue are preserved.

28.  The judge's decision to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds stands.

29. The appeal is, accordingly, remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
    heard by a judge other than Judge Lever.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                24 June 2019

