
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09132/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2018                                |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                                |                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     CDD
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms J Elliott-Kelly, instructed by MTC & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Burnett  promulgated  20.12.17,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  12.8.16,  to
    refuse his protection claim.

 2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keith  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    31.1.18.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 13.4.18 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found an error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside and remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in
    accordance with the directions below.

 5. However, I find no merit in the first and second grounds of appeal.

 6. The first ground asserts that the judge attached too little  weight  to
    the expert medical report. However, matters of weight  are  within  the
    judge's province. The judge gave adequate and cogent  reasons  at  [63]
    for according limited weight to the report and it cannot be  said  that
    the reasoning was irrational or perverse; they were  findings  open  to
    the judge. In this regard the grounds are no more than  a  disagreement
    with the judge's assessment and reasons and do not disclose  any  error
    of law.

 7. The second ground asserts that  the  judge  erred  in  making  critical
    findings as to the appellant's credibility, based on discrepancies  and
    inconsistencies in the evidence. The complaint is that in the  decision
    the judge referred to only one inconsistency.  The  ground  appears  to
    attack the use of the plural when only  a  singular  inconsistency  was
    detailed at [64]. However, it was open to the judge to find the account
    inconsistent or discrepant. It is not necessary for the judge to detail
    all such inconsistencies, and the judge gave a  cogent  example  within
    the decision, justifying the finding. In the circumstances, there is no
    merit in this ground.

 8. It follows that there is no viable challenge to the judge's conclusions
    on the protection claim, based on the findings and conclusions made.

 9. What remains of concern is the way in which  the  judge  addressed  the
    claimed mental health issues of the appellant. It  is  clear  that  the
    judge gave a very detailed assessment of the relevant medical evidence,
    but within the findings, the judge dealt with this issue rather briefly
    from [74] onwards and in particular [76] of the decision.

10. I accept the criticism that the judge appears  to  have  conflated  two
    issues: a risk of suicide or other self-harm on return arising from the
    rejected asylum claim. At [75] the judge rejected any causal connection
    between  the  appellant's  PTSD  risk  of  suicide  and   his   claimed
    experiences in Sri Lanka, concluding at [76] that as the appellant  had
    fabricated his asylum claim, there was no heightened risk of suicide on
    forced return to Sri Lanka.

11. What the decision does not  adequately  address  is  the  free-standing
    article 3 ECHR risk of suicide or self-harm on return arising from  the
    existing mental health issues of the  appellant  independently  of  the
    Convention claim, in respect of which measures to  alleviate  the  risk
    and the extent  of  appropriate  treatment  in  Sri  Lanka  are  highly
    relevant. In effect, the article 3 claim  dismissed  in  two  sentences
    within [76]: "He will have the continued support of his  wife  and  his
    family in Sri Lanka if he is returned. He has family whom he could turn
    to in Sri Lanka to assist him access the  medical  facilities  that  he
    needs."

12. The leading decision on this issue is J v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629, as modified by Y  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362. More  recently,  the
    Court of Appeal has promulgated the decision in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 64.

13. As held in J, it is for the appellant to show a causal link between the
    removal and the alleged inhuman treatment relied on  as  violating  his
    article 3 rights, based on the foreseeable consequences of his removal.
    In the context of  a  foreign  case,  which  this  is,  the  article  3
    threshold is particularly high, and it is even higher where the alleged
    inhuman treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility  of  the
    public authorities of the  receiving  state,  but  results  from  "some
    naturally occurring illness,  whether  physical  or  mental."  Further,
    where the fear of ill-treatment on  return  is  not  objectively  well-
    founded, "that will tend to weigh against there being a real risk  that
    the removal will be in breach of article 3.  The  decision  maker  must
    have regard to whether the removing  and/or  the  receiving  state  has
    effective mechanisms to reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
    effective  mechanisms,  that  too  will  weigh   heavily   against   an
    appellant's claim that removal  will  violate  his  or  her  article  3
    rights."

14. Lord Justice Sedley in Y stated, "...what may nevertheless be of  equal
    importance  is  whether  any  genuine  fear  which  the  appellant  may
    establish, albeit without an objective foundation, is such as to create
    a risk of suicide if there is an enforced return."

15. As noted in AM (Zimbabwe), removal of an alien suffering from a serious
    mental or physical illness  to  a  country  where  the  facilities  for
    treatment are inferior to those in the UK may raise an article 3 claim,
    but only in a very exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds are
    compelling. The Court of Appeal accepted that the article  3  threshold
    has been relaxed since Paposhvili, but only to a very modest extent. It
    is  not  confined  to  deathbed  cases,  but  extends  to  cases  where
    substantial grounds have been shown for believing that  the  appellant,
    although not at imminent risk of dying, would  face  a  real  risk,  on
    account of the  absence  of  appropriate  treatment  in  the  receiving
    country or lack of access to such treatment,  of  being  exposed  to  a
    serious, rapid and irreversible decline in state of health resulting in
    intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life  expectancy.
    Neither appellant in AM (Zimbabwe) succeeded, nor did the applicant  in
    Paposhvili.

16. Applying  the  above  case  law,  I  find  that  having  dismissed  the
    appellant's protection claim as not well-founded, and for adequate  and
    cogent reasoning, the judge failed to make an  adequate  assessment  of
    the independent or free-standing article 3  risk  on  return  that  may
    arise even though the Convention  claim  is  not  well-founded.  Having
    regard to the still high threshold, even if modified  slightly,  it  is
    not clear that the appellant in the present case can succeed.  However,
    he deserves at the very least a careful assessment of  the  independent
    article 3 claim arising outside of his dismissed asylum claim.

17. In the circumstances, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must  be
    set aside to be remade. However, there is no error in  the  finding  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the core protection  claim.  All
    that remains  is  the  free-standing  article  3  claim  based  on  the
    appellant's mental health and, if found to  be  sufficiently  high,  an
    assessment of effective mechanisms to alleviate or reduce the  risk  of
    suicide.

18. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. I relist this appeal in the  First-
    tier Tribunal, on the basis that this is a case  which  falls  squarely
    within the Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.  The
    effect of the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing
    and that the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is  such  that,
    having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with  cases
    fairly and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I  find  that
    it is appropriate to remit this appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine  the  article  3  claim  alone  afresh,  independent  of  the
    dismissed asylum claim.

Conclusion & Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I preserved the findings in relation to the asylum claim;

                    I remit the appeal  to  be  decided  in  the  First-tier
                    Tribunal, limited to the article 3  ECHR  claim  arising
                    from the appellant's mental health issues only.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Consequential Directions

20. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House;

21. The decision in respect  of  asylum  is  preserved  together  with  the
    factual findings as to the core events in Sri Lanka;

22. The appeal is limited to the article 3 ECHR claim arising in respect of
    the appellant's mental health independently of the core asylum claim;

23. The ELH is 3 hours;

24. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Burnett and Judge Keith;



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made to me on the issue. The First-
tier Tribunal did make an order pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the  circumstances,  I  continue  the  anonymity
order.
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to proceedings for contempt of court.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

