

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09217/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams)       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 July 2021                                 |On 4 August 2021              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M Schwenk instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration Unit.
For the Respondent: Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Mack ('the Judge') promulgated on 6  November  2019,
        in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on the basis it
        was concluded the appellant had presented a weak case  that  lacked
        credibility and that the Judge did not accept  the  material  facts
        claimed for the reasons set out in the decision under challenge.
     2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by a judge of the First-
        tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by  a  judge  of
        the Upper Tribunal, the operative part of the grant  being  in  the
        following terms:


        Permission to appeal is granted for these reasons:


        1.   In the FtT, this appeal  was  heard  before  Judge  Mack.  The
        decision is headed accordingly at page 1, but at page 19  bears  to
        be signed by Judge Mack and by Judge Pickup.
        2.   The two purported signatures are under the  secondary  heading
        "To the respondent ... No fee award." However, the grounds at  [16]
        also observe that at [6] and [52] the decision uses "we" not "I".
        3.   It is debatable whether the decision leaves an impression of a
        judge who did not hear the case being  involved  in  the  decision,
        which would offend against natural justice.
        4.   The rest of the grounds, [3-15], may turn out to  be  no  more
        than insistence and disagreement, but permission is not restricted.


     3. The application is opposed by the Secretary of State in her Rule 24
        response dated 29 March 2021.



Error of law


     4. The ground asserting that a judge other than Judge  Mack  may  have
        been involved in the decision-making process is a  timely  reminder
        to any judge of  the  need  to  take  care  when  using  pro  forma
        paragraphs and ensuring that all the details of a determination are
        carefully checked.
     5. At [6] the Judge sets out  a  self-direction  in  relation  to  the
        burden and standard of proof in which it is stated "We are  obliged
        to look at the case in the round". That is  clear  failure  of  the
        Judge to change the "we" to "I" which  is  used  with  far  greater
        frequency throughout the determination.
     6. Similarly, at [52] the Judge, when setting  out  a  self  direction
        relevant to section 8 of the 2004 Act, does  state  "We  found  the
        appellant in his substantive interview  ......"  but  also  in  the
        second and fourth lines "I".
     7. The Record of Proceedings indicates the appeal was heard  by  Judge
        Mack sitting alone.
     8. The final reference to the use of the pleural is in the section  of
        the determination which comes after the actual decision and relates
        to whether a fee was to be paid or not, in which  there  are  typed
        entries purporting to be signatures for both Judge Mack  and  Judge
        Pickup. I find this is an example of earlier  text  being  used  by
        Judge Mack with inadequate attention to the detail of the content.
     9. Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup recused himself on  the  last  occasion
        when he was allocated the appeal to consider whether  an  error  of
        law had been made and this issue arose before  him.   Judge  Pickup
        has filed a statement himself in which he confirms that he has  had
        no involvement in the decision-making  process.  In  that  document
        Judge Pickup writes:


        "The last ground of appeal raises an issue of fairness in  that  as
        drafted, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal bears my  name  in
        addition to First-tier Tribunal Judge Mack. In addition, there  are
        two references to 'we' in the body of the decision.


        I confirmed with Mr Schwenk at the outset of the  hearing  that  he
        wished  to  pursue  this  ground  of  appeal,  notwithstanding   my
        indication to him that I was not involved  in  the  making  of  the
        decision. It was agreed, however, that I could not give evidence in
        the matter, nor was he obliged to accept any assurance given by me.
        In the circumstances, the appeal needs to be heard by  a  different
        judge.


        I can confirm that I know Judge Mack and that as a Salaried  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge I was her mentor when she was  first  appointed
        to the First-tier Tribunal, sitting in Manchester. I did  sit  with
        her on a number of panel hearings in the First-tier Tribunal.


        However, I was appointed as an Upper Tribunal  Judge  in  2019  and
        began sitting exclusively in the Upper Tribunal from April 2019.  I
        did not sit on PA/09217/2019 with Judge Mack and to the best of  my
        knowledge have not discussed the case with her or played  any  part
        in the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  In  the
        period between the hearing date and its promulgation I was in  fact
        sitting at Field House in London.


        I have not discussed with Judge Mack how this error came about  and
        can only assume that Judge Mack has inadvertently added my name  to
        the decision from a template she may have used previously.  Whether
        the error is material is a matter that will need to  be  determined
        by a different Upper Tribunal Judge.


        I  consent  to  this  note  been  disclosed  to  the  parties,   if
        appropriate."


    10. The note was sent to the advocates. Mr Schwenk accepted in light of
        this material that although he could prove the use  of  the  plural
        and reference to Judge  Pickup  was  an  error  he  could  not,  in
        isolation, establish it was material, although he  referred  to  it
        demonstrating a lack of care being taken by the Judge.
    11. In relation to the remaining grounds,  Mr  Schwenk  challenged  the
        finding of the Judge at  paragraph  [48(a)]  the  Judge  finds  the
        appellant's evidence has been contradictory. It was submitted  that
        no such contradiction arises as the Judge's conclusion  there  were
        differences in the accounts given  by  the  appellant  between  his
        Asylum Screening Interview on 15 January 2019 and  the  answers  in
        his later Preliminary Information Questionnaire  (PIQ)  on  20  May
        2019 is incorrect.
    12. I do not find it made out the Judge failed to consider the evidence
        with the required degree of anxious scrutiny or placed undue weight
        upon the Screening Interview contrary to the guidance  provided  by
        the Upper Tribunal in YL (China) [2004] UKIAT  000145.  Indeed,  at
        [48(a)] the Judge acknowledges that the appellant might  have  been
        tired, which is a clear indication of the factors  the  Judge  took
        into account when considering the weight that could be given to the
        answers in the screening interview.
    13. The appellant's case in relation to this is summarised  at  [5]  of
        the ground seeking permission to appeal where it is written:


        "The Appellant  submits  that,  properly  considered  there  is  no
        discrepancy between his Screening  Interview  and  the  account  he
        later gives. The latter is simply an elaboration of the former.  To
        criticise the Appellant for failing to  mention  that  the  threats
        from Daesh (which he does mention) was via a letter is  unfair  and
        fails to recognise the limited purpose of the  screening  interview
        as acknowledged in YL, among other cases."


    14. There are however clear discrepancies in the  appellant's  evidence
        considered by the Judge. An example relied on  by  Mr  Tan  in  his
        response is the answer given in the screening interview at question
        at 4.1, specifically  referred  to  by  the  Judge,  in  which  the
        Appellant, when asked to provide brief reasons for why he could not
        return to his home country, stated:


        "My life is in danger in Iran, I stayed 20 days in Turkey to try to
        make the situation better for me to go back  but  it  did  not  get
        better. My life is in danger from the Iranian government, I was the
        driver of a minibus and somebody paid me to take them somewhere and
        pick them up at 1600. When  I  went  to  pick  them  up  they  were
        arrested. At 0500 in the morning they  came  to  arrest  me  but  I
        wasn't in. When they come to arrest you know hundred  percent  what
        they want to do with you. I will not give more details today."


    15. When asked whether there were any other reasons he cannot return to
        Iran the appellant replied:


        "Yes, I have been threatened by Daesh in Iran, god knows what would
        happen to me if I returned.  My  wife  and  child  have  gone  into
        hiding."


    16. The initial  reply  was  clearly  a  reference  to  an  individual,
        singularly paying the appellant to drop him off and later pick  him
        up from the unstated location whereas in reply to questions 12  -14
        of the appellant's PIQ the appellant's case is now stated to be:


        12.  After working for one month, on 22 November 2018 (1 Azar 1397)
             I was waiting for passengers to arrive, and six people came to
             me. Two of the six people who approached me were from Dezil, I
             need them. I thought they were passengers and they were  about
             to get into the minibus.
        13.  One of them approached me and asked me how much I was  earning
             per day, I asked why he wanted to know. He said he  wanted  to
             book me privately and for the whole day.  I  told  them  that,
             overall, I would earn between 140,000 and 150,000 Toman.
        14.  They told me they would pay me 200,000 Toman in order to  pick
             us up in the morning and take us to the place  where  we  want
             and in the evening, and collectors and take us where we needed
             to go. Because I knew two of them from Dezil, I said  I  would
             do it, and from tomorrow and pick them up.


    17. There may be an issue of an interpretation of the evidence at  this
        stage, the reference to somebody paying the appellant is clearly  a
        reference to an individual and the reference to "them"  could  also
        clearly be to that individual. The appellant would no doubt  prefer
        it to be interpreted as reading that if one person  approached  the
        appellant initially the reference to 'them' is to the  group  later
        referred to in the PIQ, but there was clearly no reference  in  the
        earlier evidence to the later claim. There also  appears  to  be  a
        discrepancy between the initial claim of only one approach  in  the
        screening interview yet in the reply in the PIQ to  this  occurring
        on two occasions (see paragraphs 12-18).
    18. As noted above, the appellant also claimed to face  a  threat  from
        Daesh, a clear  reference  to  ISIS,  yet  in  the  further  detail
        provided in the PIQ there is no reference to  a  threat  from  this
        organisation.
    19. It is accepted that in the appellant's asylum  interview  there  is
        reference to a threat from Daesh which is recorded at questions 107-
        109:


        Q107:     When did Daesh threaten you?
        A:        Perhaps about 20/22 days after the incident.


        Q108:         Where were you when they threatened you?
        A:        I was in Turkey.
        Q109:         How did they threaten you?
        A:        They had sent a letter, the family of two guys  who  were
                  from Dezil had told my dad a few times that they  hold  me
                  responsible for the family members.


    20. I do not find it made out that the Judge's  conclusion  that  there
        are discrepancies in the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  from
        various sources is a finding outside the range of those  reasonably
        available to the Judge. It is a finding that is adequately reasoned
        and was an issue for the Judge to consider in a case  in  which  it
        was established that the key  issue  was  the  credibility  of  the
        claim.
    21. Mr Schwenk also asserted the Judge had erred in law in relation  to
        her findings concerning the appellant's contact with his family  in
        Iran at [48 (d)]. In this paragraph the  Judge  found  very  little
        reference to the appellant's wife  in  the  papers,  the  appellant
        claiming in his initial interview that his wife and child had  gone
        into hiding, in his Asylum Interview that he knew this  as  he  had
        been told by another, which the Judge found to be  a  reference  to
        the appellant's uncle for credible reasons, although the Judge also
        records the appellant also claiming at the hearing that he did  not
        mean his uncle told him his wife was in hiding, but that  a  friend
        had told him, despite the  previous  reference  identified  by  the
        Judge to the uncle. The Judge was clearly  cautious  about  holding
        this issue against the appellant, noting there was reference to the
        friend S throughout the  evidence  and  that  the  appellant  could
        simply have made a mistake, although the Judge did not accept  this
        was the situation when analysing other aspects of the  evidence  as
        referred to in the decision.
    22. The Judge did not find it credible that the appellant who had  been
        in contact with a friend, his own mother, and an uncle in Iran, via
        the Internet, had had no contact with his  wife  or  his  son.  The
        finding of the Judge who had the benefit of  considering  not  only
        the documentary evidence but also seeing and hearing the  appellant
        gave oral evidence that on this issue, and who found the  appellant
        was being "deliberately evasive",  has  not  been  shown  to  be  a
        finding outside the range of those available to the  Judge  on  the
        evidence.
    23. It is not made out the Judge misunderstood the  evidence  given  in
        relation to this issue. For even if the  appellant's  wife  has  no
        access to the Internet and the appellant cannot afford to  pay  for
        data to contact his wife  on  his  mobile  phone  as  claimed,  the
        finding of the  Judge  that  notwithstanding  having  contact  with
        individuals in Iran the appellant had not made any contact with his
        wife, even if they had to travel to the property of a friend or his
        own mother, was not plausibility has not been shown to be a finding
        outside the range of those available to the Judge on the  evidence.
        The appellant's claim in relation to costs was a  matter  of  which
        the Judge was clearly aware for which adequate  reasons  are  given
        for rejecting the appellant's account in relation to his allegation
        he has not had contact those family members.
    24. Mr  Schwenk  also  asserts  the  Judge  engaged  in  "impermissible
        speculation" at [48 (e)] when finding that the  vehicle  driven  by
        the appellant would stand out somewhat in a small  village  and  at
        [48 (i)] that Daesh would  not  send  a  letter  to  the  appellant
        threatening him, claiming there was no evidence to  support  either
        of the findings, such that they  amounted  to  speculation  without
        which the Judge's conclusions might have been different.
    25. Mr Tan, in  his  response  referred  to  the  fact  the  Judge  had
        available  to  her  a  picture  of  the  minibus  which  the  Judge
        specifically refers to as being a photograph of a large coach  type
        vehicle which she would not normally assume would be referred to as
        a minibus. The Judge noted that although this is not  a  photograph
        of the exact vehicle the appellant claims he  drove  the  appellant
        accepted the picture resembled the  vehicle  that  he  had  driven,
        which he stated was a 17-seater vehicle. There is nothing  arguably
        irrational,  speculative,  or  outside  the  range  of   reasonable
        conclusions in the Judge finding that a vehicle of that size  would
        stand out in a small village environment, especially as it was  not
        from that village. There was no evidence before the Judge  or  even
        this tribunal to show  that  small  villages  are  populated  on  a
        regular basis by such vehicles. The  Judge's  observation  that  if
        members of Daesh wanted  to  go  to  a  village  where  they  would
        undertake activities that could have  the  most  dire  consequences
        should they be discovered it appears unlikely they would use such a
        large and conspicuous vehicle has not been shown to  be  a  finding
        outside the range of those available to the Judge on the evidence.
    26. In relation to the letter, at [48(i)] the Judge noted it  was  part
        of the appellant's claim that when he was in Turkey  a  letter  was
        sent to his home containing threats to him, as noted above, but the
        finding of the Judge that there was a local connection between  the
        appellant and those who had allegedly been  arrested,  which  would
        make it known that he had  left  Iran,  and  that  as  a  terrorist
        organisation it was not credible that such a letter would have been
        sent in the first place, has not  been  shown  to  be  an  arguably
        rational finding. The modus operandi of Daesh (ISIS) is well  known
        as much has been written  in  the  public  domain  and  in  country
        reports of the brutal  nature  of  this  organisation  who  detain,
        behead, and seriously ill treat those who  come  to  their  adverse
        attention. The Judge is an  experienced  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal who would have judicial knowledge of the way in which this
        organisation acts. It is not to made out the Judge's  findings  are
        infected by legal error on the basis of impermissible  speculation.
        There was no country information or other such evidence adduced  by
        the appellant to support his  claim  such  as  to  establish  legal
        error.
    27. Mr Schwenk also asserted the Judge erred in  law  in  relying  upon
        demeanour without exercising the  required  degree  of  caution  in
        relation to the weight that could be given to such issues. This  is
        a criticism of the Judge's finding at [48 (d)] that the Judge found
        the appellant to be deliberately evasive when giving his  evidence.
        I do not  find  the  appellant  has  established  that  this  is  a
        conclusion based upon demeanour, but rather a finding of the  Judge
        based upon the manner in which the appellant answered questions put
        to him. As noted above, the Judge clearly had the benefit of seeing
        and hearing the appellant give oral evidence and is  not  made  out
        the Judge  was  not  entitled  to  conclude,  having  had  such  an
        advantage, that the appellant was being deliberately evasive in his
        answers.
    28. The term  'demeanour'  normally  refers  to  outward  behaviour  or
        bearing. It is  clear  the  Judge  makes  no  adverse  findings  in
        relation to such issues but focuses  upon  the  nature  of  answers
        given and the relevance of the same to the  questions  put  to  the
        appellant. The Judges approach and assessment of the evidence is in
        accordance with the decision of Mr Justice Ousley  sitting  in  the
        Immigration Appeal Tribunal in MM (DRC) [2005]   UKIAT   00019   in
        which it was found that  in  general  the demeanour  of  a  witness
         should  not  be  relied  on  but  rather  it  is  the  content  of
         the  evidence  as  a whole which  must  underpin  any  credibility
        findings.
    29. Mr Schwenk also asserted the Judge erred by relying upon a  further
        example of "inherent implausibility" when finding  the  appellant's
        mother would not be able to escape by a  back  door,  or  that  the
        appellant would switch his mobile phone off or be unable to  safely
        stay at an orchard as he claimed. This ground of  challenge  is  to
        the findings made at [48 (c)] and [48(g)].
    30. In [48(c)] the Judge discusses the credibility of  the  appellant's
        claim that his mother came to warn him that the authorities were at
        his house. The Judge notes that to do this the  appellant's  mother
        would have to leave the house, which the respondent in the  Reasons
        for Refusal Letter found to be inconsistent in light of  the  claim
        that the IRCG who the appellant had  claimed  are  an  intelligence
        service in Iran had a spy keeping an eye out for him at  his  home,
        which the Judge accepts. It is not unreasonable to assume  that  if
        individuals have been arrested as being members of Daesh in Iran by
        the security services and that they wish to  arrest  the  appellant
        who they believe  may  have  been  involved  in  transporting  such
        individuals that they would have ensured that once their arrival at
        the property was known they would have taken steps to  prevent  the
        appellant from running away i.e. through the back door. The Judge's
        findings in relation to this matter are within the range  of  those
        available to the Judge on the evidence.
    31. It is important to note  the  specific  finding  of  the  Judge  in
        relation to the appellant switching off his mobile phone which is a
        reference to the appellant's claim that he was so concerned when he
        was told the men he dropped off had been arrested that he  went  to
        his uncles who told  him  to  stay  the  night  and  see  what  the
        situation was in the morning, yet the  appellant  claiming  he  had
        switched his phone off for a bit  of  "peace  and  quiet".  If  the
        appellant wanted to know what was developing it is  more  plausible
        that he would have  left  his  phone  switched  on,  which  can  be
        inferred as the concern of the Judge. This  has,  again,  not  been
        shown to be a finding outside the range of those available  to  the
        Judge on the evidence.
    32. Mr Tan also referred to a number of  findings  made  by  the  Judge
        which have not been challenged in the grounds seeking permission to
        appeal such as at [50] in which the Judge found the evidence of the
        appellant relating to Daesh to be  equally  vague  and  lacking  in
        detail for the reason stated. Findings are also made by  the  Judge
        at [51], [52], and [53] including the claim the appellant had  left
        Iran illegally which was dismissed by the Judge.
    33. What has not been shown to be infected by legal error  material  to
        the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  is  the  Judge's   overall
        conclusion at [54] in which the Judge writes:


        54.  In all the circumstances, having regard to the totality of the
             evidence, for the reasons set  out  above,  and  applying  the
             lower standard of proof, I conclude  that  the  appellant  has
             failed to establish well-founder, or a real  risk  of  serious
             harm, such as would qualify him for  international  protection
             on the claimed ground.


    34. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the Judge's assessment  of  the
        evidence and findings made, suggesting the decision cannot stand on
        the basis of the submissions made and the lack of  care  identified
        in the matters concerning Judge Pickup, and seeks a more favourable
        outcome to enable him to remain in the United Kingdom, the  grounds
        fail to establish legal error material to the decision  to  dismiss
        the appeal sufficient to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any
        further in this matter.

Decision

    35. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

Anonymity.


    36. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 21 July 2021












