
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09914/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 May 2021                       |On 03 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                SM (UKraine)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N. Nnamani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal under section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  27
    September 2017  to  refuse  the  appellant's  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection claim made on 23 March 2017.  I refer  to  the  respondent's
    decision as being contained in the "reasons  for  refusal  letter",  or
    'RFRL'.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine born in 1982.  He claims to  have
    ignored two summonses  for  compulsory  military  service  in  Ukraine,
    issued in February and March 2016, and  to  have  been  prosecuted  and
    sentenced  on  25  November  2016  in  his  absence  to   four   years'
    imprisonment for draft evasion.  He claims that he will  be  identified
    as a convicted criminal at the border upon his return and  subsequently
    will be imprisoned in conditions that would breach  Article  3  of  the
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  ("the  ECHR").   Although  the
    appellant originally claimed asylum on the basis  that  he  would  face
    being persecuted for failing to perform military service in Ukraine, he
    no longer maintains that limb of his claim, as confirmed by Ms  Nnamani
    at the outset of the hearing before me.

Procedural and factual background

 3. This is the appellant's third substantive appeal against the  Secretary
    of State's refusal decision.  The  appellant's  appeal  was  originally
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  in  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 8 August 2018.  That decision was set aside by a
    different constitution of this tribunal on 8 November 2018 and remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  matter  was  reheard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver on 25 October 2019, who dismissed the appeal in a
    decision promulgated on 25 November 2019. The appellant again  appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 5 March
    2020, I found the decision of Judge Oliver to have involved the  making
    of an error of law and set it aside with no findings of fact preserved.
    My error of law decision may be found in the Annex to this judgment.

 4. I directed that the matter be reheard in this tribunal, and it  was  in
    those circumstances that it resumed before me, on a face-to-face  basis
    at Field House, on 20  May  2021,  following  a  delay  caused  by  the
    pandemic.

 5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  a  visitor's  visa  in
    September 2006. He overstayed and subsequently came to the attention of
    the Secretary of State, who placed him on  reporting  conditions  which
    persisted for a considerable period. On 30 November  2016,  advised  by
    the same solicitors through which he was  later  to  make  this  asylum
    claim, the appellant applied to the Secretary of  State  for  leave  to
    remain on grounds of his human rights. That application was refused and
    certified as "clearly unfounded" on 13 February 2017. On 23 March 2017,
    the appellant claimed asylum.  A screening interview took place  on  29
    March 2017, and a substantive interview  was  conducted  on  16  August
    2017.  The claim was refused on  27  September  2017  and  it  is  that
    refusal  decision  the  appellant  now   appeals   against   in   these
    proceedings.

 6. The appellant claims that a  postman  delivered  two  military  call-up
    notices to his mother's home in Ukraine on  25  February  2016  and  31
    March 2016, requiring  him  to  attend  appointments  in  order  to  be
    enlisted for compulsory military service. The  appellant  was  in  this
    country at the time, without a passport (which he claims to  have  lost
    at an early point during his residence here), and was unable to  return
    to Ukraine to perform his service. In any event, he did not want to; he
    knew of people who had returned from the frontline in the conflict with
    the Russia-backed groups with mental illnesses from the trauma they had
    experienced. He was afraid for his life in his likely role as a sapper.

 7. As a result of failing to report  to  the  military  commissariat,  the
    appellant was prosecuted and tried  in  absentia,  he  claims.  He  was
    sentenced to four years' imprisonment and has not been able  to  appeal
    due to being in this country following advice his mother received  from
    a local solicitor that he had no case. The  basis  of  the  appellant's
    Article 3 claim is that he  will  be  imprisoned  upon  his  return  to
    Ukraine and detained in conditions which  would  not  comply  with  the
    requirements of Article 3 of the ECHR. He no longer maintains  that  he
    would be entitled to refugee status on account  of  being  required  to
    perform compulsory military service.

 8. The respondent's case, as set out in the RFRL, and as developed  by  Mr
    Lindsay before me, is that the documents relied upon by  the  appellant
    to demonstrate that he has been called for military service  and  tried
    in  his  absence  are  not  reliable.  Even  if  they   were   genuine,
    fraudulently-obtained genuine documents are prevalent in  Ukraine.  The
    background materials and relevant country guidance suggest that, absent
    some special factor, prosecution for draft evasion is highly  unlikely,
    still less is a sentence of four years' imprisonment reasonably  likely
    to have been imposed.  I am invited to reject the appellant's case that
    he received call-up notices in his absence and find  that  he  was  not
    tried in absentia.

Legal framework

 9. Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights provides:

         "No one shall be subjected to torture or to  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment or punishment."

10. In VB and Another (draft evaders  and  prison  conditions)  Ukraine  CG
    [2017] UKUT 00079 (IAC), this tribunal held,  at  paragraph  3  of  the
    Headnote:

         "There is  a  real  risk  that  the  conditions  of  detention  and
         imprisonment in Ukraine would  subject  a  person  returned  to  be
         detained or imprisoned to a breach of Article 3 ECHR."

11. The appellant bears the burden of proof to establish his  case  to  the
    lower standard.  He must demonstrate that  he  faces  a  real  risk  of
    substantial harm.

Documentary evidence

12. In the course of the two substantive  hearings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, these proceedings have generated a number of materials,  many
    of which overlap. The appellant relied on the bundle prepared  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal, a supplementary bundle, plus three expert  reports
    from Professor Mark Galeotti.  At the hearing, the  appellant  provided
    original copies of the summonses he claims to have received in Ukraine,
    an original version of the Ukrainian court judgment, plus the  envelope
    they were said to have been provided in by his mother from Ukraine.





The hearing

13. The appellant participated in  the  hearing  in  Ukrainian  through  an
    interpreter.  At  the  outset,  I  clarified  that  the  appellant  and
    interpreter could understand one another.

14. The appellant gave evidence and adopted his statement dated 26  October
    2017, prepared for the first appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    That statement is in identical terms to  the  one  he  signed  for  the
    second First-tier Tribunal appeal.  He was cross-examined.   I  do  not
    propose to set out the entirety of the  appellant's  evidence  in  this
    decision; I will do so to  the  extent  necessary  to  reach  and  give
    reasons for my discussion.

Discussion

15. I reached the following findings having considered the entirety of  the
    evidence in the round, to the lower standard.

16. By way of a preliminary matter, as Ms Nnamani  realistically  accepted,
    the appellant's claim does not engage the 1951 Geneva  Convention.   Ms
    Nnamani explained that, in light of the findings of PK  and  OS  (basic
    rules of human conduct) Ukraine CG [2020] UKUT 314 (IAC), the appellant
    no longer considers his asylum claim to engage the 1951 Convention  and
    does not pursue it.  This  appeal  is  therefore  dismissed  on  asylum
    grounds.  I turn to Article 3.

17. The appellant's Article 3 case turns primarily on whether I accept  the
    two central planks of the his case: first, whether he received  call-up
    papers, and secondly, whether I accept that he has been sentenced to  a
    term of four years' imprisonment in his absence.  If it  is  reasonably
    likely  that  the  appellant  has  been  sentenced   to   four   years'
    imprisonment, pursuant to VB it is reasonably likely that he  would  be
    subject to the non-Article 3 compliant detention conditions in Ukraine,
    although he may be entitled to a retrial.

18. It is necessary  to  consider  the  background  materials  and  country
    guidance relevant to military service in Ukraine.  In PK and OS, it was
    held that it remained the case that it was not reasonably likely that a
    draft evader avoiding conscription or  mobilisation  in  Ukraine  would
    face criminal or administrative proceedings;  the  panel  endorsed  the
    guidance previously given in VB  to  that  effect  in  2017  (headnote,
    [3.b]).  At [277] of PK and OS,  the  tribunal  found  that  the  'vast
    majority' of draft evaders are not prosecuted, and at [283] that  draft
    evaders are not reasonably likely to  be  identified  as  such  at  the
    border.  In PK and OS it  was  also  held  that,  absent  some  special
    factor, it was highly likely that a person who had  been  convicted  of
    unlawfully avoiding military service would be sentenced to a period  of
    imprisonment.

19. VB also held that an immediate custodial sentence  would  be  unlikely,
    barring some aggravating feature: see paragraph 1 of the  headnote;  as
    did PK at [3.c].

20. The  respondent's  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  -  Ukraine:
    documentation,  version  1.0,  May  2020  ('the  CPIN'),  outlines  the
    prevalence of forged documents, and genuine but  fraudulently  obtained
    documents: see paragraph 6.1.1 and following.  The use of fraudulently-
    obtained genuine documents is prolific, and there is a cottage industry
    specialising in the production of false documents.

21. Turning to the specific evidence in the case, it is trite law that  the
    weight to be ascribed  to  individual  pieces  of  evidence,  including
    documentary evidence, is a matter to be considered in  the  context  of
    the overall evidence in the case, including  the  background  materials
    and country guidance.  See QC (verification of documents; Mibanga duty)
    China [2021] UKUT 33 (IAC), which states in the first paragraph of  the
    Headnote:

         "The decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in  Tanveer  Ahmed
         [2002] UKIAT 00439 remains good law as regards the correct approach
         to  documents  adduced  in  immigration  appeals.  The  overarching
         question for the judicial fact-finder will be whether the  document
         in question can be regarded as reliable..."

22. The appellant relies upon three reports from Prof. Galeotti,  dated  26
    October 2017, 10 October 2019 and 17 December  2019  to  underline  the
    reliability of the summonses and the court documents.   Prof.  Galeotti
    is an expert in post-Soviet security, policing and crime matters in the
    region.  He is a Senior Fellow at the Royal United  Services  Institute
    and holds a number of other prestigious  positions.  He  has  travelled
    extensively to the region and has high level contacts  in  Ukraine.   I
    accept that he is an expert in those  matters  and  that  his  opinions
    carry weight, although two  reservations  are  necessary.   First,  all
    three reports pre-date PK and OS.  Secondly, Prof. Galeotti  is  not  a
    document verification specialist.   While  I  accept  that  a  regional
    expert would  be  better  placed  than  many  to  comment  on  official
    documents issued by the government of Ukraine,  with  the  greatest  of
    respect to Prof. Galeotti, document verification does  not  lie  within
    his primary expertise.

23. Prof. Galeotti concludes that the summonses appear to be  genuine,  and
    typical of those issued to reservists and conscripts, based on 25  such
    documents he has viewed in total.  Their layout is typical, and factual
    details (such  as  the  location  of  the  commissariat)  is  accurate.
    Normally they would be back-printed (which the  appellant's  are  not),
    but that is not concerning, as around a third of the examples of  call-
    up papers viewed by Prof. Galeotti were not  back-printed,  he  writes.
    Normally one would expect a longer gap between  the  first  and  second
    summonses, in contrast to the summonses issued only weeks apart in this
    case, but  given  the  ongoing  conflict  at  the  time,  that  is  not
    concerning, considers Prof. Galeotti.  The ink  quality  is  poor,  but
    that is true of many summonses, and the official stamps  appear  to  be
    genuine.

24. The judgment of the  court  appears  to  be  genuine,  considers  Prof.
    Galeotti.  The judge  was  publicly  listed  on  a  Ukrainian  judicial
    website at the time Prof. Galeotti first analysed  the  judgment,  even
    if, in light of the respondent's concerns raised at the hearings before
    the First-tier Tribunal and addressed in his third  report,  the  judge
    appears no longer to hold judicial office in Ukraine.   The  judgment's
    layout was typical of Ukrainian judgments; it adopted one of three main
    stylistic approaches.  The provisions of Ukrainian law referred to were
    accurate, as was the location of the court, and the  reference  to  the
    appellant's period of mobilisation.

25. Although Prof. Galeotti recognised  that  he  does  not  have  specific
    document verification expertise, his overall regional  experience  gave
    him confidence that the documents were genuine.  Concerns raised by the
    Secretary of State before Judge Oliver, which Prof. Galeotti  responded
    to in his third report concerning the  functionality  of  the  weblinks
    cited in the first two reports, were without foundation  and  puzzling:
    they all worked, he wrote.

26. In my judgment, it  is  not  clear  how  Prof.  Galeotti  was  able  to
    benchmark or otherwise calibrate the 25 call-up papers  he  has  viewed
    throughout his career against a  genuine  document.   He  had  retained
    copies of only 12 such documents.  His reports do not engage  with  the
    possibility that the documents he has viewed in  other  contexts  could
    themselves have been forged; certainly  one  would  expect  a  regional
    expert report addressing  the  reliability  of  official  documents  to
    engage with the prevalence of false documents in the country concerned,
    in light of the varied background materials to that effect collated  by
    the respondent in the CPIN, or otherwise distinguish  those  background
    materials.  I also have some concerns about  Prof.  Galeotti's  opinion
    concerning the fact that, although  most  call-up  papers  were  "back-
    printed" (that is, featuring official text on the reverse), a third  of
    those he viewed were not.  When assessing such significant  differences
    between call-up papers, the national incidence  of  document  forgeries
    was a matter that should have been the subject  of  some  consideration
    but was not.  It is not clear whether the call-up papers  without  back
    printing were genuine, or further examples of the prevalent practice of
    forgery in Ukraine.

27. When examining the judgment of the Ukrainian  court,  although  in  his
    second report at paragraph 21 Prof. Galeotti notes the findings  of  VB
    concerning the low likelihood of prosecutions  for  draft  evasion,  he
    distinguishes those findings on the basis they related to  the  2014/15
    draft.  By the time the appellant was called up,  in  early  2016,  the
    conflict in the east of the country had  changed  matters,  he  opined.
    Enforcement was more likely by then.  The difficulty  with  relying  on
    that analysis in these proceedings is that PK and OS  has  subsequently
    clarified  that  the  enforcement  emphasis  remains  on  non-custodial
    disposals.  Imprisonment  is  'highly  unlikely',  as  set  out  above.
    Matters had not changed to the extent suggested by Prof. Galeotti.  The
    most recent country guidance throws the professor's analysis into sharp
    relief.  There is no updated, post-PK and OS report from Prof. Galeott.

28. Even putting the above concerns about Prof. Galeotti's analysis of  the
    summonses to one side,  Prof.  Galeotti  does  not  address  the  well-
    documented prevalence of fraudulently-obtained genuine documents.  This
    is an observation  which  applies  equally  to  the  Galeotti  reports'
    analysis of both the summonses and the judgment.  The  reports  do  not
    address whether, if the documents are genuine,  they  are  nevertheless
    reliable.  In  light  of  the  prevalence  of  genuine  but  fraudulent
    documents in Ukraine, there  is  considerable  force  to  Mr  Lindsay's
    submissions that the key issue is, if the documents are 'genuine',  are
    they reliable?  Whether  a  document  is  genuine  is  not  necessarily
    determinative of its reliability.  To assess reliability, the  entirety
    of the evidence must be considered, in the round.

29. I turn, therefore, to the evidence of the appellant.  I accept that his
    evidence before me was largely consistent with the accounts he provided
    in his screening and substantive asylum interviews.

30. Under cross-examination the appellant was able to  provide  only  scant
    details relating to the receipt of the summonses at his mother's  house
    and the court proceedings.  He claims to have done nothing in  response
    to the summonses  being  received,  and  nothing  in  response  to  the
    judgment sentencing him to four years'  imprisonment.   He  said  under
    cross-examination that his mother sought the advice of a  solicitor  in
    Ukraine to address the court's decision, whereas his witness statements
    were silent as to that fact.  His mother provided a  witness  statement
    for  the  second  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  dated  11
    September 2019, in which she stated that,  in  response  to  the  court
    summons, she sought the advice of a solicitor:

         "However they told me bluntly that  they  could  not  help  as  the
         appellant  had  broken  the  law  and  would  almost  certainly  be
         prosecuted in his absence and that there would also be no chance to
         lodge an appeal. I was devastated as I thought if I  paid  for  his
         services he would be able to help."

    Putting to one side the fact  that  the  appellant's  mother's  account
    differs from his in relation to whether the solicitor's assistance  was
    sought before or after the judgment, it is striking that there  are  no
    details in the appellant's own statement relating to seeking  the  help
    of a solicitor. He confirmed under cross-examination that  he  has  not
    sought to address the imposition of the sentence in  any  way,  despite
    its length, and despite the magnitude of the mistreatment that, on  his
    own case, he will be subject to. When pressed  under  cross-examination
    as to why he had taken no steps, the appellant was unable to provide an
    answer. I found his evidence in this respect to be  unsatisfactory.  At
    times he simply shrugged his shoulders.  On any view, the imposition of
    a  sentence  of  four  years'  imprisonment  is  a   matter   of   some
    significance.  The appellant's inability to explain any reaction to it,
    or steps taken in response, gives rise to some credibility concerns.

31. The appellant's  mother's  statement's  summary  of  the  legal  advice
    purportedly received by the Ukrainian lawyer also  conflicts  with  the
    background materials  and  country  guidance.    The  advice  that  the
    appellant "would almost certainly" be prosected is  at  odds  with  the
    conclusions of two country guidance cases, VB and PK &  OS,  that  very
    few people are prosected for draft evasion in Ukraine.   VB  held  that
    those convicted in absentia would probably be able to appeal, a finding
    which appears to be at odds with the advice purportedly  received  from
    the Ukrainian solicitor that the appellant had no case at all.

32. There is another feature of the appellant's claimed conviction which is
    inconsistent  with  the  background  materials:  the  length   of   the
    appellant's sentence.  Mr Lindsay asked the appellant if he  was  aware
    of any special feature about his  circumstances  or  prosecution  which
    would give rise to a sentence of four years'  imprisonment,  given  the
    background materials and country guidance suggests that the emphasis of
    Ukrainian prosecutors and  the  courts  is  on  fines  and  other  non-
    custodial disposals for draft evasion. The appellant was  not  able  to
    highlight any such features, and in submissions,  Ms  Nnamani  did  not
    draw my attention to any considerations  inherent  to  the  appellant's
    circumstances in Ukraine that would have merited a higher sentence.  He
    left Ukraine in 2006, when he would have been 25  years  old.   He  had
    been a student and had undertaken some military training as part of his
    course, but it was not his case (as Ms Nnamani confirmed) that he was a
    reservist.  He had worked for a year before  coming  to  the  UK  on  a
    visitor's visa.  It is difficult to see a special factor that  features
    in the appellant's case which displaces the  high  likelihood  of  non-
    custodial sentences being imposed, or any features that would place his
    case at the four year point on a sentencing scale of a theoretical five
    year maximum; the appellant did not attempt to demonstrate  that  there
    were any.

33. Drawing this analysis together, while I accept that Prof.  Galeotti  is
    an established expert in regional security matters, he has not had  the
    benefit I have had of hearing the  appellant's  evidence  tested  under
    cross-examination. Prof. Galeotti did not  address  the  potential  for
    fraudulently-obtained genuine documents to be held  by  the  appellant.
    The reports pre-date the latest country guidance in PK and OS, and  are
    inconsistent with it in some respects as set out above, particularly in
    relation to the likelihood of the appellant  being  prosecuted.   Prof.
    Galeotti is not a document verification expert, and while  his  opinion
    in principle attracts weight, some features  of  his  analysis  of  the
    documents featured weaknesses.

34. Turning to the appellant's evidence, it was light on detail and  lacked
    credibility.  His oral evidence featured significant events  that  were
    not in his statements, such as his mother's claimed attempt  to  secure
    legal  advice.   His  mother's  evidence  of  the  solicitor's   advice
    contrasts with the country guidance and background materials concerning
    the likelihood of prison sentences being imposed and  the  availability
    of a right of appeal.  The appellant highlighted no special feature  of
    his case which could have merited such  a  significant  sentence  being
    imposed, as set out above.

35. In her closing submissions, Ms Nnamani highlighted how  the  respondent
    had not obtained her own report to authenticate the documents. I do not
    consider this to be a  case  where  the  respondent's  duty  to  verify
    documents and protection claims  is  engaged.  As  outlined  in  QC  at
    paragraph 1 of the headnote, the obligation upon the respondent to take
    steps to verify document arises only exceptionally  (in  the  sense  of
    rarely):

         "An obligation on the  respondent  to  take  steps  to  verify  the
         authenticity of the document relied on by an appellant  will  arise
         only exceptionally (in the sense of rarely).  This  will  be  where
         the document is central to the claim; can easily be  authenticated;
         and where (as in  Singh  v  Belgium  (Application  No.  33210/11)),
         authentication is unlikely to leave any  'live'  issue  as  to  the
         reliability of its contents.  It is for the tribunal to decide,  in
         all the circumstances of the case, whether the  obligation  arises.
         If the respondent does not fulfil the  obligation,  the  respondent
         cannot  challenge  the  authenticity  of  the   document   in   the
         proceedings; but that does  not  necessarily  mean  the  respondent
         cannot question the reliability of what the document says.  In  all
         cases, it remains the task of the judicial  fact-finder  to  assess
         the document's relevance to the claim  in  the  light  of,  and  by
         reference to, the rest of the evidence."

36. Two of the essential criteria for the respondent's duty to  be  engaged
    are not met in the present matter. First, the document cannot easily be
    authenticated; Ms Nnamani did not attempt to contend that it could  be.
    Secondly, and more significantly, authentication of the documents would
    not extinguish any remaining "live" issues as  to  the  reliability  of
    their contents. As outlined above, there is  a  prevalent  practice  in
    Ukraine of the use of  fraudulently  obtained  but  genuine  documents.
    Whereas Ms Nnamani attempted to categorise this distinction relied upon
    by Mr Lindsay as an "intellectual" distinction,  with  the  implication
    that it was of no relevance, in my judgment it is a central point. Even
    if the documents relied upon by the appellant in these proceedings were
    genuine, the remaining concerns  surrounding  the  appellant's  overall
    credibility as a witness would  be  outstanding.  Verification  by  the
    respondent would be unlikely to take the matter much further.

37. Finally, while not determinative, I recall that despite, on  his  case,
    having already received the call-up papers and  having  been  convicted
    and sentenced to four years imprisonment in his absence, the  appellant
    did not make an asylum claim at the time in 2016. Instead,  he  made  a
    human rights claim, and did not claim  asylum  until  the  refusal  and
    certification of that claim is clearly unfounded. Pursuant  to  section
    8(5) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)  Act
    2004, that is a factor harming the appellant's credibility.

38. In conclusion, therefore, having analysed the evidence in the  case  to
    the round, to the lower standard, I make the following findings.  I  do
    not consider the call-up papers and the judgment of the Ukrainian court
    to be reliable.  They are inconsistent with  the  background  materials
    and the relevant country guidance. The  appellant's  statements  lacked
    essential detail that he introduced only  under  cross-examination,  in
    particular the steps taken by his mother to challenge  the  prosecution
    against him.  His oral evidence lacked depth and was evasive at  times.
    He did not make the claim for asylum at the time he contends the events
    giving rise to the basis of the claim took place,  instead  pursuing  a
    different  type  of  application,  which  was  certified  as   "clearly
    unfounded".  I do not consider the appellant to be credible.

39. I find that the appellant has not demonstrated to  the  lower  standard
    that he received call-up papers in February and March 2016, nor that he
    was prosecuted and sentenced to four years'  imprisonment  in  absentia
    later that year.  It  follows  that  there  is  no  real  risk  of  the
    appellant being subject to detention or  imprisonment  in  Ukraine  for
    draft evasion or any other reason, which is dispositive of this Article
    3 claim.

40. The appellant did not argue that he would face Article  3  mistreatment
    on any other grounds, nor did he advance an Article 8 based claim.

41. This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

42. Notwithstanding the above findings, in order to  ensure  this  judgment
    does not expose the appellant to a risk he does not currently  face,  I
    maintain the anonymity direction already in force.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 24 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


                                   +[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09914/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Yemets
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, SM, is a citizen of Ukraine, born on 13  May  1982.   He
    appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M.R.  Oliver
    promulgated on  25  November  2019  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 27 September 2017 to refuse his  claim
    for asylum and humanitarian protection. The basis  of  the  appellant's
    claim is that he faces persecution and/or  inhumane  prison  conditions
    for evading military service in Ukraine, having been issued with  call-
    up papers in 2016[1].

Factual background

 2. The appellant claims to have received two military call-up documents at
    his home address in Ukraine, in February and March 2016. He also claims
    that he was sentenced by a court in Ukraine  on  25  November  2016  in
    absentia to four years' imprisonment for  draft  evasion,  providing  a
    judgment of the relevant local court as confirmation.  Upon his return,
    he claims, he will be detained and subject to inhumane conditions,  and
    compelled to work as a mine-clearer in a potentially lethal role.

 3. This matter has a lengthy procedural background. The appellant  arrived
    in this country on a visitor's visa in September 2006. He did not leave
    upon its expiration.  He was encountered by the police in December 2008
    and later placed on  reporting  conditions.  He  made  a  human  rights
    application  in  November  2016.   The  application  was  refused   and
    certified as clearly unfounded. On 23 March 2017, the appellant claimed
    asylum.

 4.  The  appellant  originally  appealed  to  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Greasley, who dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  8
    August 2018.  Upper Tribunal Judge Storey set that decision aside on  8
    November 2018 and gave directions for the service  of  a  supplementary
    expert's report, an issue to which I shall return. The matter was  then
    reheard, with no findings preserved, in the First-tier Tribunal, before
    Judge Oliver. It is that decision which the appellant  appeals  against
    in these proceedings.

Permission to appeal

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    the basis that, first, the judge's  approach  to  the  expert  evidence
    involved procedural unfairness, was irrational, and that  his  findings
    were inadequately reasoned (Ground  1).   A  second  ground  of  appeal
    related to the judge's assessment of the appellant's risk on return, in
    the event that the documents were genuine.  Ground 2 did not  stand  on
    its own, as it was only engaged if  the  documents  were  found  to  be
    genuine.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The context for the grant of  permission  to  appeal  arises  from  the
    appellant's reliance on reports of a Professor Galeotti, an  expert  in
    the region and in Ukrainian military matters.  The first report,  dated
    26 October 2017, was also submitted to Judge  Greasley.   It  concluded
    that the conscription documents and the court  judgment  were  genuine,
    although it did not say whether the author had viewed the  respondent's
    refusal letter and other documents relating to the  appellant's  claim,
    leading to Judge Greasley applying minimal weight to it.  Judge Storey,
    when  setting  aside  Judge  Greasley's  findings  for  other  reasons,
    directed that the appellant provide a supplementary report, considering
    some of the concerns raised by Judge Greasley, and setting out  whether
    he had seen the respondent's refusal  letter  and  the  record  of  the
    asylum interview.  The appellant complied with that direction,  insofar
    as obtaining a supplementary report, dated 10  October  2019,  although
    the supplementary report did not say whether the professor had seen the
    documents before reaching his views, contrary to the directions  of  Dr
    Storey.

 7. At the hearing before Judge Oliver, the respondent  relied  on  written
    submissions which sought to critique the contents  and  conclusions  of
    both Galeotti reports.  The critique included screenshots of  Ukrainian
    websites which the professor claimed to have relied upon but which, the
    submissions  contended,  demonstrated  that  the  conclusions  of   the
    Galeotti report could not be  sustained.   Details  of  the  judge  who
    purportedly presided over the appellant's court hearing in Ukraine were
    not included in a published list of judges presiding over the court  in
    question, and nor did a public list of judgments feature details of the
    appellant's case, contended the submissions.

 8. Judge Oliver appeared to be  persuaded  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
    written submissions.  At [39] he said:

         "The submissions made in the document served by the respondent  and
         adopted at the hearing  follow  the  methodology  outlined  in  the
         expert  report  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.  I  have
         attempted to follow the search route set  out  in  the  submissions
         purely to check the  accuracy  of  the  reported  results  and  the
         results  accorded  with  those  of  the  anonymous  author  of  the
         submissions, save for  the  results  of  searching  under  the  web
         address as referred to in the expert footnote 9 and 12, which  came
         up with similar but not identical pages."

 9. The judge sought post-hearing confirmation from Prof. Galeotti that  he
    had seen the respondent's refusal letter and the record of  the  asylum
    interview. Confirmation was provided in an email submitted to the judge
    after the hearing by the appellant's solicitors.  At  [40],  the  judge
    appeared to have concerns that Prof. Galeotti  had  not  addressed  the
    concerns raised by the respondent in her written submissions:

         "Following the hearing on 25 November 2019 [sic]  counsel  for  the
         appellant submitted an email from the expert in which he  confirmed
         that he had sight of the respondent's  refusal  letter  and  asylum
         interview. The expert must have had  some  communication  with  the
         appellant's legal team after the hearing but had not replied to the
         written submissions submitted on behalf of the respondent. For  all
         of the reasons  set  out  above  I  find  that  the  documents  are
         unreliable (Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD* [2002] UKAIT 00439)."

    The judge must have meant to state 25 October  2019.   The  letter  was
    sent by Yemets Solicitors, not the appellant's barrister,  as  recorded
    by the judge.

10. The judge found that the documents  were  not  genuine,  and  that  the
    appellant did not face a real risk of being persecuted upon his return.
     Even if they were genuine and the appellant had been sentenced to four
    years' imprisonment, he would be able to appeal upon his return.

Discussion

11. Ms Nnamani advanced a robust attack on  the  judge's  analysis  of  the
    Galeotti  reports.  She  contends  that  the   judge   placed   "unduly
    significant weight" on the contents of the Secretary of State's written
    submissions; the document was  unsigned  and  purported  to  engage  in
    analysis of the Galeotti reports for which the author's  expertise  was
    not apparent. The judge was  procedurally  unfair  by  expecting  Prof.
    Galeotti to respond the submissions of the Secretary of State, given he
    had not directed him to do so, and there had been  no  indication  that
    post-hearing submissions were sought in relation to anything other than
    the specific matter upon which the judge requested assistance  (namely,
    compliance with Dr Storey's directions), still less that they would  be
    welcomed.

12. Mr Bramble submits that the judge did no more than  engage  a  detailed
    analysis of the contents  of  the  reports,  as  part  of  his  overall
    assessment of the case.  The judge was required to adopt this  approach
    pursuant to R (on the application of Hoxha and Others) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  (representatives:  professional  duties)
    [2019] UKUT 00124 (IAC), headnote (3), he submitted:

         "(3) Where a medical expert  report  is  relied  upon  by  a  legal
         representative, the representative has a duty to check  the  report
         for accuracy, including ensuring the report accurately reflects the
         way in which the information in it came to be obtained."

    Headnote (vi) to PP (female headed household; expert duties) Sri  Lanka
    [2017] UKUT 117  (IAC)  requires  a  similarly  vigorous  approach,  Mr
    Bramble also submitted:



         "(vi)       The methodology of every expert witness  should  always
         be patent on the face of the report. If not, it should be  provided
         via a supplement, accompanied by a full and  frank  explanation  of
         the  omission.  Experts  and  practitioners  are  reminded  of  the
         decisions of the Upper Tribunal in MOJ and Others [2014]  UKUT  442
         (IAC), at [23] - [38] and MS (Trafficking  -  Tribunal's  powers  -
         Article 4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 226 (IAC), at [68] - [69]."

13. Mr Bramble is, of course, correct to submit that the judge was entitled
    to scrutinise the Galeotti reports.  No authority is required for  that
    proposition (I do not consider the proposition  to  be  established  by
    either of the authorities  relied  upon  by  Mr  Bramble,  which  cover
    different situations, neither of which concern the task of a judge upon
    consideration of reports submitted to a tribunal).  Some of the written
    submissions of the Secretary of State set out considerations which were
    valid and rational.  For example, Prof. Galeotti did not have  document
    verification expertise of his own.  He did not have  genuine,  verified
    documents against which to benchmark or calibrate his assessment of the
    appellant's documents.   His first report had been compiled without the
    benefit of seeing the original documents.

14. However, there is also considerable force in Ms Nnamani's  submissions.
    Most  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  written   submissions   featured
    untranslated screenshots of Ukrainian websites, all of  which  were  in
    Cyrillic script.  It is not clear how the judge purported to be able to
    have understood these websites, still less that he was able to  compare
    them to the analysis conducted by Prof. Galeotti  with  any  degree  of
    confidence.  It may be that the judge understands written Ukrainian; if
    so, he did not say so, nor explain what the documents meant.

15. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal may only be on a point of  law,  not  a
    point of fact.   The  question  for  my  consideration,  therefore,  is
    whether the judge's  analysis  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  written
    submissions was irrational, or otherwise  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law such that the decision must be set aside.  Did the judge's
    analysis of the Galeotti reports lead to him reaching findings that  no
    reasonable judge could have reached?  See, for example, the approach of
    the Supreme Court in Henderson v Foxworth Investments Ltd  [2014]  UKSC
    41; [2014] 1 WLR 2600 at [62]:

         "It does not matter, with whatever degree of  certainty,  that  the
         appellate court considers that it would have  reached  a  different
         conclusion. What matters is whether the decision  under  appeal  is
         one that no reasonable judge could have reached."

16. The judge had the advantage of hearing the evidence in the case, and of
    considering the entire evidential landscape in a way that an  appellate
    tribunal does not.  There was certainly much analysis  in  the  judge's
    decision which was plainly open to him on the facts.  For example,  the
    judge was entitled to ascribe significance to the late claim for asylum
    [41].  Ms Nnamani has not expressly challenged  his  finding  that  the
    appellant decided very shortly after his arrival in 2006  that  he  was
    not going to leave, and that that decision had nothing  to  do  with  a
    well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  [43].   The  basis  of   the
    appellant's claim for asylum was not a  Convention  ground  [42].   The
    judge also had legitimate concerns about the dates  and  times  of  the
    call-up documents [38], and  the  fact  that  the  four  year  sentence
    purportedly imposed on the appellant featured no  explanation  for  its
    significant length, as would normally be expected [44].

17. It is in this respect that the judge's  comments  at  [40]  are  highly
    relevant.  The judge appeared to ascribe significance to the fact  that
    Prof.  Galeotti  had  not  "replied"  to  the  Secretary   of   State's
    submissions, served on the day of the hearing, with no advance  notice.
    This was despite the fact that he "must  have  had  some  communication
    with the appellant's legal team after the hearing".  The judge had  not
    invited  Prof.  Galeotti  to  respond  to  the  Secretary  of   State's
    submissions, or to provide a further supplementary report.  He had  not
    indicated that post-hearing evidence would even be welcome,  yet  alone
    necessary.  All that the judge  had  asked  to  take  place  after  the
    hearing was for the professor to confirm that he had seen the documents
    the Judge Storey directed he have sight of.

18. The appellant cannot be criticised for having failed  to  do  something
    that a party would never normally be permitted to do, which he was  not
    directed to  do.   While  judges  are  not  required  to  give  running
    commentary on the evidence in the case, where a significant point is to
    be taken against a party which has not been canvassed by  the  parties,
    fairness requires the judge to enable the party in question to have the
    opportunity to respond to the point.    The  judge's  approach  to  the
    "failure" of Prof. Galeotti to respond  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    report in these circumstances amounted to procedural  unfairness.   See
    AM (Fair hearing) Sudan [2015] UKUT 656 (IAC), headnote (v):


             "Fairness may require a Tribunal to canvas an issue which has
             not been ventilated by the parties or their representatives,
             in fulfilment of each party's right to a fair hearing."

19. This error in isolation is sufficient to render  the  judge's  findings
    unsafe.  However, when this concern is placed  alongside  the  concerns
    set out above arising from the judge's  reliance  on  the  untranslated
    documents in Ukrainian, the errors are  compounded.   While  the  judge
    made superficially sound findings  elsewhere  in  his  decision,  those
    findings may have been tainted by his procedurally  unfair  and  flawed
    approach to the Galeotti reports and the Secretary of  State's  written
    submissions.

20. The decision involved the making of an error of law  and  must  be  set
    aside, with no findings preserved.

21. In light of my findings, above, it is not necessary for me to  consider
    the second ground of appeal, concerning whether the judge erred in  his
    application of the Country Guidance.

22. In view of the fact this matter has already been heard  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal twice, I consider that it  will  not  be  appropriate  to
    remit it for a third hearing.  I direct that the matter be  reheard  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

23. I give the following directions:

        a. Within 14 days of being sent this decision, the appellant is  to
           serve on the Upper Tribunal and the respondent a further  report
           from Prof. Galeotti responding to the concerns set  out  in  the
           written submissions of the Secretary of  State  advanced  before
           Judge Oliver;

        b. Within 28 days of being sent this decision, the  respondent  may
           serve further written submissions.

        c. If either party wishes to rely on websites or other documents in
           a  foreign  language,  that  party  must  produce  a   certified
           translation of all such documents.

24. I maintain the anonymity order previously made.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Oliver involved the making of an error of law  and  is
set aside with no findings preserved.

The matter will be reheard in the Upper Tribunal with  a  time  estimate  of
three hours and a Ukrainian interpreter.

The parties are to comply with the directions in paragraph 23, above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith        Date 27 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith























-----------------------
[1] The original decision promulgated stated 2015, which was a
typographical error.  It was 2016.

