
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09216/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd February 2019                        |On 27th February 2019         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SHK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Brown, Counsel instructed by WTB Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").
     However, as  this  a  protection  claim,  it  is  appropriate  that  a
    direction is made.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  Court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of
    his family. This direction  applies  amongst  others  to  all  parties.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national who appealed to the  FtT  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 10th July 2018 refusing his claim  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection.  His appeal was dismissed  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision of FtT Judge Davies promulgated on 13th
    September 2018.


The decision of the FtT Judge


 3. Mr Brown was prepared to accept for today's purposes that a summary  of
    the appellant's asylum claim is accurately set out at  paragraphs  [13]
    to [19] of the decision of the FtT Judge.  I do not repeat the  account
    of events relied upon by the appellant in this decision.


 4. As the Judge notes at paragraph [29] of his decision, at the hearing of
    the appeal before the FtT there was no Home Office Presenting  Officer.
    The Judge heard evidence from the appellant and at paragraph [32],  the
    Judge records that the appellant adopted the contents  of  his  witness
    statement as his evidence.  The only other evidence that is referred to
    by the Judge, is that which is recorded at paragraphs  [33]  and  [34],
    relating to the appellant's failure to claim asylum  en  route  to  the
    United Kingdom, an issue that had been identified by the Judge  as  set
    out at paragraph [28] of the decision.


 5. The Judge notes at paragraph [35] of his decision that the issue in the
    appeal  was  the  claim  made  by  the  appellant  to  be  bisexual  or
    homosexual.  The Judge's findings are set out  at  paragraphs  [38]  to
    [42] of the decision.  Insofar as the core of the  appellant's  account
    is concerned, the Judge states at paragraphs [38] and [39]:


         "38. I have no hesitation whatsoever,  after  considering  all  the
         evidence, and applying the  lower  standard  of  proof  to  it,  to
         conclude that the appellant has fabricated  in  its  entirety,  the
         reasons why he left Iraq and what he fears if he should be returned
         there.


         39.  There is not one scrap of credible evidence  to  indicate  the
         appellant is either bisexual or homosexual. The appellant's account
         of entering into a homosexual relationship at a young  age  with  a
         man called Ismail is wholly unbelievable,  as  is  his  claim  that
         Ismail  was  caught  by  a  cleaner  in  the  Mosque  touching  the
         appellant's private parts. I do not believe that the appellant left
         Iraq in the circumstances he claims.  The  evidence  overwhelmingly
         indicates he is an economic migrant."


 6. The appellant claims that the Judge has  failed  to  adequately  engage
    with the claim made on behalf of  the  appellant,  and  has  failed  to
    provide any or any  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    claim.  It  is  said  that  the  FtT  Judge  essentially  rejected  the
    appellant's account of his sexuality, simply because he had  failed  to
    claim asylum en route to the UK.


 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on  11th
    December 2018.  The matter comes before me  to  determine  whether  the
    decision of the FtT Judge contains a material error of law, and if  so,
    the remake the decision.


 8. At the conclusion of the hearing before me, I informed the parties that
    in my judgement, the decision of the FtT Judge does contain a  material
    error of law, and that I would set aside that  decision.  Having  heard
    from  the  parties,  I  also  informed  the   parties   that   in   the
    circumstances, the appropriate course is for the matter to be  remitted
    to the FtT for hearing afresh.  I said that I would  give  the  reasons
    for my decision in writing. This I now do.


Discussion


 9. The assessment of credibility in an appeal such as  this  is  always  a
    highly fact sensitive task.  The FtT Judge  was  not  assisted  by  the
    failure of the respondent to attend the  hearing,  particularly  in  an
    appeal where the respondent's case was that  the  appellant  is  not  a
    credible witness, and had provided a vague and inconsistent account  of
    his sexuality.  The opportunity to  test  the  appellant's  account  of
    events was therefore limited.   However,  the  Judge  was  nevertheless
    required to consider the evidence carefully, and where the  appellant's
    account was rejected, set out his reasons for rejecting  the  evidence.
    The Judge was required to give a brief explanation of  the  conclusions
    that he had reached on the central issues;     Shizad  (sufficiency  of
    reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC


10. Although I accept that the reasons provided need not be  extensive,  it
    was for the Judge to consider the ingredients of  the  story,  and  the
    story as a whole, by reference to all the  evidence  available  to  the
    Tribunal.  It was for the Tribunal to make findings on whether, and  to
    what extent, the appellant's account is credible. To simply  recite  in
    two sentences, as the Judge did  here,  the  appellant's  account,  and
    simply say that it  is  "wholly  unbelievable",  is  in  my  judgement,
    insufficient.  The Judge failed to explain or set out his  reasons  for
    reaching the conclusion or to explain why he considered the account  to
    be wholly unbelievable.


11. I accept, as Mr Brown submits, that what is necessary is for the  Judge
    to identify and resolve key conflicts in the evidence, and  explain  in
    clear and brief terms his reasons, so that the parties  can  understand
    why they have won or lost.  He  submits  and  I  accept,  that  from  a
    reading of paragraphs [38] to  [42]  of  the  decision,  the  appellant
    cannot know why the Judge rejected his account  of  being  bisexual  or
    homosexual, beyond the fact that he did not claim asylum  en  route  to
    the UK.


12. The appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely, but that  does  not
    mean that it is untrue.  It may well have been open  to  the  Judge  to
    find in the end, that the appellant's account of events is not credible
    and is untrue, but the appellant is entitled to know  the  reasons  why
    the Judge reached that conclusion.


13. In my judgement the FtT Judge failed to make adequate findings of fact,
    as to those aspects of the claim that lay at the heart  of  the  claim.
    It follows that in my judgement, the  decision  of  the  FtT  Judge  is
    infected by a material error of law, and the appeal is allowed.


14. I must then consider whether to remit the case to the FtT,  or  to  re-
    make the decision myself. In my judgment, the appropriate course is  to
    remit the matter to  the  FtT  for  hearing  afresh  with  no  findings
    preserved. In reaching my decision, I have taken into account paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement  of  25th  September
    2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and extent  of
    any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The parties will
    be advised of the date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  in  due
    course.


Notice of Decision


15. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of  FtT  Judge  Davies  is  set
    aside.


16. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh  hearing  of  the  appeal
    with no findings preserved.


    Signed                                   Date           22nd   February
    2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia








TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


    Signed                                   Date           22nd   February
2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


