
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/09162/2016
     pa/09173/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 6th June 2019                     |On 18th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            s r (FIRST APPELLANT)
                           h r (SECOND APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Jones of Counsel instructed by Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Juss (the  judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 2nd January 2018.

 2. The Appellants are Iranian citizens of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   They  are
    brothers and were born  on  30th  October  2000  and  12  January  2002
    respectively.

 3. They arrived in the UK  clandestinely  in  February  2016  and  claimed
    asylum.  Their claim was that their parents had been supporters of  the
    PJAK Party in Iran which is a Kurdish Party working for the rights  and
    freedoms of the Kurdish people.  Members and supporters of  this  party
    would be at risk from the authorities in Iran.

 4. The Appellants' case was that their parents made clothes for  PJAK  and
    delivered them.  On occasions the first Appellant had  accompanied  his
    father.

 5. On 26th December 2015 the Appellants  were  on  their  way  home  after
    grazing sheep.  They were met by their maternal  uncle  who  told  them
    that their parents had been arrested in relation  to  their  activities
    for PJAK and the lives of the Appellants would be in danger.  The uncle
    hid the Appellants in a house in a nearby  village  for  fifteen  days.
    During this time their uncle told the Appellants that  the  authorities
    had visited his home, and also homes of his neighbours looking for  the
    Appellants.  The Appellants left Iran on 10th January 2016 illegally.

 6. The Respondent refused the claims for international  protection  on  19
    August 2016.   The Appellants' appeals were  initially  heard  on  16th
    March 2017 by Judge Graham of the FtT.   The  appeals  were  dismissed.
    That decision was however set aside by the Upper Tribunal in a decision
    promulgated on 18th September 2017, and the appeals were remitted  back
    to the FtT to be heard afresh.

 7. The judge heard the appeals on 7th December 2017.  The judge  dismissed
    the appeals and made findings in paragraph 18 of his decision which  is
    set out below;

         "18.  However,  the  fact  is  that  the  maternal  uncle  of  both
             Appellants is the direct relative of  the  Appellants'  mother
             and the Iranian authorities had not targeted him in  any  way,
             making him of no adverse interest to  the  authorities  there.
             Accordingly, on the lower standard, I find that the Appellants
             are not at risk  of  ill-treatment  or  persecution.   If  the
             Iranian authorities  are  not  interested  in  a  close  adult
             relative they are not likely to be interested in boys who were
             14-15  years  old.   Even  if  their  account   is   believed,
             therefore, they fail  to  establish  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution."

 8. The Appellants then applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 9. It was contended that the judge had failed to adequately  consider  the
    Appellants' claims.  At paragraph 18 the judge had  provided  his  only
    justification for rejecting the asylum claims,  which  was  that  their
    maternal uncle had not been arrested and therefore there was no risk to
    the Appellants.

10. It was contended that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  first
    Appellant's explanation at paragraph 37 of his  witness  statement  and
    the judge had failed to point  to  any  evidence  that  a  relative  as
    distant as an uncle (or  brother  in  their  mother's  case)  would  be
    reasonably likely  to  be  targeted  by  the  authorities.   The  first
    Appellant accompanied his father on deliveries to PJAK,  whereas  there
    was no suggestion that the maternal uncle had any such involvement.

Permission to Appeal

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  O'Ryan
    who noted that the sole  reason  why  the  appeals  were  dismissed  is
    contained within paragraph 18.  It was found arguable  that  the  judge
    erred in law in failing to adequately consider the Appellants'  claims.
    The first Appellant's account was that he not only assisted his  father
    in making uniforms for PJAK but accompanied his father to deliver them.
     It was arguable that the judge had failed to  take  into  account  the
    first Appellant's claim that he had been involved, whereas his maternal
    uncle had not.

12. Following the grant of permission to  appeal,  directions  were  issued
    that there should be an oral  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such that the decision  must
    be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. Mr Jones relied upon the grounds upon which permission  to  appeal  had
    been granted, and the grant of permission.

14. Mrs Aboni submitted that there was no material error and relied upon  a
    response dated 21st November 2018, prepared pursuant to rule 24 of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   In  summary  it  was
    contended that the judge had directed  himself  appropriately  and  was
    entitled to take into account the  lack  of  interest  by  the  Iranian
    authorities in the Appellant's uncle.  It was submitted that  objective
    evidence referred to in the Respondent's refusal decision supported the
    judge's view that if there was no interest from the authorities  in  an
    adult relative, there will be no interest in children.

15. Mr Jones disagreed with that submission, contending that the Respondent
    had been selective in  relation  to  references  made  to  the  Country
    Information and Guidance, Iran: Kurds August 2015.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. Both representatives before me agreed that the only findings in the FtT
    decision are those contained in paragraph  18.   I  am  afraid  that  I
    conclude that those findings are not adequate.  No finding is  made  as
    to whether the parents of the  Appellants  were  arrested  as  claimed.
    This was a central  point.   Their  arrest  was  not  accepted  by  the
    Respondent in the refusal decisions.

18. No findings were made in relation to the  claim  that  the  Appellants'
    parents supported PJAK and made uniforms for them.  No finding was made
    as to whether the Appellants' father delivered the  uniforms  to  PJAK,
    and no finding made as to whether the first Appellant  accompanied  his
    father on those trips.

19. No finding was made as to what  involvement  the  Appellants'  maternal
    uncle had if any, in relation to PJAK.  It is contended  on  behalf  of
    the Appellants, that there was no suggestion that  the  maternal  uncle
    had any involvement.

20. The judge does not specify in paragraph 18 which objective evidence  he
    has considered and relied upon.

21. The Appellants complain that the judge did not make  adequate  findings
    of fact, and did not provide adequate reasons for concluding that  they
    would not be at risk.

22. Guidance on giving reasons for decisions  is  contained  in  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decisions)  [2014]  UKUT  00341  (IAC)  and  for  ease  of
    reference I set out the head note to that decision below;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue  raised  in  the  case.
         This leads to judgments becoming overly long and  confused  and  is
         not a proportionate approach to deciding cases.   It  is,  however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

23. I do not find that the judge has complied with the guidance referred to
    above.  As there is no finding as to the involvement of the  uncle,  it
    is unclear why the authorities' lack of interest  in  him,  would  mean
    there  would  be  no  interest  in  the  first  Appellant,  given   his
    involvement in accompanying his father to provide  uniforms  for  PJAK.
    The second Appellant is said to have had no knowledge of this, but  his
    case very much depends upon what view the  authorities  would  take  in
    relation to the first Appellant.

24. As I find that adequate findings of fact, and adequate reasons have not
    been given, I must set aside the decision of the FtT with  no  findings
    preserved.

25. Both  representatives  agreed  at  the  hearing,  when  I  reserved  my
    decision, that if a material error of law was found, as contended, then
    it would be appropriate to remit the appeal back to the FtT to be heard
    again.

26. I am conscious that there have already been two hearings  in  the  FtT.
    That is regrettable.  However I have  considered  paragraph  7  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statements and find  that  the  appropriate
    course must be to remit the appeal back to the FtT  again,  because  of
    the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding that will  be  necessary
    in order for this decision to be remade.

27. The appeal will be heard at  the  Birmingham  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised at the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FtT judge who has had no previous  involvement  in
    this case.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because this is a claim for international protection,  and
the second Appellant is a minor.


Signed                              Date: 6th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The issue of any fee award will need to be  considered
by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 6th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall






