

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09530/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24 August 2017                   |On 25 August 2017                     |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    J p a
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Kotak, of Counsel, instructed by Barnes, Harild
                    and Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, an Iranian national of Kurdish ethnicity born  on  5
         May 2001, challenges the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Traynor dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  refusal  on
         18 August 2016 to grant him protection in the UK. As  a  minor,  he
         has, however, been granted  discretionary  leave.  The  appeal  was
         dismissed by way of a determination promulgated on 18 January  2017
         following a hearing at Taylor House on 11 October 2016.
      2. The appellant claimed to have witnessed an alleged fight between  a
         shop owner and a Pasdaran guard in 2015. The guard was hit  with  a
         stick and later died of his  injuries.  The  appellant  then  heard
         through his uncle that all those who had been present  were  wanted
         by the authorities. His uncle and mother made arrangements for  him
         to leave. He travelled here  via  Turkey  and  France  and  claimed
         asylum.


      3. The initial grounds for permission to appeal,  at  23  pages,  were
         unnecessarily  lengthy  and  some  10   pages   longer   than   the
         determination. Permission to appeal was refused  by  Judge  Parkes.
         The application was renewed and the grounds to the  Upper  Tribunal
         were more succinct.    Permission to appeal was granted on 29  June
         2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer.



      4. At the hearing before me on 24 August 2017, Ms  Kotak  expanded  on
         the grounds in her submissions  and  Mr  Avery  responded.  At  the
         conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my decision which I now give.



      5. Conclusions



      6. Only one ground is  advanced.  It  takes  issue  with  the  judge's
         assessment of the risk to the appellant on return to  Iran  and  is
         divided into several sub sections. I deal with each in turn.



      7. The first complaint is that the judge failed to  consider  relevant
         evidence; that is to say, he did not consider the issue of the risk
         to the appellant on return on account of his Kurdish ethnicity. The
         judge is criticised for  maintaining  this  was  a  new  issue  and
         reference is made to  various  statements  of  evidence  where  the
         appellant  mentioned  his  ethnicity  and  claimed  he  would  have
         problems because of it.



      8. The difficulty with this complaint is that  it  takes  the  judge's
         comments out of context. The remarks which the appellant criticizes
         are contained at paragraph 41. The judge's  precise  comments  are:
         "Although in her skeleton argument and oral submissions, Counsel on
         behalf of the appellant seeks to argue that because  the  appellant
         is an ethnic Kurd who would be returned to Iran as an  undocumented
         failed asylum seeker he is at risk. I find this is a new  assertion
         which has only been introduced at this stage  of  the  hearing  and
         certainly not something that the appellant  has  ever  advanced  in
         connection  with  is  claim.  He  has  never  suggested  that   the
         authorities have been interested in him on account of him being  an
         ethnic Kurd". It is plain then that the judge was not  saying  that
         the appellant had never claimed to be a Kurd. What  he  was  saying
         was that he had not claimed he would be at risk  on  return  purely
         because of his ethnicity and that is borne out by the evidence. The
         witness statement referred to in the grounds was prepared  for  the
         appeal hearing and with the assistance of his  representatives.  No
         such claim was, however, made at his asylum interview. Even in  the
         witness statement there was no claim  that  he  would  be  at  risk
         solely as a Kurdish asylum seeker; the claim was made that the risk
         to him would be exacerbated by this fact.


      9. Nevertheless, contrary to what is argued, the judge did engage with
         the issue. At paragraphs 42, 43, 44, 45 and 47  he  considered  the
         claim but concluded that the appellant's  young  age  and  lack  of
         political profile would make adverse interest in him  unlikely  and
         this finding was supported  by  the  absence  of  any  evidence  to
         suggest otherwise.



     10. This ties in with the second complaint; that  the  judge  erred  in
         disregarding the expert report. The judge considered the reports by
         Dr Joffe and Dr Kahkhi at paragraph 41 but considered that they did
         not  relate  specifically  to  the  appellant  or  his   particular
         circumstances as a minor. That was a conclusion he was entitled  to
         reach. The appellant was  a  child  at  the  time  of  the  alleged
         incident and his return now, when he is still a  minor,  cannot  be
         equated with the return of adult asylum seeking Kurds who are dealt
         with in the reports. It was entirely open to the judge to  conclude
         that adults and minors would be treated differently and I have  not
         been referred to any evidence to suggest  that  would  not  be  the
         case.  Moreover,  the  submission  in  the  grounds  regarding  the
         discrimination and persecution of Kurds, supported by the  reports,
         does not accord with the appellant's own evidence at interview that
         his first and only problem was the alleged incident in 2015. He did
         not claim that he had suffered  discrimination  or  persecution  on
         account of his ethnicity nor did he claim his family had.  For  the
         large  part  the  extracts  cited  in  the  grounds  refer  to  the
         mistreatment of Kurdish  activists,  armed  Kurdish  groups,  Kurds
         exercising  their  freedom  of  expression,  members   of   Kurdish
         opposition parties and Kurdish militants. None of  these  scenarios
         would apply to the appellant.


     11. The third complaint is that country  evidence  was  not  considered
         when considering the return of failed Kurdish asylum seekers.  This
         is linked to the  first  complaint.  The  difficulty  is  that  the
         evidence does not relate  to  the  treatment  of  Kurdish  children
         returning to Iran. It is difficult to see how a rehearsal  of  this
         evidence in the determination would have  advanced  the  particular
         issue before the judge.



     12. Finally, it is argued that country guidance was not considered.  It
         is more precise to state that  current  country  guidance  was  not
         considered as the judge did, indeed, refer to and apply SB (risk on
         return - illegal exit) Iran [2009] UKAIT 00053. I accept that there
         was no reference to SSH and HR (Illegal exit: failed asylum seeker)
         CG [2016] UKUT 308 however as  the  parties  both  noted  in  their
         submissions there are no fundamental differences  between  the  two
         decisions and I was not referred to anything in the later  decision
         which would suggest that the appellant was materially disadvantaged
         by a failure to consider the case. Moreover, neither case addresses
         the particular situation of a child. Whilst it  would,  of  course,
         have been preferable  for  the  judge  to  have  considered  recent
         country guidance, even if only to reject it  as  irrelevant,  given
         the particular circumstances of this case  there  was  no  material
         error in failing to do so.



     13. It is significant that the judge's findings on the core  claim  are
         unchallenged. No issue has been taken with the  judge's  conclusion
         that the core claim relating to the alleged  fight  and  subsequent
         interest in all those present was  not  made  out.  Those  findings
         therefore stand unchallenged.



     14. As the applicant has discretionary leave as a minor, no  article  8
         claim was brought.



     15. For all the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that there are no
         material errors in the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  determination
         and the decision to dismiss the appeal stands.



     16. Decision


     17. The appeal is dismissed.



     18. Anonymity



     19. Although I was not asked to do so, I continue the  anonymity  order
         made by the First-tier Tribunal.



    Signed


       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 25 August 2017


