
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09518/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Teams                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2021                               |On 28 June 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     FMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Fadarhussain
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision promulgated on 2 October 2020, I set aside  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal. My reasons were as follows:

         1.   The appellant was born in 1991 and is a male citizen of  Iran.
         He entered the United Kingdom in August 2017 claimed asylum.  By  a
         decision dated  23  September  2019,  the  respondent  refused  the
         appellant's  claim  for  international  protection.  The  appellant
         appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,   in   a   decision
         promulgated  on  18  November  2019,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The Upper Tribunal issued directions indicating a  provisional
         view that the matter of error of law/setting aside of the  decision
         may appropriately be determined without  a  hearing.  Both  parties
         have responded to those directions. In the light of the  responses,
         I consider that it is both fair and appropriate for the  appeal  to
         be determined by reference to those responses only  and  without  a
         hearing.

         3.   The respondent accepts that the first of the  two  grounds  of
         appeal reveals 'a material error of law.' Mr  Howells,  writing  on
         behalf of the Secretary of State , states: '[Ground 1] asserts that
         the FTTJ failed to apply relevant case law in her consideration  of
         the risk to the appellant on  return  to  Iran.  In  response,  the
         respondent accepts that the FTTJ's reasoning  at  [36-40]  for  her
         finding that the appellant would not be a real risk  on  return  to
         Iran is unclear.' As I understand the expression 'material error of
         law' used by Mr Howells, it appears that  the  Secretary  of  State
         considers that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  legally
         flawed such that it should be set aside. I agree. For the avoidance
         of doubt, I find that the judge's finding at [40] that there is 'no
         reasonable likelihood that the appellant's sur place activity  will
         come to the attention of the authorities in Iran' is not preserved.

         4.   The parties are not agreed as to whether  Ground  1  has  been
         established. Mr Howells writes:

             This Ground asserts that the FTTJ heard in  her  consideration
             of the appellant's claim to have been a smuggler in  Iran.  In
             the respondent's submission, the FTTJ gave adequate reasons at
             [18-20] for not accepting this part of the appellant's  claim.
             At [18], the FTTJ identified several material discrepancies in
             the appellant's evidence in relation  to  the  nature  of  the
             goods smuggled, how the goods were transported, whether he was
             working in a group and how the group operated.  At  [19],  the
             FTTJ identified a further material inconsistency as to whether
             the appellant had been involved personally in smuggling  white
             goods.

             The respondent notes that the grounds  do  not  challenge  the
             FTTJ's finding that the appellant was not  involved  with  the
             KDPI in Iran [34] nor the FTTJ's finding that Ettlaat did  not
             attempt to recruit the appellant as  an  informer  within  the
             KDPI [34].

         5.   The appellant's representatives have responded as follows:

             The appellant continues to rely on  the  previous  submissions
             [which I have also considered] and  notes  that  there  is  no
             consideration  of  the  clarifications  made   following   the
             interview, and excessive reliance is placed on this.  As  such
             the appellant submits that focus  on  what  is  effectively  a
             single issue drive from  a  series  of  questions,  cannot  be
             characterised as 'several material inconsistencies' such as to
             undermine the otherwise credible evidence given.

         6.   I have considered the First-tier Tribunal decision  carefully.
         I find that I agree with the respondent's submissions. There is  no
         reason  to  consider  that  the  judge  did  not  have  regard   to
         'clarifications made following the interview' by the appellant; the
         judge made it clear [10]  that  she  had  considered  all  relevant
         documentary and oral evidence before reaching a decision. Moreover,
         not all the inconsistencies referred to by the judge arose from the
         appellant's asylum interview; that identified in  the  decision  at
         [19]  emerged  from  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  before   the
         Tribunal.

         7.   I find that the error of law  which  both  parties  considered
         occurred in this decision does not in any way affect  the  findings
         of fact reached by the judge. Rather, the  error  solely  concerned
         the application of country guidance concerning risk  on  return  to
         those facts. Accordingly, I find that the  findings  summarised  by
         the judge at [34-35] should be preserved. In reaching that decision
         I have had regard to the recent guidance contained in AB (preserved
         FtT findings; Wisniewski principles) Iraq [2020]  UKUT  268  (IAC).
         However, given that I have not preserved the findings  at  [40]  as
         regards the appellant's sur place activities, this  aspect  of  the
         case will need to be re-examined as anticipated by the  appellant's
         representatives in their written submissions at [10].

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The  findings
         of fact summarised at [34-35] are preserved. The decision  will  be
         remade by the Upper Tribunal at or following a resumed hearing on a
         date  to  be  fixed  (Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane,  if  available,
         otherwise any Upper Tribunal Judge/Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge;  2
         hours; Manchester  Civil  Justice  Centre;  first  available  date;
         remote hearing by Skype for Business; Kurdish Sorani interpreter)



 2. At the resumed hearing on 16 June 2021, Mr McVeety,  who  appeared  for
    the Secretary of State, drew my attention to the following paragraph of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision:

         30. ... I accept that the  appellant  holds  a  genuine  belief  in
         favour of greater rights for Kurdish people in Iran. I accept  that
         because the appellant is Kurdish, he has said that he  has  such  a
         belief and it would be natural for  him  to  have  such  a  belief,
         taking into account the external evidence regarding how  Kurds  are
         treated in Iran.

    That finding is summarised in  slightly  different  terms  at  [34],  a
    paragraph which I expressly preserved in my error of law decision:

         I do accept that the appellant is supportive of the  cause  of  the
         Kurdish people in Iran. However, his support takes the form of  his
         own political views and were it not for the  asylum  claim  in  the
         United Kingdom, he would not have attended  demonstrations,  posted
         on Facebook or have been political in any way.

 3. As Mr McVeety pointed out, there is an obvious  tension  between  these
    two paragraphs.  Notwithstanding  the  judge's  finding  that,  despite
    having genuine separatist opinions, the appellant would not have posted
    on Facebook and that he only  did  so  to  support  his  asylum  claim.
    However, Mr McVeety agreed that the finding at [30] engaged  HJ  (Iran)
    [2010] UKSC 31. It follows  that,  if  the  appellant  was  faced  with
    returning to Iran, he would either delete his Facebook account or would
    not do so. In the first case, the finding at [30] means that  he  would
    feel compelled to silence expression of his political opinion for  fear
    of persecution. In the latter case, he would  be  likely  to  face  ill
    treatment in the (reasonably likely) event that  the  Iran  authorities
    became aware of his posts. Mr McVeety accepted that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not sought to challenge the  finding  at  [30].  It  follows,
    therefore, that, whatever he choses to do with his Facebook account, he
    should be recognised as a refugee. In the circumstances,  I  allow  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  23
    September 2019 on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.




    Notice of Decision

    I allow, on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds, the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 23 September 2019






         Signed                              Date 16 June 2021


        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

