
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/09138/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2019                      |On 22 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                    M R H
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Kajambala, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Turfan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1998.  He appealed against a
    decision of the respondent made on 8 July 2018 to refuse his claim  for
    asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim is that he fears return because of his religion.
     He was Muslim by birth but became disillusioned.  He was introduced by
    a friend to Christianity in April 2016.  He started attending  a  house
    church and was converted.  He was then encouraged to start a  web  blog
    to evangelise people to Christianity.  In July 2017 some  who  attended
    the house church were arrested by the authorities.  He learned of  this
    and went into hiding.  A summons was issued against him and the  family
    home raided.  He left Iran clandestinely in October  2017  arriving  in
    the UK in January 2018 when he claimed asylum.   Following  arrival  in
    the UK he began  attending,  in  January  2018,  the  Jesus  Fellowship
    Church.  He also set up a Facebook page to blog about his  interest  in
    Christianity.

 3. The respondent rejected  the  appellant's  entire  claim,  finding  his
    motivation and reasons for his  claimed  conversion  to  be  vague  and
    inconsistent.  It was not accepted that he was of adverse  interest  to
    the authorities.

 4. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 28 March 2019 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal O'Garro dismissed the appeal.

 6. Her findings are at paragraph 35ff.  In summary, she found against  the
    appellant that he had not given any strong motivation for his  decision
    to convert particularly taking into account the risks; also  the  speed
    with which he claimed he had converted.  Further, it was  not  credible
    that church members would have gathered together at a  meeting  knowing
    they were likely being monitored and could be arrested.

 7. In further adverse findings the judge did not accept the claim that the
    appellant was sent an email warning about his blogging  followed  by  a
    summons; he would have been arbitrarily arrested.  Moreover, there  was
    a lack of evidence  about  his  claimed  blogging  in  Iran.   She,  in
    addition, placed no weight on the claimed summons.

 8. Turning to the appellant's activities in the UK  she  did  not  believe
    these to be of a genuine convert.

    Error of law hearing

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was refused but granted
    on 1 July 2019 on re-application to the Upper Tribunal.

10. The crux of the grounds was that  the  judge  erred  by  analysing  the
    appellant's claimed conversion through the lens of her  own  subjective
    expectations of conversion  from  Islam  to  Christianity.   Similarly,
    concerning the speed of the claimed conversion she  again  imposed  her
    own  subjective  expectations  on  the  appellant's  narrative  without
    substantiating her reasons which, it was submitted, would be  difficult
    to do given  the  highly  personal  nature  of  faith  and  conversion.
    Further, she failed to give adequate consideration to the  evidence  of
    the church witness, Pastor Bird, who attended the hearing and spoke  of
    the appellant's activities and commitment.

11. Mr Turfan conceded that the submissions had merit such  that  the  case
    would need to be heard again.

12. I agreed with the parties.

13. In the circumstances it suffices to deal with the last ground.

14. In her decision the judge, dealing with the UK church activities,  said
    this (at [52], [53] and 54]):-

         "52.     I accept as factually correct the observations  of  Pastor
         Bird about the appellant's attendance at church, his activities and
         his positive interactions with other churchgoers.  I have no  doubt
         that the appellant is an active and keen participant in church life
         as described by Pastor Bird in  his  two  letters.   They  are  all
         positives and a huge tribute to the work the church is doing.


         53.      I find that Pastor Bird has given sincere  evidence  about
         his impressions of the  appellant's  genuineness.   However,  faith
         being something ultimately unprovable because it is irrational  and
         internal, I do not find the witness evidence proves anything  other
         than that the appellant attends church as he says, is baptised  and
         behaves in a way that has the appearance of being a Christian.   If
         the appellant was an accomplished  actor,  seeking  to  act  out  a
         fraudulent conversion, it is still possible Pastor Bird might  give
         the same evidence of being convinced of his faith.  So, for all his
         conviction that the appellant is  genuine,  the  Pastor's  evidence
         alone does not persuade me to the lower standard of proof, that the
         appellant is a genuine Christian.


         54.      I do of course assess Pastor Bird's evidence in the  round
         with all the other evidence and I have not viewed it in  isolation.
         However, when I have regard to  my  concerns  about  that  evidence
         alongside  my  concerns  about  the  appellant's  account  of   his
         conversion in  Iran,  I  find  that  the  appellant  is  unable  to
         establish even to the lower standard that he is a  genuine  convert
         to Christianity."

15. The problem is that the judge failed to have  regard  to  the  guidance
    given in TF and MA (Iran) v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58 which stated (at [39] :-



         "... the appellant's case has to be considered in  the  round,  not
         only on the basis of the appellant's own evidence, which may or may
         not be accepted as  credible,  but  also  on  the  basis  of  other
         evidence that may be available.  It does not follow from  the  fact
         that the appellant himself is disbelieved, even on very large parts
         of his story, that other evidence in support of his case cannot  be
         relied upon.  Much will depend,  of  course,  on  what  that  other
         evidence is.  If, for example, that other evidence comes from  some
         wholly independent source and is, on the face of it, impartial  and
         objective, it is difficult to see how a finding that the  appellant
         himself is  dishonest  can  materially  affect  the  weight  to  be
         attached to it.  If, on the other hand, the  third  party  evidence
         simply comprises information based entirely upon what the appellant
         has previously told the witness, then in assessing what  weight  to
         give to that third party evidence it  may  be  legitimate  for  the
         tribunal to take account of its findings about the  credibility  of
         the appellant, on the basis that it has found the appellant to be a
         liar and capable of making up a story, fabricating an  account  and
         spreading  that  account  amongst  others  as  part  of  a  web  of
         deception.  But much would depend on the time and circumstances  in
         which the third party witness was given  that  information  by  the
         appellant, as well as the credibility of the  third  party  witness
         himself - and it would not be right for a tribunal to dismiss  that
         evidence as having no weight simply on the basis that  it  amounted
         to a repetition of what  the  appellant  had  said  without  having
         regard to those other considerations."


         And also (at [48]): "... Any court or tribunal must be very careful
         not to dismiss an appeal just because an appellant has  told  lies.
         For reasons we have already set out, the judge should not jump  too
         readily to the conclusion that because the appellant has told  lies
         about some matters then his credibility on all matters  is  fatally
         undermined."


         And [49]: "The second point is that even if the FTT judge concludes
         that the witness's evidence on the critical matters  is  undermined
         by a finding that he is generally incredible and not to  be  relied
         on, that has the limited effect that the appellant's  (disbelieved)
         evidence is disregarded or put to one side:  it  does  not  somehow
         become evidence to the opposite effect,  to  be  used  against  the
         appellant in contradiction of other independent evidence  on  which
         he relies.  That again reflects the standard direction in  criminal
         cases in Scotland and applies in civil cases too,  including  cases
         before tribunals.  The judge should not allow his  adverse  finding
         about the credibility of the appellant to sway  his  assessment  of
         the credibility and relevance of other independent evidence bearing
         upon the issue before him.  So here,  where  the  FTT  judges  have
         disbelieved the appellants' evidence that they are genuine converts
         to Christianity, their evidence to that effect will be put  to  one
         side, given no weight.  But the rejection of their evidence on this
         point does  not  become  evidence  that  their  conversion  is  not
         genuine, to be set against other, independent, evidence from  which
         the genuineness of their conversion can be  inferred.   That  other
         evidence requires to be assessed  on  its  merits,  without  any  a
         priori assumption derived from the complainer's own false  evidence
         that it is in some way suspect or of little value."

16. The court also found that church witnesses who  were  in  positions  of
    responsibility within  the  church  who  had  observed  an  appellant's
    activities at church and expressed their views on the genuine nature of
    the appellant's conversion based on their experience were giving expert
    evidence.

17. In this case the judge stated that she assessed the pastor's  "evidence
    in the round ..." However, it is not apparent that  she  has  done  so.
    Rather, what she did was take into account all the material showing, to
    her mind, that the appellant was not a truthful witness;  and  she  has
    then carried that finding  through  in  her  discussion  of  the  other
    evidence, written and oral, from the church witness so as  to  reach  a
    conclusion that the appellant is not telling the truth  about  being  a
    genuine convert. What she ought to have done was to  look  at  all  the
    evidence in the case, including the evidence from the  church  witness,
    on its own merits, before forming a concluded view as to  the  veracity
    of the appellant. In failing to do so she materially erred.

18. As agreed by parties the case must be remitted for a fresh hearing.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material error of law.  It  is
set aside.  No findings stand.  The member(s)  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
chosen to consider the case are not to include Judge O'Garro.


Anonymity Order

Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  order  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway                        19 August 2019

