

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number
PA/09754/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
 Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 18th March 2019
On 19th March 2019




                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                               ZAHRAA MANSOUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:       Mr S Saeed (Solicitor, Aman Solicitors Advocates
(London) Ltd)
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of her
   asylum application was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE at
   Taylor House on the 6th of September 2018 and dismissed for the reasons
   given in the decision promulgated on the 7th of December 2018. In the
   decision the Judge made a number of adverse credibility findings in
   paragraphs 56 to 64.

2. The grounds object to the Appellant's adverse credibility findings on
   the basis that as the Appellant's counsel was about to start making
   submissions the Judge indicated that there was no need to make
   submissions on credibility. This is supported by counsel's note of the
   proceedings. Permission was granted on that basis.

3. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the Home Office took a neutral
   stance on the issue and indicated that the notes taken at the hearing did
   not shed light on the matter. Having had access to the Tribunal file and
   the Judge's Record of Proceedings I note that although there is no record
   of such an indication being made the Judge's notes of the submissions
   made on behalf of the Appellant do not contain any references to
   credibility or submissions that could relate to that matter.

4. I indicated that that appeared to support the contention that the
   indication had been given and that was a position that the Home Office
   did not dispute. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the Judge had
   indicated that credibility was not a matter that the Appellant needed to
   address but went on to make adverse credibility findings. In denying the
   Appellant's representative to make appropriate submissions that was
   procedurally unfair and material to the fairness of the appeal such that
   the decision cannot stand.

5. In the circumstances it is appropriate to set the decision aside and to
   remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing with no findings
   preserved and not to be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House to be
heard de novo with no findings preserved. Not to be heard by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In setting the decision aside and remitting to the First-tier Tribunal the
issue of a fee award remains to be decided by the First-tier Tribunal at
the conclusion of the remitted hearing.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 18th March 2019
