
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09546/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On the 28 October 2020                 |On 9 November 2020              |
|                                       |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     RK
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the
         First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who
         dismissed his protection appeal in a decision promulgated on the 8
         November 2019.

      2. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14 of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as the
         proceedings relate to the circumstances of a protection claim.
         Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction applies
         both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 28 October 2020, by means of Skype for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected to by the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held because it was not
         practicable, and both parties agreed that all issues could be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video. There
         were no issues regarding sound, and no substantial technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing and I am satisfied
         both advocates were able to make their respective cases by the
         chosen means.

Background:

      4. The appellant's claim is summarised in the decision of the FtTJ at
         paragraph 15.   The appellant is an Iraqi citizen of Kurdish
         ethnicity from Kirkuk. His previous claim for asylum is set out in
         the decision of FtTJ Fisher promulgated on 24 June 2011.

      5. The appellant arrived in United Kingdom on 17 January 2008 and
         claimed asylum at the time of his entry he was a minor and whilst
         his application for asylum was refused he was granted leave in view
         of his age until he was 18 years old.

      6. The appellant then made an application for further leave to remain
         which was refused by the respondent in a decision letter dated 18
         April 2011. The basis of his claim was that when selling cigarettes
         outside a coffee shop, some men had bought cigarettes from him and
         had paid twice their value. They had done this on several occasions
         and the appellant was then asked if he would like to earn more than
         50 to hundred dollars per day. The man explained that the appellant
         would be delivering pots of hashish to addresses. When the
         appellant refused one of the men showed him a knife and a gun and
         threatened him. Again, the appellant refused as he was the sole
         provider in the house. The appellant went straight to the local
         police who accompanied him back to the shop but when they arrived,
         the man told the police not to believe him. His parents did not
         believe him until a man visited the house later that evening
         informing them that the appellant had been telling the truth
         because he had overheard men saying that they would kill him for
         what he done by alerting the authorities. He therefore left the
         area with the assistance of his uncle (at paragraph 5).

      7. The FtTJ observed at [16] that the credibility of the appellant's
         account had been accepted and that he had given a consistent and
         coherent account of his experiences in Iraq but it was not accepted
         that it was one which engaged the Refugee Convention. At [16] the
         judge noted that the appellant was hampered in his account because
         he did not know the identity of the group or indeed if the men were
         part of a group as opposed to a few individuals who are simply
         engaged in the trafficking of drugs and that he was not at risk of
         being targeted by an organised group. At [17] the judge noted that
         if he was wrong about that, he was asked on one occasion if he
         would transport drugs and that he would not be persecuted on return
         given the time that had elapsed since the incident. He therefore
         dismissed his claim for asylum. As to Article 8 grounds, the FtTJ
         considered his private life which consisted of his studies and that
         he had a number of friends. The judge noted at [22 "there is at
         least a real possibility that his family might be traced,
         especially further information can be provided to the Red Cross."
         The judge made reference to his learning disability but found that
         it had a limited effect on his life and carrying out the
         proportionality assessment concluded that he should dismiss the
         Article 8 claim.

      8. Further applications were then made by the appellant but on 23 July
         2019 he lodged further submissions in support of a grant of asylum
         or humanitarian protection by way of a "fresh claim".

      9. In a decision letter dated 17 September 2019 the Respondent refused
         his claim for asylum. It was accepted that he was a national of
         Iraq and of Kurdish ethnicity. The further submissions were
         summarised at paragraph 10 which made reference to the poor
         security situation in his home area, that he came from a contested
         area and could not return there that he had no documents and that
         he had no contact with his family, he feared return due to his
         father's Baath party -related activities and that he had a medical
         condition in the UK. The respondent considered the previous
         findings of the FtTJ in 2011 and went to consider the country
         situation and whether returning to Kirkuk would breach Article 15
         (c ). Reference was made to the CPIN at paragraphs 22 - 23 and that
         based on that "country guidance" there had been a clear improvement
         in the security and humanitarian situation in Kirkuk. The decision
         letter went on to consider feasibility of return and it was
         accepted at paragraph 33 that he currently did not have any of the
         Iraqi documentation listed at paragraph 30 which would enable him
         to obtain a passport. In the alternative it was considered that he
         had family members within Iraq and reference was made to the lack
         of tracing. Further reference was made to his attendance at the
         Iraqi embassy. The decision went on to consider the risk of
         destitution, his religion, the risk of kidnapping and issues of
         internal relocation. At paragraphs 80 - 106 is a decision letter
         considered the issue of Article 8.

     10. His claim was therefore refused on all grounds. The appellant
         lodged grounds of appeal against that decision. The appeal against
         that decision came before the FtTJ on the 4 November 2019 and in
         the decision promulgated on 8 November 2019 his appeal was
         dismissed.

     11. The FtTJ set out his analysis of the evidence and his findings of
         fact at paragraphs 10 - 22. He did not consider the appellant to be
         credible and contrasted his witness statement in which it said he
         was illiterate and did not attend school with his interview where
         he said attended school between the ages of 6-8. At paragraph 11,
         the FtTJ agreed with the decision letter that there was
         "substantial evidence to justify a departure" from the country
         guidance decision in AA (Iraq) and that the appellant could return
         to Kirkuk. The judge found that the appellant was in contact with
         his Iraqi family, he was not suffering from any medical problems
         and would not be destitute. The judge made reference to his
         previous claim and that in interview on Iraqi ID was retained on
         the file. At paragraphs 17 - 19 the judge considered the evidence
         as to his attendance at the Iraqi embassy including that of his
         witness that found that by walking off the street and asking for
         documents a request which was refused was not a surprising outcome
         from the embassy. The judge found that there were flights to the IK
         are and he could travel to Erbil directly and therefore there was
         no risk of him returning to Baghdad. The judge found that there was
         no question of internal relocation as it could be returned to his
         home area. At paragraph [23] the judge found for the same reasons
         they would not be "very significant obstacles" to the appellant's
         integration.

     12. Permission to appeal was issued by the appellant acting in person
         and on 22 January 2020 permission was granted by FtTJ Bristow.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     13.  The hearing was originally listed on a date in April 2020.
         However, in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the Upper Tribunal
         issued directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally
         of the view that the error of law issue could be determined without
         a face to face hearing and that this could take place  without a
         hearing. Following these directions, the Upper Tribunal received
         written submissions from the appellant dated 28 April 2020 and the
         respondent on the 6 May 2020. Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia gave
         further directions observing that the Tribunal would be assisted
         from submissions from the parties as to the materiality of the
         error conceded at paragraph 13 of the Rule 2 reply and upon the
         matters set out at paragraphs 14 and 15 of the submissions. UTJ
         Mandalia therefore listed the appeal for a remote hearing via
         Skype.

     14. Both parties have indicated that they were content for the hearing
         to proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the
         hearing to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the
         parties.

     15. Mr Ahmed on behalf of the respondent relied upon on the written
         grounds. There was also a skeleton argument prepared by Mr Malik in
         March 2020 for the purposes of the hearing then scheduled before
         the Upper Tribunal. When asked about the further written
         submissions that his instructing solicitor had provided dated 14
         May 2020 and how they related to the grounds and the issues
         identified by the FtTJ Bristow when granting permission, Mr Ahmed
         set out that he did not rely upon all of those paragraphs but
         identified those that he did.

     16. A Rule 24 response was filed on behalf of the respondent which I
         have read and taken into account. I also heard oral submission from
         the advocates, and I am grateful for their assistance.

Decision on error of law:

     17. It is not necessary to set out the submissions of each of the
         parties in full as I will set out the relevant aspects of those
         submissions when dealing with the grounds advanced on behalf of the
         appellant and my consideration of those issues.

     18. I begin my assessment by reference to the written grounds. Whilst
         the appellant was represented by solicitors and Counsel at the
         hearing before the FtT, it appears that the grounds were drafted by
         the appellant acting in  person.  As may be expected from an
         appellant who does not have the advantage of legal knowledge, the
         grounds do not, with any clarity, set out what were the asserted
         errors of law in the FtT decision. Many of the paragraphs begin
         with the words "I disagree" (as indicated in paragraph 4, 5,6,7 8)
         and others refer to not taking into account material evidence (such
         as paragraph 3) but there is no reference to the material in
         question. At paragraph 9, there is reference to "significant
         obstacles" to return which have not been considered fully and at
         paragraph 10, the appellant identifies an error relating to the
         standard of proof applied by the FtTJ when reaching his assessment.

     19. When the application came before the FtT (Judge Bristow) he granted
         permission to appeal. In the grant of permission, he identifies 3
         grounds; not fully considering material facts/evidence, and
         applying a higher standard of proof still required, and the grounds
         also state that the appellant disagrees with the judge's decision.
         The grant of permission is at paragraph 3. The FtTJ refers to
         paragraph 8 of the FtTJ's decision where he referred to the correct
         lower standard of proof to be applied to the Refugee Convention,
         humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3. He also refers to
         paragraph [15] where the judge writes "I conclude on a balance of
         probabilities that the appellant is in contact with his Iraqi
         family who are still living in Kirkuk and will be able to assist in
         return." The judge went on to state "this is a conclusion relevant
         to the protection aspects of the appeal and so the correct standard
         of proof is the lower standard. It is not clear that the judge was
         making this finding only in relation to the Article a ground of
         appeal whether civil standard would be applicable. The decision and
         reasons do contain an arguable material error of law. Permission to
         appeal is granted that reason. Permission is granted on all grounds
         asserted in the application received 13 December 2019 except those
         which amount to no more than a disagreement with the judge's
         decision."

     20. The grant of permission thus purported to be a limited grant of
         permission  but not only is it is unclear as to the basis of this
         but the FtTJ has not done so in a way which complies with Safi and
         others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC).  The
         FtTJ failed to incorporate his intention to grant permission on
         limited grounds within the decision section of the standard
         document, where it is simply stated, 'permission to appeal is
         granted'. Whilst the judge stated "permission is granted in all
         grounds asserted in the application except those which amount to no
         more than a disagreement with the judge's decision. There is no
         engagement with what paragraphs are a disagreement.

     21. Furthermore, the appellant's solicitors filed a further skeleton
         argument relating to the hearing before the Upper Tribunal that was
         due to be heard pre-COVID-19. Those submissions make reference to a
         large number of grounds. It is not necessary to set them out in
         full but in summary, the grounds challenged the finding of whether
         there were "very significant obstacles " to the appellant's
         reintegration (citing the decision in Kamara) and failing to
         consider whether there were "exceptional circumstances" in relation
         to his appeal in Article 8 grounds and on the basis of his medical
         position. There was also a ground which relied upon the failure to
         follow the country guidance in AA (Iraq) and challenges to the
         findings made in relation to his family and reference made to the
         Red Cross evidence. Following this, a rule 24 response was filed on
         behalf of the respondent dated 6 May 2020 which answered the
         submissions that were made in the further clarification of the
         grounds in March 2020. The rule 24 response dealt with the issue of
         failing to follow the country guidance decision, the issue of
         tracing his family, the standard of proof, identity documents and
         also Article 8. In particular at paragraph 13 it was conceded on
         behalf of the respondent that the judge had failed to make a
         finding or consideration under Article 8 are set out in the
         appellant's "further submissions" (I read that to mean the grounds
         that were amplified in March 2020). However, the reply at
         paragraphs 13 - 15 refers to the general position in Article 8 but
         also that the appellant did not raise this in his original grounds.
         However in the alternative, even if the tribunal were minded to
         consider the issue, it was submitted that in relation to the facts
         of the Article 8 claim it would have resulted in the same outcome
         thus there was no material error of law. This document generated a
         further reply on behalf of the appellant which was lodged on the 14
         May 2020.

     22. The rule 24 response and submissions answer the points raised in
         the appellant's skeleton argument. Beyond reference to the Article
         8 point, neither party sought to identify what the arguable errors
         were which were to be argued before the Tribunal save that Mr Ahmed
         clarified that he relied upon the grounds as set out in the grant
         of permission ( which related to the standard of proof) but that in
         view of the respondent's response at paragraph 13 when seen in the
         context of UTJ Mandalia's directions, that it appeared that the
         issue of Article 8 was a live issue and one that could properly
         form part of the grounds as referred to in the written submissions.

     23. Mr Diwnycz was aware of the Rule 24 response and its contents and
         that the submissions relating to Article 8 were a "Robinson
         obvious" point but relied upon paragraphs 14 - 15 of the reply
         which referred to its materiality.

     24. There was therefore no clarity about the grounds and in light of
         the matters set out in March 2020 submissions which further
         expanded upon the matters raised in the original grounds, I observe
         that they were replied to in full by the respondent. In the
         circumstances and given that the original grounds were drafted by
         the appellant in person, I shall treat those as the grounds of
         challenge.

     25. It is convenient to begin with the challenge to paragraph 11 which
         deals with the position of the appellant's home area. At paragraph
         11 the FtTJ considered the submissions raised on behalf of the
         appellant's Counsel that he was bound by the country guidance case
         of AA (Article 15 (c) Iraq [2015] UKUT 0054. The judge stated
         "however as discussed at length in paragraph 20 to 27 of the
         refusal letter, I agree that there is now substantial evidence to
         justify a departure from AA and I conclude that the level of
         violence in Iraq does not reach the high threshold. I add that it
         is all evidence the appellant told that his UK-based Iraqi friends
         have some time and also recently been making regular holiday trips
         to Kirkuk which is hardly consistent with the suggestion that it is
         inherently very dangerous there."

     26. The appellant in his original grounds did seek to challenge this
         assessment (albeit with little detail) as did the submissions made
         in the March 2020 document and paragraph 2 of the further
         submissions dated 14 May 2020.

     27. At the date of the hearing, the country guidance decision was AA
         (Article 15(c) Iraq [2015] UKUT 00544 as amended by the Court of
         Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, which confirmed that there
         was a state of internal armed conflict in certain parts of Iraq,
         involving government security forces, militias of various kinds,
         and the Islamist group known as ISIL, which included Kirkuk.

     28. The test to be applied when considering whether to depart from
         country guidance is set out in SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940 Lord Justice Stanley
         Burnton said this:

             "45. There are simply not the resources  for  a  detailed  and
                  reliable determination of conditions in foreign  countries
                  to be made on an individual basis on each decision on  the
                  application or appeal of persons seeking protection. There
                  are far too many such cases, as  is  demonstrated  by  the
                  Secretary of State's use of charter flights to accommodate
                  the large  numbers  of  returnees  to  countries  such  as
                  Afghanistan and Iraq.  Neither  those  representing  those
                  seeking protections nor the  Secretary  of  State  herself
                  have the resources for the detailed, lengthy,  and  costly
                  investigation of conditions on return that is appropriate,
                  given the potential risk to the returnees, in every  case.
                  Even if the resources were available, it would be wasteful
                  to have such an investigation,  involving  much  the  same
                  evidence, in every case. There would also  be  a  risk  of
                  inconsistent   decisions,   a   consideration   that    is
                  particularly important in the  present  context  since  it
                  follows  from  a  decision  that   one   person   requires
                  protection,  if  correct,  that  a  person  in  the   same
                  situation  who  has  been  returned  may  have  risked  or
                  suffered ill treatment or worse.

             46.  The system of  Country  Guidance  determinations  enables
                  appropriate resources, in terms of the representations  of
                  the parties to the Country  Guidance  appeal,  expert  and
                  factual  evidence  and  the  personnel  and  time  of  the
                  Tribunal, to be applied to the determination of conditions
                  in, and therefore the risks of return for persons such  as
                  the appellants in the  Country  Guidance  appeal  to,  the
                  country in question. The procedure is aimed at arriving at
                  a reliable (in the sense of accurate) determination.

             47.  It is for these reasons, as well as the  desirability  of
                  consistency, that decision makers and tribunal judges  are
                  required to  take  Country  Guidance  determinations  into
                  account, and to follow them  unless  very  strong  grounds
                  supported  by  cogent  evidence,  are  adduced  justifying
                  they're not doing so."

     29. The Upper Tribunal elaborated upon this test in the subsequent
         decision in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure ) Zimbabwe CG
         [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC) [at ยง72]:  [We] recognise that where a
         previous assessment has resulted in the conclusion that the
         population generally or certain sections of it may be at risk, any
         assessment that the material circumstances have changed would need
         to demonstrate that such changes are well established evidentially
         and durable.

     30. The FtTJ gave no reasons why he found there to be substantial
         evidence to justify a departure from the country guidance case.
         Whilst the judge purported to rely upon the paragraphs in the
         decision letter, which erroneously referred to the COIN as "
         country guidance " there was a bundle of documentary evidence
         submitted on behalf the appellant which enclosed further evidence
         relating to Kirkuk and that assessment including the Danish
         immigration service report, the US State Department report and the
         EASO report dated 4/2/19 and in the original submissions sent to
         the respondent which generated the fresh claim, objective material
         by reference to the position of Kirkuk had been provided.

     31. There was therefore evidence before the FtTJ relevant to the
         assessment, but which was not taking into account. In my view is
         not sufficient to simply state that he agreed with paragraphs 20 -
         27 of the refusal letter without considering the other evidence
         relevant to the assessment.

     32. Mr Diwnycz relies upon the rule 24 response paragraph 4 where it
         states that the FtTJ gave reasons for the decision by relying on
         the decision letter that there were strong grounds supported by
         cogent evidence to depart from the previous country guidance
         decision to find that Kirkuk was no longer a contested areas.
         However the grounds are silent as to the material that was before
         the FtTJ and goes on to state that that was affirmed in the
         decision of SMO, KSP &  IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq
         CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC)and quotes headnote 6 which does not
         appear to have been any relevance.

     33. Whilst the rule 24 response refers to the decision in SMO, that
         decision was not promulgated until after the hearing of the appeal
         and the promulgation of the decision in November 2019. The only CG
         decision in force was that of AA and the Court of Appeal decision.

     34. Whilst the new CG decision sets out why Kirkuk is no longer a
         contested area, that was not the stated position before the FtTJ,
         and the judge was required to give reasons why he was departing
         from the country guidance in force. In my judgement he did not do
         so. I would accept that this raises the issue of materiality, given
         that SMO has reached a different conclusion. However, the
         difficulty with this is that the FtTJ made no reference to the
         position in Kirkuk whatsoever. There is no reference to the country
         materials insofar as related to Kirkuk which was an area which had
         suffered from upheaval violence and displacement. This was relevant
         and material in my judgement to  the grounds in which challenges
         are made to the issue of the remaining family members ( where
         permission was granted) and the issue of identity documents as set
         out in the further submissions and answered in the reply of the
         rule 24 response.

     35. Dealing with the challenge to paragraph 15, the FtTJ sets out at
         paragraph 12 - 14 the evidence.  He begins by setting out that the
         previous judge did not accept that he had no family or friends in
         Iraq (relying on paragraphs 3 and 5) and that he had his parents
         and two sisters in Iraq. The respondent in the rule 24 response
         relies upon finding on the basis of Devaseelan principles.

     36. I agree that the starting point should be the decision of FtTJ
         Fisher promulgated in 2011. However, the earlier judge did not find
         that the appellant had family living in Iraq with whom he was in
         contact with. The FtTJ did not go beyond finding that there was a
         real possibility that the family members might be traced,
         especially if further information could be provided. The FtTJ also
         made reference to the appellant's learning disability in the light
         of the evidence given by the appellant's social worker at paragraph
         8 and in his finding at paragraph 22.

     37. In reaching his conclusions as to whether the appellant had family
         in Iraq, whilst the judge made reference to the delay in contacting
         the Red Cross until 2019, no further consideration was given to the
         length of time since he had contact with his family which is when
         he left Iraq when he was a minor. Nor was there any reference to
         the position of Kirkuk by way of the objective material and the
         displacement and conflict that had occurred in that area.

     38. Whilst it was open to the judge to find that he made little effort
         to trace the family (see paragraph 6 of the rule 24 response) no
         reference is made to the length of time or the circumstances that
         had occurred during that length of time in Kirkuk.

     39. I am also satisfied that the FtTJ erred in law by applying the
         wrong standard of proof. At paragraph 15 the FtTJ concluded "I
         conclude on a balance of probabilities that the appellant is in
         contact with his Iraqi family who are still living in Kirkuk and
         who will be able to assist in return." As the rule 24 response sets
         out, at paragraph 8 the judge did direct himself to the appropriate
         standard in protection appeals but also as a rule 24 response sets
         out and as Mr Ahmed submitted, it is wholly unclear whether the
         FtTJ was referring to the Article 8 ground of appeal. In the
         ordinary course of events given that the judge had earlier referred
         to the correct standard, it might be that the direction also
         applies to further findings. However here the judge expressly
         stated by reference to the factual elements relevant to the
         protection appeal that he "concluded on the balance of
         probabilities that the appellant is in contact with his family who
         are still living Kirkuk" and this was a higher standard of proof
         and was in error.

     40. In the light of the lack of reference to the objective material in
         the country circumstances in Kirkuk in the interfering period or
         the length of time that the appellant had left Iraq (in the light
         of there being no positive finding that he been in contact with his
         family by the previous judge) the error is a material one.

     41. This is sufficient in my judgement to render the decision unsafe as
         the FtTJ then went on to consider the issue of return to Kirkuk on
         the basis that he was in communication with his family (see
         paragraph 20).

     42. Mr Diwnycz  submitted that the FtTJ had stated that the appellant
         had provided his identity documents and that even in the absence of
         contact with his family in Iraq, he was potentially a documented
         male and therefore could not succeed (and see paragraph 7 of the
         rule 24 response). However, the difficulty with that submission is
         that the identity document had not been put in evidence and I have
         not been referred to any copy in the bundles of documents before
         the tribunal. The reference to an identity document was made at
         question 46 of the interview in 2008 but it has never been
         explained what document that is, nor has it been confirmed that the
         document is still in existence. There are a number of different
         documents in Iraq and it has not been confirmed not only if the
         document is still in existence or where it is or what the document
         was to enable any assessment of the redocumentation issue or in the
         particular context of the appellant's home area in Kirkuk. I am
         therefore satisfied that it was a material error which went to the
         core of the consideration of the claim.

     43. In addition, Mr Ahmed on behalf of the appellant relies upon the
         Article 8 point raised in his solicitor's submissions and upon
         which the respondent addressed in the rule 24 response. Whilst that
         response makes reference to permission having not been granted on
         that point as it had not been raised in the grounds, Mr Diwnycz
         accepted that it was a "Robinson obvious" point given the failure
         to make any reference to Article 8 beyond that at paragraph 23.
         Consequently, the issue as identified by UTJ Mandalia when he gave
         his directions related to the materiality of the error given that
         the respondents reply at paragraph 13 accepted that the judge had
         failed to make a finding or consideration under Article 8.

     44. Mr Ahmed submits that paragraph 23 purported to make an assessment
         of safety but there was no assessment of Article 8 by reference to
         the issue of proportionality and the appellant's history having
         entered the UK in 2008 when he was 15 years of age (a minor) and
         had substantial residence in the UK including all of his adult
         life. He also submits it was no consideration of the public
         interest considerations under section 117B.

     45. Mr Diwnycz referred to the rule 24 response and that whilst the
         concession was made that there was an acceptance that the judge
         failed to make any findings or failed to consider Article 8, it was
         not material because the appellant was relying only on his private
         life, little weight to be placed on any private life in the
         circumstances of not having any leave following 2010, that the
         medical evidence in the bundle was not before the FtTJ and thus it
         would not have resulted in a different outcome.

     46. Having considered the submissions of the parties I am satisfied
         that the error conceded by the respondent was material. I reach
         that conclusion of a number of reasons, firstly the appellant did
         raise submissions that related Article 8 based on his length of
         residence in the circumstances of his arrival as a minor as set out
         in the further representations that gave rise to the fresh claim.
         Not all of his residence was unlawful, and he had a period of
         lawful leave. Most of his adult life has been in the United
         Kingdom. No assessment was made in his private life and the
         assessment of Article 8 only extended to whether there were very
         significant obstacles and that was not an assessment made in
         relation to his circumstances that related to the findings made by
         the judge on the protection appeal. There was no balancing exercise
         or consideration of the section 117 factors. Even if it is right as
         the respondent submits that the elements of private life were not
         sufficiently strong to succeed, given that I have found errors of
         law in relation to the protection /humanitarian protection aspect
         of the appeal, then those errors infect the Article 8 assessment.

     47. For those reasons, I am satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law. The decision of the FtT shall be set aside.

     48. As to the remaking of the decision I have considered the
         submissions made by the advocates. Mr Ahmed submitted that the
         appeal should be remitted given the length of time that has elapsed
         since the last hearing and also that there has been a new CG
         decision SMO, KSP &  IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG
         [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) and further objective material relevant to
         the claim.

     49. I have therefore considered whether it should be remade in the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In
         reaching that decision I have given careful consideration to the
         Joint Practice Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

             "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that:-
             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or
             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

     50. I have considered this question in the light of the practice
         statement recited above. As it  will be necessary for the appellant
         to give evidence and  to deal with the evidential issues, further
         fact-finding will be necessary alongside the analysis of risk in
         the light of the relevant law and in my judgement the best course
         and consistent with the overriding objective is for it to be
         remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. The Tribunal will be
         seized of the task of undertaking an assessment of the evidence and
         any updated evidence (whether subjective or objective evidence).

     51. I observe that the decision of the previous judge made reference to
         the appellant's learning disability having heard evidence from a
         social worker in 2011. There has been no further reference to this
         and that should be clarified for any further hearing. Furthermore,
         issues surrounding the identity document should be clarified and
         the document should be traced, and confirmation be provided that it
         is still in existence and what the document is. A copy should be
         provided to the appellant's solicitors and to the Tribunal.




         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error on a point of law and appeal shall be remitted to the FtT.

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction  applies
         both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                           Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                                           Dated   3/11/2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


         1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision
         must make a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such
         application must be received by the Upper Tribunal within the
         appropriate period after this decision was sent to the person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the way in which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


         2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention under the Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days,
         if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time that the application for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days, if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


         5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


         6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
         covering letter or covering email.

