
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/09478/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2020                  |On 19 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD [U]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent refused the appellant's claim, on all available grounds,
    by a decision dated 16 July 2018.

 2. FtT  Judge  Green  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 30 January 2019.

 3. The appellant produced a  report  by  Dr  Fraser  Morrison,  consultant
    clinical psychologist, dated 30 August 2018.  The author was  asked  to
    opine on "the substantive  nature  of  the  relationship"  between  the
    appellant and his wife.  His conclusion was that the  relationship  was
    genuine.

 4. In a second psychological report, dated 4 November  2018,  Dr  Morrison
    was asked to comment on  the  appellant's  ability  to  participate  in
    tribunal proceedings.  He concluded  that  it  was  unlikely  that  the
    appellant would be "able to participate ... in any meaningful degree".

 5. The appellant applied to the FtT for permission to  appeal  on  grounds
    which in summary are as follows:

         (1)      The judge at [19] noted that the  second  report  did  not
         comply with Practice Directions, but failed  to  read  the  reports
         together on that point; and failed to consider whether  defects  in
         the report were such  as  to  fundamentally  undermine  the  expert
         evidence.

         (2)      The judge at [21] and [23]  gave  reduced  weight  to  the
         report because the author might  not  have  seen  the  respondent's
         decision, but did not explain why that was so, or  how  that  might
         have altered the opinion reached.

         (3)      The judge from [24] onwards explained  why  a  variety  of
         factors might undermine an appellant's  credibility,  but  did  not
         indicate why such factors were relevant to this case.

         (4)      At  [28],  in  referring  to  the  absence  of  conclusive
         evidence of causation  between  the  appellant's  account  and  his
         injuries,  the  judge  sought  "an   unlawfully   high   level   of
         corroboration".

         (5)      Moving from the medical claim to the  family  and  private
         life claim, the judge "unlawfully compartmentalised" the two.   The
         appellant could not succeed on medical  grounds  alone,  but  those
         matters impacted on family and private life.

         (6)      The judge held that the appellant could not meet the terms
         of the rules on family and private life,  but  erroneously  applied
         the "insurmountable obstacles" test.

         (7)      The judge failed to  consider  the  private  life  of  the
         appellant's  wife,  and  whether  the  interference  with  it   was
         disproportionate.

 6. The FtT refused permission by a decision issued on 7 March  2019.   The
    appellant applied to the UT, on  the  same  grounds.   The  UT  refused
    permission by a decision dated 9 May 2019.

 7. The appellant petitioned the Court of Session for reduction of the UT's
    refusal of permission.  He averred that it was arguable whether the FtT
    was entitled to give little or no weight to  the  second  report.   The
    parties entered into a joint minute.  They have  not  provided  the  UT
    with a completed copy, but it appears to have  been  in  terms  of  the
    grounds of appeal going to that  report.   On  20  July  2020,  the  UT
    granted permission (in light  of  the  joint  minute  and  the  Court's
    interlocutor).

 8. The case came before me accordingly on 9 September 2020.   The  hearing
    was clerked from a hearing room at the tribunals centre, George  House,
    Edinburgh.  I conducted it from a hearing room at the tribunals centre,
    Aberdeen.  Representatives attended remotely.  No members of the public
    attended, either in person  or  remotely.   The  technology  functioned
    without difficulty.

 9. Parties agreed that the case turned on whether the FtT was entitled  to
    give little or no weight to the second report, and on whether any error
    in that respect  was  material.   Having  heard  their  submissions,  I
    reserved my decision.

10.  The  judge  records  at  [14]  the  respondent's   submissions   about
    deficiencies in the  second  report  and  at  [18  f]  the  appellant's
    submissions in reply.  He resolves the matter for reasons given at  [20
    - 22], concluding at [23] that the report is  "significantly  deficient
    in its failure to comply strictly with ... the Practice Directions" and
    that as it is "based  on  self-reporting"  it  must  be  "treated  with
    circumspection".

11. Mr Forrest accepted that the judge was correct at  [21]  in  discerning
    that the second report (at page 2) was unclear whether it was about the
    appellant's relationship or about  his  ability  to  participate  in  a
    hearing.  He argued, however, that the author made it clear on the same
    page, in the report as a whole, and in its conclusion (at page 7), that
    it was about ability to participate.

12. Mr Forrest did not suggest that the judge was wrong in identifying non-
    compliance with Practice Directions in respect of not setting  out  the
    facts and instructions on which it was based.  His  argument  was  that
    the judge made more than could be justified of those  deficiencies,  as
    the first and second reports could be read together to show  the  basis
    on which the author proceeded.  The judge was concerned by  absence  of
    reference to the refusal letter, but it is specified in the preamble to
    the first report.

13. I consider that the judge's observations of deficiencies in the  second
    report were accurate.  Those were live issues at the hearing, to  which
    the appellant's advocate made her reply.  The  phrasing  "significantly
    deficient" may be rather strong, reading the two reports together;  but
    the view that opinions based on self-reporting by an appellant  must be
    treated with circumspection has not been challenged, and that reasoning
    has nothing to do with formal shortcomings in the report.

14. Mr Forrest submitted that the judge when focusing  on  deficiencies  in
    the report "did not see the wood for the trees",  and  that  error  was
    material,  because  the  case  turned  on  credibility.   However,  the
    appellant's focus on those remarks has  also  to  be  put  in  context.
    Despite his observations, the  judge  accepted  that  the  relationship
    between the appellant and his wife is genuine (the first report) and he
    made nothing of  absence  of  his  direct  oral  evidence  (the  second
    report).  The appellant has not referred to anything  in  the  decision
    which is based on rejection of the conclusions in the reports.

15. The appellant claimed to be at risk from a gang  over  a  land  dispute
    with its origins in 2001 - 2006, successfully evaded until a kidnapping
    and escape in 2009, and evaded again until departure from  Pakistan  in
    2011.  He did not seek protection  until  January  2018.   The  judge's
    decision on the  protection  claim  at  [24  -  28]  is  based  on  the
    unlikelihood of any real ongoing risk after such  a  period;  the  long
    delay in claiming, which suggested no real fear; and the implausibility
    of ongoing interest, or ability to locate the appellant.   Among  those
    reasons, the judge says nothing about the absence of evidence from  the
    appellant.  His reasoning is not based on inconsistencies  which  might
    have been explained away by mental difficulties.

16. The appellant has not  shown  that  the  judge's  observations  on  the
    reports involved the making of any error on a point of law.

17. Even if, on reading the  two  reports  together,  the  judge  was  more
    stringent in his observations than he might have  been,  the  appellant
    has not shown that those observations led to any error in resolving the
    substance of the case.  They had nothing to do with the finding that no
    real risk was established.

18. Mr Howells pointed out that the respondent's decision was also based on
    the appellant's evidence that his grandmother continued to live on  the
    land allegedly  in  dispute  without  coming  to  any  harm;  on  legal
    sufficiency of  state  protection;  and  on  availability  of  internal
    relocation.  He accepted, however, that the judge omitted to deal  with
    the sufficiency of protection and relocation alternatives.

19. It might be read into the decision that the case was bound to  fail  on
    those alternatives; but that should have been  dealt  with  explicitly,
    even if only briefly, not left to implication.

20. Mr Forrest did not advance any grounds other than those related to  the
    medical reports.

21. Given the history, I do not think that the further grounds are  covered
    by the grant of permission; but  in  any  event,  they  do  not  fairly
    reflect the decision, are no more than disagreement,  and  disclose  no
    error on any point of law.

22. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      5 October 2020
      UT Judge Macleman

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




