
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal Number: PA/09490/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 7 January 2020                  |On: 15 January 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              Md guljar hussain
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, instructed by Londonium Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 15 January  1983.  He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Housego dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 18 April  2019  with  a
      working holidaymaker visa valid until 9 March 2011. He overstayed  his
      visa. On 15 November 2017  he  was  encountered  and  arrested  as  an
      overstayer, was served with removal papers and released  on  temporary
      admission. He failed to report  and  absconded.  He  was  subsequently
      encountered during an enforcement operation on 20 June  2019  and  was
      detained and served with removal papers.  He claimed asylum on 25 June
      2019. His asylum claim was refused on 19 September 2019.

   3. The appellant's asylum claim was made on  the  basis  that  he  feared
      persecution in Bangladesh as a result  of  his  involvement  with  the
      Bangladesh National Party (BNP). He claimed to have joined the BNP  in
      2005 and remained as a Union Secretary for two years.  He attended BNP
      programmes in 2007 and 2008. As a result of his political  involvement
      he experienced problems with the Awami League. On 25  August  2008  he
      was attacked by members of the Awami League  and  beaten  up.  He  was
      taken to hospital because of his injuries.  On  30  October  2008  his
      friend had a fight with an Awami League member who later died from his
      injuries. Since he, the appellant, was present at the fight,  a  false
      allegation was made against him. The police came to his house to  make
      enquiries and he ran away. He came to the UK and, after arriving here,
      found out about  the  false  case  against  him.  If  he  returned  to
      Bangladesh he would be killed or put in prison by the Awami League.

   4. In support of his  claim  the  appellant  submitted  some  documentary
      evidence consisting of a BNP membership receipt, a  supporting  letter
      from the General Secretary of the BNP  dated  29  July  2019,  an  FIR
      registered against him relating to the incident on 30 October 2008,  a
      charge sheet dated 26 November 2008 referring  to  that  incident,  an
      arrest warrant signed on 23 August 2009, a newspaper article  dated  4
      September 2008 about the attack  on  25  August  2008  and  an  injury
      certificate from the hospital.

   5. In  the  decision  refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  the  respondent
      considered that his lack of knowledge about  the  BNP  undermined  his
      claim to be  a  member  and  that  the  timing  of  his  asylum  claim
      undermined his credibility. The respondent did  not  accept  that  the
      appellant was involved with the BNP or had the problems described  and
      did not accept that he was of any adverse interest to the  Bangladeshi
      authorities or at any risk from the Awami League. The  respondent  did
      not accord any weight to the documents relied upon by  the  appellant.
      The respondent considered that in any event there was a sufficiency of
      protection available to the appellant and that he  could  also  safely
      relocate to another part of Bangladesh. It  was  considered  that  his
      removal to Bangladesh would not breach his human rights.

   6. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  on
      24 October 2019 before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Housego.  The  judge
      found that the appellant was an economic migrant. He  did  not  accept
      that being a member of the BNP would give rise to a risk and he  noted
      that the appellant had had no involvement in the party since 2008. The
      judge found the documentary  evidence  to  be  unreliable.  The  judge
      considered that the respondent was wrong in the  submission  that  the
      appellant had left Bangladesh at a time when he had an arrest  warrant
      issued against him, since the warrant was dated four months after  his
      departure from the country, and he  considered  that  the  appellant's
      failure to point that out was notable. He drew  an  adverse  inference
      from that, as well as from the lack of any explanation as  to  why  an
      arrest warrant would have  been  issued  a  year  after  the  asserted
      incident, from the timing of the appellant's claim and  his  behaviour
      prior to making the claim and from the lack of an account of  how  his
      mother obtained the documentary evidence. The  judge  found  that  the
      appellant was a member of the BNP from 2005 and secretary of  a  small
      branch of the BNP from 2006-2008. He did not  accept  his  account  of
      being attacked by the Awami League and he did not  accept  that  there
      was an arrest warrant issued against him. He found that,  even  if  he
      had been attacked by a small group of people in 2008 he was no  longer
      at risk from them as he was no longer active in politics  and  in  any
      event they would not know if he returned to  Bangladesh  and  went  to
      live somewhere else. The judge considered that the appellant's removal
      would not breach his Article 8 rights. He dismissed the appeal on  all
      grounds.

   7. The appellant sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
      judge applied a higher standard of proof, gave no reason for rejecting
      the appellant's account of the incident on  25  August  2008  and  was
      wrong to do so as the account was supported by the background  country
      information; that the judge's finding, that the appellant would not be
      at risk as a local leader  of  the  BNP,  was  inconsistent  with  the
      background country information and that the judge had been  wrong  not
      to accept the existence of  false  criminal  proceedings  against  the
      appellant; that the judge  erred  by  not  accepting  the  appellant's
      explanation for his delay in claiming asylum; and that the  judge  had
      erred in his Article 8 assessment.

   8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 19  November
      2019.

   9. At the hearing, both parties made  submissions.  Mr  Parkin  submitted
      that the judge erred by failing to consider the  documentary  evidence
      which supported the appellant's claim,  in  particular  the  newspaper
      report and the hospital report, and gave no reasons  for  finding  the
      documentary evidence as a whole to be unreliable. The reason given  by
      the judge for not accepting the arrest  warrant  was  inadequate.  The
      appellant's delay in claiming asylum was a matter the judge  was  able
      to take into account but could not form the sole basis  for  rejecting
      his claim. The judge did not explain why he rejected  the  appellant's
      evidence but yet accepted his claim to be a member  of  the  BNP.  His
      findings lacked adequate reasoning and the decision was flawed.

  10. Mr Avery submitted that the grounds were simply  a  disagreement  with
      the judge's decision. The judge heard  the  evidence,  considered  the
      documents and properly applied Tanveer  Ahmed.   He  was  entitled  to
      assess  the  documentary  evidence  in  the   context   of   all   the
      circumstances including the fact that the appellant had  only  claimed
      asylum after been encountered twice and  trying  to  run  away  before
      being detained. The judge did not have to  refer  to  each  and  every
      piece of evidence. His determination was a properly considered one.

Discussion and conclusions

  11. Contrary to the assertions made on behalf of the appellant, there  can
      be no doubt as to what the judge's decision was and  why  and  how  he
      reached the conclusions that he did. The judge  clearly  set  out  the
      evidence and explained his approach to the assessment of the  evidence
      in the context of  the  relevant  legal  provisions  and  the  country
      information. He summarised the reasons  why  the  respondent  did  not
      accept the appellant's claim and  he  particularised  the  appellant's
      response to those reasons as  well  as  setting  out  the  appellant's
      evidence  at  the  hearing,  including  specifically,  at  [36],   the
      appellant's explanation for  the  matters  which  were  of  particular
      concern. The judge's reasons for according the limited weight that  he
      did to the evidence are set out from [53] where he  referred  back  to
      the credibility concerns raised in  the  respondent's  submissions  at
      [43], and at [56] to [58] where he considered the documentary evidence
      and the appellant's submissions. Contrary to the mention in the  grant
      of permission of the judge having failed  to  deal  with  the  medical
      documentation, the judge  in  fact  made  specific  reference  to  the
      hospital report at [56]. He also  specifically  addressed  the  arrest
      warrant, FIR, charge sheet and the letter from the BNP.

  12. It was Mr Parkin's submission that the judge failed  to  give  reasons
      why he considered the documentary evidence to be  unreliable,  but  he
      plainly did give such reasons at [57]. Mr Parkin  submitted  that  the
      judge's reasoning at [57.1] in relation to the arrest warrant was  not
      a sufficient basis for placing no reliance on the document, but on the
      contrary the judge was perfectly entitled to draw adverse  conclusions
      from the appellant's contradictory evidence in that regard.  Not  only
      did  the  appellant  make  no  attempt  to  correct  the  respondent's
      submission that he had been able to leave Bangladesh after  an  arrest
      warrant had been issued,  as  the  judge  noted  at  [57.1],  but  the
      appellant's own evidence, recorded at [38], was that he left after the
      warrant had been issued,  which  was  clearly  inconsistent  with  the
      information in the document. For that reasons,  and  for  the  further
      reason given at [57.1], the judge was perfectly entitled to  have  the
      concerns that he  did  about  the  evidence  relating  to  the  arrest
      warrant.

  13. In addition to pointing out specific difficulties  with  some  of  the
      documents,  the  judge's  concern  about  the   reliability   of   the
      documentary evidence as a whole was also expressed  in  terms  of  the
      lack of any clear explanation as to  their  provenance  ([57.5]),  the
      background evidence relating  to  fraudulent  documentation,  and  the
      circumstances leading to their production, all of which  were  matters
      upon which the judge, properly  applying  the  principles  in  Tanveer
      Ahmed, was entitled to take into consideration. As Mr  Avery  properly
      submitted, the judge was entitled to  consider  the  evidence  in  the
      context of the timing of the appellant's claim and  the  circumstances
      under which it was made. It was not the case that the  judge  rejected
      the appellant's claim on the sole basis of the  delay  in  making  his
      claim, but he was entitled to approach the evidence  with  caution  in
      the light of such circumstances, having before  him  evidence  in  the
      form HO minute sheets setting out the appellant's adverse  immigration
      history and behaviour when encountered on two occasions leading up  to
      the claim.

  14. Mr Parkin made specific reference to a newspaper report relied upon by
      the appellant in support of the claimed incident  on  25  August  2008
      which he submitted was not referred to by the judge. However, for  the
      reasons given above, it is plain that the judge had regard to all  the
      evidence as a whole and was not required to  address  each  and  every
      piece of evidence in turn. He accorded the evidence the limited weight
      that he did for the reasons fully and properly given. In any event  it
      is relevant to regard that evidence in  the  context  of  the  judge's
      findings at [59.8] where he considered the appellant's position on the
      alternative basis that the incident on 25 August 2008 had occurred.

  15. Accordingly, for all these reasons, it seems to me  that  this  was  a
      case where the judge carefully assessed all the evidence in the  round
      and in the context of the  background  country  information  and  made
      properly reasoned findings  on  the  evidence,  applying  the  correct
      standard of proof. It was open to the judge, for the reasons  cogently
      given, to conclude that the appellant had  fabricated  an  account  of
      being the subject of an arrest warrant and of outstanding  charges  in
      Bangladesh and to conclude  that  he  would  not  be  of  any  adverse
      interest to any party or at any risk on return Bangladesh on the basis
      of  his  limited  profile.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  reach   the
      conclusions that he did and to dismiss the appeal on the basis that he
      did. I note that the grounds relating to Article 8 did not  form  part
      of the submissions made before me by  Mr  Parkin  and  that  he  quite
      properly did  not  pursue  a  matter  upon  which  the  judge  reached
      conclusions fully open to him on the evidence.

DECISION

  16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

     Anonymity

   It is not clear whether Judge  Housego  intended  to  make  an  anonymity
   order, as he made a direction at the end of his decision to that  effect,
   but stated below the appellant's name at the beginning  of  the  decision
   that an anonymity direction was not  made.  I  see  no  reason  for  this
   decision to be anonymised and therefore discharge any direction which may
   have been made.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  10 January
2020
