
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  PA/09645/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Monday 18 May 2020                |On Thursday 21 May 2020              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M M
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1.   The Appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge B Lloyd promulgated on 21 January 2020 ("the Decision").  By  the
    Decision, the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 18 September 2019 refusing  his  protection
    and human rights claims.

2.   The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  The core of his  protection
    claim is that his uncle murdered his parents in 1992 when the Appellant
    was still a child.  It is said that his uncle then tried to poison  him
    in order to secure his seizure of the Appellant's parents' assets.   As
    a result of these events, the Appellant says that  he  moved  to  Dhaka
    where he worked for two to three years but that  his  uncle  thereafter
    traced him to that area.  He says that he then moved to  Oman  in  1996
    where he  suffered  yet  further  ill-treatment  at  the  hands  of  an
    employer.

3.   The Appellant came to the UK as a domestic worker with his  sponsor  in
    2007.  His last entry in that capacity was in 2014.  Although, when  he
    claimed asylum in 2016, the Appellant said that  he  was  a  victim  of
    modern slavery, his claim was not accepted.   The Appellant also claims
    to have been the victim of an attack by local criminals whilst  in  the
    UK (in January 2018).

4.   The Appellant is said to suffer from mental  health  difficulties.   He
    claims that he tried to take his own life in  2019.   Medical  evidence
    dating from December  2018  is  contained  in  the  Appellant's  bundle
    ([AB/11-31]).

5.   There was a dispute as to the Appellant's age (material to  the  events
    which the Appellant says occurred in Bangladesh).  The  Judge  resolved
    that issue in the Appellant's favour but that was  the  only  point  on
    which  the  Judge  found  the  Appellant   credible.    Otherwise,   he
    disbelieved the Appellant's account.  In any event, he also found  that
    the Appellant would not face a risk on return  owing  to  the  historic
    nature of the events on which the Appellant relied and that there was a
    sufficiency of protection.  For those reasons, the Judge dismissed  the
    Appellant's protection appeal.

6.   The Judge also dismissed the Appellant's human rights  appeal  (founded
    on Article 8 ECHR)  both  within  the  Immigration  Rules  (relying  on
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)) and outside the Rules.

7.   The Appellant appeals the Decision  on  two  grounds.    By  his  first
    ground, the Appellant contends  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  make
    findings on material issues.  It is  said  that,  having  accepted  the
    Appellant's date of birth,  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  how  that
    impacted on the chronology of the Appellant's  claim,  particularly  in
    relation to his Article 8 claim and the  obstacles  he  might  face  on
    return.  The second ground asserts that the Judge  failed  to  consider
    the medical evidence which was relevant in  particular  to  the  events
    which the Appellant claimed befell him in Bangladesh.

8.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  EM
    Simpson on 24 February  2020  for  the  following  reasons  so  far  as
    relevant:

         "... 2.  Permission to appeal is granted because in the appellant's
             asylum  and  human  rights  appeal   the   Decision   arguably
             disclosed:

               i) In one brief closing paragraph (47), a failure to  provide
                  an adequacy of reasoning and fact-finding, with  reference
                  to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Immigration  Rules  and
                  Art 8 of  the  ECHR,  private  life,  in  respect  of  the
                  evidence before them, including medical evidence and inter
                  alia a Rule 35 report, and arising from the chronology  of
                  life events provided by the appellant,  the  judge  having
                  found in the appellant's favour his claimed date of  birth
                  and furthermore having accepted that  he  had  'been  away
                  from his home country (Bangladesh)  for  a  long  time...'
                  (42,1,10,12,16-19, 25,26);

              ii) All grounds arguable..."

9.   By a Note and Directions sent on 7 April 2020, the  Vice  President  of
    the Tribunal, having reviewed the file, reached  the  provisional  view
    that it would be appropriate to determine without a  hearing  (pursuant
    to Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 - "the
    Procedure Rules") the following questions:

         (a)  whether the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
         involved the making of an error of law and, if so

         (b)  whether that decision should be set aside.

    Directions were given for the parties to make submissions in writing on
    the appropriateness of that course and further submissions in  relation
    to the error of law. The reasons for the Note and  Directions  was  the
    "present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,  and
    the overriding objective expressed in the Procedure Rules".

10.  On 21  April  2020,  the  Appellant  filed  written  submissions.   The
    Appellant repeated in summary form the grounds to which I refer  above.
    In relation to whether the error  of  law  issue  could  be  determined
    without an oral hearing, the Appellant submitted  that  one  should  be
    convened if the Tribunal was not persuaded to set  aside  the  Decision
    because the "appeal raises concern about whether  the  Applicant  [sic]
    has  had  a  fair  hearing  with  anxious  scrutiny  applied   to   the
    consideration of his evidence."  It was said that "an oral  hearing  is
    required so that trust in the judicial process can be  maintained,  and
    the Applicant can be assured that the relevant standard of scrutiny has
    been applied."

11.  On 27 April  2020,  the  Respondent  filed  written  submissions.   The
    Respondent accepted that "there is material merit in the criticisms  in
    respect of the findings on  the  Article  8  appeal".   The  Respondent
    submitted however that the Appellant had not challenged  the  dismissal
    of the appeal on protection grounds "presumably because the alternative
    findings in respect of sufficiency of protection and risk on return are
    unimpeachable".  As the Respondent understood the  second  ground,  she
    accepted that the medical evidence was relevant to  the  assessment  of
    Article 8.  Whilst, in the Respondent's view, the Article 8 case was  a
    weak one, she accepted that the Decision  should  be  set  aside.   She
    contended however that the Decision could be re-made in  this  Tribunal
    as the re-making related only to the Article 8 case.

12.  By a reply dated 4 May 2020, the Appellant  welcomed  the  Respondent's
    concession but disagreed with the Respondent  as  to  next  steps.   In
    particular, she  submitted  that  the  failures  to  consider  relevant
    evidence  were  relevant  also  to  the  protection  claim  and   that,
    accordingly, the Decision should be set  aside  as  a  whole,  and  the
    appeal remitted as it amounted to a complete re-hearing.

13.  The matter comes before me to determine whether the  Decision  contains
    an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make  the  decision
    or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

14.  I accept that the Respondent's  concession  is  appropriately  made  on
    both of the Appellant's grounds.  The disagreement between the  parties
    is as to the extent of  the  challenge  to  the  Decision,  the  errors
    identified and the next steps.

15.  In relation to ground one, the Judge's findings are  confined  to  [47]
    of the Decision which reads as follows:

         "In relation to Appendix FM and Article 8 ECHR, I conclude  that  I
         have no sufficient evidence before me in respect of the Appellant's
         family or private life that would permit me  to  conclude  that  he
         engages any of the provisions of Appendix  FM  or  that  there  are
         exceptional circumstances which would facilitate his engagement  of
         Article 8, so that his removal from the UK to Bangladesh  would  be
         disproportionate.  For those reasons therefore I do not  allow  his
         appeal in the context of Article 8 as well as under Appendix FM."

16.  I am unimpressed by the first ground insofar  as  it  claims  that  the
    statements of the Appellant's witnesses were relevant to the extent  of
    the Appellant's private life in the UK.  They  are  largely  silent  on
    that point.  They do not demonstrate the nature  and  strength  of  any
    private life ties.  However, the Judge failed to consider the  position
    for the Appellant returning to Bangladesh after he claimed to have left
    that country whilst still a child.  As the grounds point out, the Judge
    having accepted that the Appellant is the age he  says  he  is,  should
    have taken into account his age when he left Bangladesh and that he had
    therefore spent the whole of his adult life outside that country.  That
    was relevant to an assessment  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules whether there are very significant obstacles  to  integration  in
    Bangladesh, an assessment which was not  carried  out  at  all  by  the
    Judge.

17.  The second ground is perhaps more nuanced than is  appreciated  by  the
    Respondent in her submissions.  As I understand that ground it is  that
    the Judge failed to make findings in relation to the  medical  evidence
    and to take that into account when assessing  whether  the  Appellant's
    protection claim was  credible.   As  the  Appellant  points  out,  the
    medical evidence indicates that the Appellant is suffering  from  post-
    traumatic stress disorder.  Some although  not  all  of  that  evidence
    cites the cause as the previous traumatic events  which  the  Appellant
    recounts.  I note,  of  course,  that  not  all  of  those  experiences
    occurred in or have any link to the position on return  to  Bangladesh.
    It is also the case that an expert can only opine on  the  plausibility
    or consistency of the link between particular traumatic events and  the
    symptoms presented.

18.  I also accept the Respondent's point that, whether or  not  the  events
    occurred as the Appellant says, the protection claim could not  succeed
    if there is a sufficiency of protection in Bangladesh.  The Judge  made
    a finding that there is a sufficiency of protection in Bangladesh ([37]
    of the Decision) which is not challenged  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    However, that finding is unreasoned and  unsupported  by  reference  to
    background material.

19.  The Judge has referred to the medical evidence in  particular  at  [19]
    of the Decision.  However, what is said in that evidence  is  not  then
    taken into account when considering the credibility of the  Appellant's
    account.  For that reason, I am persuaded that this  error  impacts  on
    the credibility findings in relation to the protection claim.  For that
    reason, I do not  consider  it  appropriate  to  preserve  the  Judge's
    findings in  that  regard.   The  protection  claim  will  need  to  be
    reconsidered taking into account all relevant evidence.

20.  It follows from the foregoing that I am  satisfied  that  the  Decision
    should be set aside as a whole.  Given the  lack  of  any  findings  in
    relation to obstacles on return to Bangladesh (and so far as  evidenced
    the Article 8 claim relating to private life in the UK) and the failure
    to consider material evidence when determining  the  protection  claim,
    the appeal will need to be re-heard on all issues.

CONCLUSION

21.  For those reasons, I am satisfied that the grounds  disclose  an  error
    of law as set out above. I therefore set aside the Decision.

NEXT STEPS

22.  My decision has identified an  error  which  impacts  on  the  previous
    Judge's credibility  findings  as  well  as  an  error  in  failing  to
    determine another material issue.  Accordingly, it  will  be  necessary
    for another Judge to make credibility findings which  will  be  initial
    ones.   In  fairness  to  the  Appellant,  therefore,  I  consider   it
    appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
    determination.



DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a  point  of  law.  The  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  B  Lloyd
promulgated on 21 January 2020 is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to  the
First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge B  Lloyd.



Signed   L K Smith     Dated: 18 May 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
