
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09036/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision promulgated         |
|On 13 March 2018                              |On 15 March 2018             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  NAGMA [I]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Karnik, Counsel.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge Williams, promulgated on  16  November
        2017 following a hearing at Manchester, in which the Judge  allowed
        the appellant's protection appeal.
     2. The appellant is a citizen of Tanzania born on [ ] 1990.
     3. The Secretary of States sought permission to appeal  asserting  the
        Judge failed to give adequate reasons for his finding the appellant
        will be unable to relocate within Tanzania, failed  to  reason  why
        the appellant and her former boyfriend had stopped communicating or
        to explore whether contact could be resumed, failed to consider how
        the appellant will be located  if  she  went  to  another  area  of
        Tanzania, and found relocation would be unreasonable  based  solely
        on economic factors  which  were  insufficient  to  meet  the  test
        required under the Refugee Convention  and  render  the  conclusion
        misdirected.
     4. This is a carefully written decision in which the Judge  considered
        the evidence with the required degree of anxious scrutiny  and  has
        given adequate reasons in support of the findings made.  The  Judge
        found the appellant to be credible having balanced points  for  and
        against her, found it reasonably likely the appellant had abandoned
        Islam to follow Christianity, as claimed, found that the  appellant
        provided a credible explanation for the delay in leaving  Tanzania,
        and was satisfied the appellant is a national of  Tanzania  from  a
        strict Muslim background  who  had  an  unhappy  arrange  marriage,
        formed a new relationship, and following conversion to Christianity
        ultimately received death threats from her family supported by  her
        ex-husband; as a result of which she left Tanzania. The Judge found
        that on return to Tanzania the appellant will face persecution from
        the family or her ex-husband  due  to  her  conversion.  The  Judge
        considered internal relocation/sufficiency protection at [34 -  39]
        but did not find it  would  be  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to
        internally  relocate  or  that  she  would  be  able  to  access  a
        sufficiency protection on  return  to  Tanzania.  The  Judge  notes
        country information in support of his fact-finding; including  that
        cultural, family, and social pressures  often  prevent  women  from
        reporting  abuse,  including  rape  and  domestic   violence,   and
        authorities rarely prosecuted persons  who  abused  women.  Persons
        close to the victims, such  as  relatives  and  family,  were  most
        likely to be the perpetrators. Many who appeared in courts were set
        free  because  of  corruption  in  the  judicial  system,  lack  of
        evidence, improper investigations, and poor evidence preservation.
     5. The Court of Appeal have made it clear that  this  Tribunal  should
        not interfere in the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  unless
        there is good reason to do so by it being established  the  earlier
        tribunal has erred in law in a  manner  material  to  the  decision
        under challenge. It has not  been  made  out  that  the  Judge  has
        inadequately  reasoned  the  findings  made  or  that  the  overall
        finding, in the appeal being allowed and  it  being  concluded  the
        appellant is entitled to a grant of  international  protection,  is
        outside the range of findings reasonably open to the Judge  on  the
        evidence.
     6. It does not matter whether  another  judge  would  have  made  this
        finding or whether the respondent likes the finding.  Applying  the
        appropriate legal test, the respondent has failed to make out legal
        error  material  to  the  decision  that  warrants  this   tribunal
        interfering with the decision.





Decision

     7. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     8. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 13 March 2018











