
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09038/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 26 July 2019                               |On 7 August 2019             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                  Idris [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Somalia born on 13 September 2000 and
    was aged 17 when he entered the United Kingdom and 18 at the date of
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  He appealed against the
    decision of the respondent dated 13 July 2018 to refuse to grant him
    asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.


 2. Permission to appeal was at first refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Andrew in a decision dated 1 April 2019.  Subsequently permission to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 24 June 2019,
    stating that it is arguable that the judge's intemperate and repeated
    use of the word "alleged" in the decision gives the impression that the
    judge had predetermined the appeal.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds including Article 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights.    The first ground of appeal is the
    allegation that the judge by using the word "alleged" in his decision
    had predetermined the issues.  I do not find that this ground was made
    out.  The word "alleged" in the context of the decisions of the First
    Tier Tribunal, normally means what the appellant claims to be his case.




 4. However, having said that, and on a very careful perusal of the
    decision, I have found it difficult to find a particular paragraph of
    the decision where the appellant's case is set out. It was argued
    before me by Ms Sanders that there is a lack of neutrality in the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Having considered the decision I
    find that whilst the Judge has set out the respondent's refusal letter
    in detail, there has not been an even-handedness by setting out the
    case for the appellant.

 5. The Judge makes findings at paragraph 65 in point form, home which he
    found went against the appellant's credibility. However, the linkage
    between the various credibility findings and to the exact issue it
    related to is not clear.  As an example is that the judge found in
    respect of the medical evidence that the expert had not been called to
    give evidence and placed little reliance on it as a consequence. It is
    clear that in this jurisdiction experts are not called to give evidence
    both by the appellant or by the respondent.

 6. The Judge also noted that the bullet wound did not have an exit point
    based on the appellant's evidence that the bullet went through his
    flesh and took this evidence as an adverse credibility point against
    the appellant. The judge did not refer to the evidence of the doctor
    who clearly explained that the subjective view of the appellant as to
    how the bullet entered or exited his body is not reliable.

 7. Ms Fijiwala made a very gallant attempt to stitch together the decision
    and I find some of her points were very reasonable but, given the
    potentially severe and catastrophic consequences to the appellant,
    especially at his age, to be sent back to Somalia, the evidence must be
    scrutinised very carefully.

 8. I therefore find that there has been a material error of law in the
    decision of the judge in respect of his consideration of the evidence
    and I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it to be heard de
    novo before any judge other than Judge Wright.

    No anonymity direction is made


Signed                                  Date 30 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
