
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09498/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 November 2018                |On 12 December 2018                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 SHAHZAD [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Murkherjee (counsel) instructed by Davjunel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Row  promulgated  on  04/09/2018,   which   dismissed   the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3.     The  Appellant  was  born  on  03/02/1999  and  is  a   national   of
Afghanistan. On 20/07/2018 the Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Row ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  04/10/2018  Tribunal  Judge
Lambert gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "3.    The grounds argue that the Judge  wrongly  dismissed  the  claim
    solely on the basis of the appellant's means of financing  his  travel,
    his failure to claim asylum en-route, and  an  implausible  account  of
    loss of contact with his family, without consideration whether  he  was
    moved exclusively by economic considerations. The decision  reveals  no
    specific adverse credibility findings as to  the  facts  on  which  his
    asylum claim was based, therefore this ground is arguable.


    4.     It is further argued that  there  is  a  material  inconsistency
    between the finding at paragraph 28 that his failure to claim asylum en-
    route did not damage his credibility under section 8 and a finding that
    it "does however go to plausibility" is enlarged upon at paragraph  29.
    This point is also arguable.


    5.     There is therefore an arguable error of  law  disclosed  by  the
    application."

The Hearing

5.    (a)   For the appellant, Mr Mukherjee moved the grounds of appeal.  He
told  me  that  between  [12]  and  [13]  the  Judge  rejects  many  of  the
respondent's criticisms of the appellant's account set out  in  the  reasons
for refusal letter. At [23] the Judge finds that the  respondent's  position
in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  does  not  affect  the   appellant's
credibility, but from [24] to [29] the Judge  finds  that  there  are  other
matters  which  undermine  the  appellant's  credibility.  In  essence,   Mr
Mukherjee said that the Judge's finding  in  the  second  sentence  of  [31]
(that the appellant has not been threatened by the Taliban  in  Afghanistan)
is not supported by adequate reasoning.

      (b)   Mr Mukherjee told me that the Judge made findings on  peripheral
matters and did not make adverse credibility  findings  which  went  to  the
core of the appellant's claim. He told me that at [28] and  [29]  the  Judge
places  too  much  emphasis  on  section  8  of  the  Asylum  &  Immigration
(Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004. He told me that the Judge's  findings
are contradictory.  He  told  me  that,  overall,  the  Judge's  credibility
assessment is fundamentally flawed. He urged me to set  the  decision  aside
and remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

6. For the respondent,  Mr  Bramble  simply  referred  me  to  the  rule  24
response dated 22 November 2018.

Analysis

7. Between [12] and [22] the Judge sets out factors which do not damage  the
appellant's  credibility.  The  Judge  considers  paragraph   399   of   the
immigration rules and considers the respondent's reasons for  refusal,  then
concludes at [23]

    "I do not find that any of the above  matters  affect  the  appellant's
    credibility or is implausible."

8.    Between [24] and [29] the Judge finds that (i)  the  manner  in  which
the appellant's trip to the UK was funded; (ii)  the  Judge's  rejection  of
the appellant's account of loss of contact with family in  Afghanistan,  and
(iii) the appellant's  failure  to  claim  asylum  in  continental  European
countries, are the three factors which undermine the appellant's claim.

9.    The Judges conclusions start at [30]. The first two sentences of  [31]
are

    "His personal circumstances, the circumstances of his  journey  to  the
    United Kingdom, indicate that he did not come here to seek  safety  but
    did so as an economic migrant. I do not find  that  the  appellant  was
    threatened by the Taliban in Afghanistan."

10.   The second sentence of [31] goes to the core of the appellant's  claim
but is inadequately reasoned. Between [19] and [21] the  Judge  rejects  the
respondent's reasons for disbelieving the appellant's claim to have been  of
interest to the Taliban. No other consideration of the  appellant's  account
to have come to the attention of the Taliban can be  found  in  the  Judge's
decision.

11.    The  error  the  Judge  makes  is  that  his  findings  at  [31]  are
contradicted by his findings between [12] and [16]. The  material  error  of
law is that he deals with core elements of  the  appellant's  claim  in  one
sentence which is not supported by either reasons or findings of  fact.  The
second sentence of [31] dismisses the appellant's account of  what  happened
to him in Afghanistan. The Judge does not give reasons  for  dismissing  the
appellant's account. The Judge has  not  adequately  analysed  the  evidence
before concluding  that  the  appellant  has  not  been  threatened  by  the
Taliban.

12.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

13.   The decision is tainted by material errors of law. I set it  aside.  I
am not able to  substitute  my  own  decision  because  a  new  fact-finding
exercise is necessary. None of the Judge's findings can stand.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

14.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b)    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


15.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

16.   I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Birmingham
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Row.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

I set aside the Judge's  decision  promulgated  on  4  September  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.





Signed
                       Date 7 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



