
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09984/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 October 2018                            |On 13 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                                 Mohamed [C]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms N Willocks-Briscoe of the Specialist Appeals
                    Team
For the Respondent:     Ms C Robinson of Counsel instructed by Coram
                  Children's Legal Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent (the Applicant) is a national of Guinea. The  Respondent
    (the SSHD) dispute his claimed year of birth: the Applicant  states  he
    was born in 1993 and the SSHD consider he was born in 1985.  He  states
    he arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 January 2010 and on the next day
    claimed international surrogate protection. He  feared  persecution  on
    the basis of imputed political opinion  because  his  father  had  been
    active in the UFR Party and suspected  of  involvement  in  a  plot  to
    assassinate the President which was attempted on 2 December 2009. On 10
    December 2009 soldiers had raided the family home and his  parents  had
    been taken away. He now had serious mental health problems.

The SSHD's Decision

 2. On 7  September  2016  the  SSHD  refused  the  Applicant's  claim  for
    international surrogate protection. She noted the Applicant's  original
    claim for asylum  had  been  refused  and  that  his  appeal  had  been
    dismissed on 7 April 2010 and his appeal rights had become exhausted on
    20 May 2010. The present  decision  had  been  made  following  further
    submissions of 25  March  2013  and  the  Applicant's  application  for
    judicial review. She relied on the findings in the determination  of  7
    April 2010 in which the Judge had made adverse credibility findings  in
    respect of both the Applicant's claimed year of birth and  his  account
    of events which led to him leaving Guinea.

 3. The SSHD considered that little weight should be  given  to  a  country
    expert report of Ms Monekosso and to the  additional  documentation  to
    support his claimed year of birth which the Applicant had  subsequently
    provided. The SSHD noted the contents of a 2015 country  expert  report
    and addendum from Dr  A  Schroven  and  considered  that  it  contained
    statements adverse to the Applicant's claim and otherwise added  little
    to it.

 4. The SSHD referred to mental health policy of the state  in  Guinea  and
    the  availability  of  treatment  and  medication  for  mental   health
    problems. The Applicant's circumstances were not such  as  would  place
    the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under Articles 3 and  8
    of the European Convention in the event of his return to Guinea.

Hearing history

 5. By a decision promulgated on 6  April  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Geraint Jones QC  dismissed  the  Applicant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds. On 14 July 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek by consent  set
    aside the decision and remitted the appeal for hearing  afresh  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 6. By a decision promulgated on 28 August 2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Dineen allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds.
    On 20 September 2018 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison
    granted the SSHD permission to appeal because  it  was  arguable  Judge
    Dineen had not given sufficient reasons why he did not prefer  the  age
    assessment conducted closest to the Appellant's arrival to  assessments
    prepared at later dates and that one of  the  persons  who  prepared  a
    later assessment lacked the requisite qualifications; did  not  address
    the submissions made for the SSHD based on Dr Schroven's report and why
    it should be preferred to Dr Melly's; did  not  deal  with  the  SSHD's
    challenge to the medical evidence about the  Applicant's  mental  state
    and did not assess the evidence from both sides in the round.



The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Appellant attended the hearing but took no part. He was accompanied
    by Dr McClatchey of the Baobab Centre for Young Survivors in Exile  who
    is  the  Applicant's  psychotherapist.  I  explained  the  purpose  and
    procedure to be followed and asked the Appellant to confirm his current
    address.

Submissions for the SSHD

 8. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that  Judge  Dineen  had  not  adequately
    considered the points raised before him for the  Respondent  before  he
    had conducted his proportionality assessment. It was of note  the  2010
    determination of Judge Simon Batiste dismissing the appeal had not been
    appealed. Consequently, the jurisprudence in Devaseelan  *[2002]  UKIAT
    00702 would apply and she referred specifically  to  paragraphs  39-42.
    She also relied on the decision  in  Chomanga  (binding  effect  of  an
    appeal decisions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 00312 (IAC), especially the head
    note that "the parties are bound by the unappealed findings of fact  in
    an immigration judge's decision" but this does not  fully  reflect  the
    reference in paragraph  19  to  the  authority  upon  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal relied, namely SSHD  v  TB  [2008]  EWCA  Civ.997  because  at
    paragraph 35 of its judgment the Court of Appeal noted  "...  different
    considerations may apply where there is relevant  fresh  evidence  that
    was not available at the date of the hearing, or a change in  the  law,
    and the principal has  no  application  where  there  is  a  change  in
    circumstances or there are new events after the date of decision....".

 9. She continued that Judge Dineen at  paras.59ff  had  not  set  out  the
    findings in the 2010 determination as  his  starting  point.  This  was
    important because the Applicant was  challenging  key  issues  of  fact
    found by Judge Simon Batiste upon which the SSHD had  expressly  relied
    as recorded by Judge Dineen at para.37.

10. Judge Simon Batiste did not have before him the "Merton compliant"  age
    assessment of 16  February  2010  by  Leeds  City  Council  (the  Leeds
    assessment) upon which before Judge Dineen the SSHD had  made  specific
    submissions as evidenced by the Presenting Officer's minute produced to
    me and dealt with in the SSHD's reasons for refusal.  The  Judge  could
    not  have  adequately  addressed  these   points   in   his   decision,
    particularly at paragraph 66. He had not  given  adequate  reasons  for
    preferring the later  age  assessments  to  the  Leeds  assessment.  Ms
    Robinson interjected that the Applicant had told  Judge  Simon  Batiste
    about the Leeds assessment as recorded at paragraph 25 of his decision.
    Ms Willocks-Briscoe continued that the issue of  the  Applicant's  age,
    whether he was 17 or 25, was important because it affected  the  weight
    to be given to his evidence whether he was a child or an adult.

11. She submitted that similar arguments apply  to  the  treatment  of  the
    country expert reports. In 2010 the Judge had been satisfied  that  the
    Applicant's father had no actual role in  the  assassination  plot  but
    Judge Dineen had  not  taken  this  finding  into  account  at  any  of
    paras.41, 49 and 68 of his decision. Nor had he taken into account  the
    2010 decision's findings at para.25 on the Applicant's age.

12. She continued that Judge Dineen had  not  given  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the SSHD's submissions before him why  the  medical  evidence
    filed for the Applicant should be rejected and referred to paras.41 and
    56 of his decision and the Presenting Officer's minute. It was accepted
    the Applicant may have mental health issues but whether  they  are  the
    consequence of what happened  in  Guinea  or  elsewhere  had  not  been
    adequately addressed in the medical evidence or by Judge Dineen.

13. The Judge had not addressed the SSHD's concerns about the  report  from
    Ms Monekosso who had not seen the birth certificate  submitted  by  the
    Applicant  and  he  had  not  addressed   the   submission   that   the
    jurisprudence in Tanveer Ahmed *[2002] UKIAT 00439 should be applied to
    give little weight  to  the  birth  certificates  and  arrest  warrants
    provided by the Applicant.  Para.64  of  Judge  Dineen's  decision  was
    insufficiently recent.

14. The findings made by Judge Dineen on the Applicant's  protection  claim
    were flawed and will have infected his assessment  of  the  Applicant's
    human rights claim based on his mental health. The decision  should  be
    set aside.

Submissions for the Applicant

15. Ms Robinson referred to the Procedure Rule  24  response  filed  on  22
    October 2018.  The response highlighted that the SSHD had not sought or
    been given permission to appeal the Judge's findings at paras.73-75  of
    his decision dealing with the Applicant's claim under Article 8 of  the
    European Convention and to which no reference is made in the Presenting
    Officer's minute.

16. The response continued that the Judge heard oral evidence from  several
    witnesses over the two-day hearing and the  findings  made  at  para.66
    were open to the Judge.  Any arguable failure by the Judge  to  address
    the professional qualifications of  the  Applicant's  carer  would  not
    amount to a material error of law: the Applicant had been a  member  of
    her household since 2012.  She has  children  of  her  own  and  was  a
    witness of fact, not an expert witness.

17. In respect of the two expert  reports  the  Judge  at  para.31  of  his
    decision  had  accurately  summarised  the  position  by   finding   Dr
    Schroven's report was generally supportive of that of  Mr  Melly.   The
    two experts had differed on the generalised risk for  returning  failed
    asylum seekers but both agreed  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  on
    account of his father's connection with the attempted coup.  The  Judge
    at  para.68  had  taken  account  of  the  improvement  in   democratic
    procedures  in  Guinea  and  the  assimilation  of  UFR  members   into
    government.

18. There had been  no  challenge  to  the  diagnosis  of  the  Applicant's
    psychological  condition  and  having  heard  oral  testimony  from  Dr
    McClatchey, the Appellant's clinical physician,  it  was  open  to  the
    Judge  to  make  the  findings  he  did  about  the  aetiology  of  the
    Applicant's condition.

19. At para.11 that Judge had set out the  substantial  and  extensive  new
    evidence filed for the  Applicant  and  in  particular  the  additional
    expert evidence which together with the fact that the Applicant had not
    been represented at the previous hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were matters in themselves sufficient to be sustainable reasons for the
    Judge's conclusions at paras. 61-62 of his decision.

20. It was accepted that at para.64 the Judge had  not  differentiated  the
    documents in his rejection of the application of the  jurisprudence  in
    Tanveer Ahmed *[2002] UKIAT  00439   but given his earlier findings  on
    the  credibility  and  consistency  of  the  Applicant's  account   his
    compendious treatment of them was adequate.

21. At para. 66 of the Judge's decision  he  gave  adequate  reasoning  for
    preferring the expert evidence about  the  Applicant's  age  which  had
    subsequently been filed over the earlier age assessment, albeit "Merton
    compliant", of Leeds Social Services.

22. Paras.36ff of the decision were a fair and adequate reflection  of  the
    case as put by the Respondent and there had been no need for the  Judge
    to have addressed every point.  The Presenting Officer's  minute  added
    little.  There was no material error of law.

Response for the SSHD

23.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe referred to para.  42.7  of  the  determination  in
    Devaseelan that there needed to  be  "some  very  good  reason"  for  a
    failure to adduce relevant evidence at a previous  appeal  hearing.   I
    noted at para.61 the Judge explained  why  the  additional  and  expert
    evidence was not before the previous Judge  and  at  para.62  concluded
    that  those  reasons  were  sufficient  to  justify   considering   the
    Applicant's claim afresh.

24.  The Judge had not dealt with the direct challenges made to  the  expert
    report of Dr Schroven at paras.63-66 of the reasons for refusal  or  to
    the qualifications of Ms Monekosso at paras. 43-44.

25.  She argued again that paras. 49 and 68 of  the  decision  dealing  with
    the expert evidence were inconsistent with each other.  In the light of
    what I have said at para.17 above I give little weight to this point.

26.  The UFR is now in coalition with the  government  in  Guinea  which  at
    para.68 the Judge  acknowledged.   Ms  Robinson  interjected  that  the
    account needed to be taken of what Mr Melly had said at items 4, 6  and
    7of his report at AB pp.261-266.  Dr Schroven had also found there  was
    no risk to the Appellant.  I  find  this  submission  does  not  fairly
    reflect what she has said at paras.38 and 48 of her report in which she
    distinguishes between the  risk  to  the  Applicant  from  the  Guinean
    authorities simply as a returning failed asylum-seeker and the risk  to
    him when his family antecedents become known.

27.  She urged that the medical evidence be viewed simply as supportive  but
    not determinative and referred again to the Judge's compendious  review
    of the documentary evidence at para. 64 of his decision.  Additionally,
    para. 64 did not address the submission recorded at para.52  which  was
    supported by para.  16 of the addendum to Dr Schroven's  report  at  AB
    pp.371, that there had been no public or independent investigation into
    the 2009 assassination attempt.   This  must  have  an  impact  on  the
    Appellant's credibility.  The decision should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

28.  The  Judge  acknowledged  the  jurisprudence  in  Devaseelan  and  gave
    sustainable  reasons  why  he  decided  effectively  to  consider   the
    Applicant's claim afresh: see paras.60-62.  It was  not  necessary  for
    him  to  recite  the  findings  in   the   2010   determination.    The
    determination itself was in the Applicant's bundle before the Judge and
    the SSHD.

29.      At para.66 the Judge acknowledged that the best  evidence  for  the
    SSHD's view of the Applicant's age on arrival was the age assessment by
    Leeds Social Services.  He was entitled to set against this  the  other
    expert evidence, even if  it  was  prepared  subsequent  to  the  Leeds
    assessment.  There was no suggestion the Judge did not have all this in
    mind in assessing the credibility of the Applicant.

30.      The report from  the  Baobab  Centre  makes  clear  that  it  is  a
    therapeutic report and not an expert report.  Appendix One sets out the
    context in which the report was prepared and the  body  of  the  report
    makes appropriate reference to DSM4.  The Presenting  Officer's  minute
    may reflect what was said but in terms of assisting any analysis it has
    limited application because when dealing with the  medical  reports  it
    mixes  references  to  the  reports  with  submissions  as  to  general
    credibility.  The submissions for the SSHD will  have  made  the  Judge
    aware of the two polarities of the  claimed  relationship  between  the
    Applicant and his father and which  figured  in  his  analysis  of  the
    Applicant's evidence and the medical evidence before coming to his view
    that the Applicant was a credible witness.

31.   Looked  at  in  the  round,  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  reach  his
    conclusions on the Applicant's credibility and, given that, there would
    have been little or no need for  him  separately  to  canvass  possible
    other causes for the Applicant's current psychological condition.

33.  Ms Monekosso's opinion on the documents submitted by the  Applicant  to
    support his claimed date of birth is essentially that the format of the
    documents reflects  the  format  of  documents  typically  produced  in
    Guinea. Her report does not go to whether the right paper and  printing
    inks have been  used.   She  clearly  states  that  her  background  is
    journalistic rather than academic but this does not impugn in  any  way
    her expertise.  The Tribunal is accustomed to hearing from experts from
    a variety of backgrounds and is experienced in assessing how to  filter
    out a bias which  might  reflect  the  expert's  own  background.   For
    example, an individual involved in a dissident political group  is  not
    by  reason  of  that  involvement  excluded  from  having  considerable
    knowledge about the treatment of members of the dissident group by  the
    authorities in the home country.  A judge will be  cognisant  that  the
    likely politicalisation of the presentation of the evidence  will  need
    to be identified and put aside.

34.  The doctrine  of  giving  little  weight  on  a  compendious  basis  to
    documentary evidence in accordance with the  principles  enunciated  in
    Tanveer Ahmed depends  on  the  nature  of  the  credibility  findings.
    Para.64 of the Judge's decision shows that  he  was  clearly  aware  of
    this.  It is of note that as to the  Applicant's  general  credibility,
    the SSHD's reasons letter relies simply on the 2010  determination  and
    the Judge gave sustainable reasons for departing from  it,  as  already
    mentioned.

35.  The challenge before the Upper Tribunal to the Judge's findings on  the
    Article 8 claim is that they are flawed because the Judge's  assessment
    of the Applicant's protection claim is flawed.  For the reasons  given,
    I am not satisfied the Judge's treatment of  the  protection  claim  is
    flawed in the manner claimed by the SSHD and consequently I give little
    weight to this submission.

36.  Looking at the entirety of the  Judge's  decision  and  notwithstanding
    the lengthy and forcefully made submissions for the SSHD, I  find  that
    the Judge's decision contains no material error of  law  which  had  or
    would be likely to have had any material  impact  on  his  conclusions.
    The consequence is that the Judge's decision shall stand.

Anonymity

37.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
    error of law appeal, I find none is warranted.

notice of decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  any  material
    error of law and shall stand.  The effect is that  the  appeal  of  the
    Applicant succeeds.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                               Date26.
xi. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
