
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09689/2018
                                                               PA/09680/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2019                |On 23 April 2019                |
|Prepared on 15 April 2019       |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    D. S.
                                    K. S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mendoza, Counsel, for Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The Appellants, citizens of Afghanistan, who are father  and  adult
         son, entered  the  UK  illegally  by  air  from  Munich,  and  made
         protection claims on 24 January 2018. Those claims were refused  on
         24 July 2018, and their appeals against these decisions  were  then
         heard and dismissed by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher  in  a
         decision promulgated on 4 October 2018. The appeals were linked for
         hearing together at the Appellants' request.
      2. The Appellants' applications for permission to appeal were  granted
         by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 19 December 2018.
      3. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to  Rule
         15(2A) for permission to  rely  upon  further  evidence.  Thus  the
         matter came before me.


    The challenge
      4. Ms Mendoza, who was not the author of  the  grounds,  and  did  not
         appear below, advanced the third ground as the strongest  challenge
         to the Judge's decision. This complained that the Judge had  failed
         to properly apply the country guidance to be found in TG and Others
         (Afghan  Sikhs  persecuted)  Afghanistan  CG   [2015]   UKUT   595.
         Specifically the Judge was said to have  failed  to  give  adequate
         consideration to the  evidence  concerning  the  inability  of  the
         Appellants to support themselves upon return, so that there was  no
         adequate basis for the finding that they had family  to  whom  they
         could turn for support. As drafted therefore this  ground  did  not
         advance a reasons challenge, but a complaint  that  the  Judge  had
         failed to engage with relevant evidence upon the key issue  of  the
         Appellants' likely circumstances upon return.
      5. Pausing there, the Judge was not required to consider the issue  of
         internal relocation within Afghanistan on the basis of his findings
         of fact. The Judge had rejected  the  claim  that  the  Appellants'
         grandfather had been murdered, and, the claim that the  family  had
         experienced persecution when they lived in Kabul in the past. As  I
         understand  the  Appellants'  fallback  case,  it  was  that  their
         inability to support themselves adequately  upon  return  to  Kabul
         following the sale of the business that  had  previously  supported
         them, would either lead to a real risk of a breach of their Article
         3  rights,  or,  increase  their  vulnerability  as  members  of  a
         religious minority to persecution. Moreover any attempt to build  a
         business from which they could support themselves once again  would
         in practice be impossible both  because  of  a  lack  of  financial
         resources, and, the discrimination that they would  face,  even  if
         that would not of itself amount to persecution.
      6. Neither the Appellants' evidence, nor the grounds, engaged with the
         financial support packages available to those  prepared  to  return
         voluntarily. Absent the argument that discrimination  and  lack  of
         capital would make it impossible to do so it was not at  all  clear
         why the Appellants could not be expected to successfully return  to
         pursuing a business in Kabul  that  would  allow  them  to  support
         themselves once again.
      7. As drafted  by  Counsel  who  represented  the  Appellants  at  the
         hearing, the grounds asserted that the only family members referred
         to in evidence were the deceased grandfather, and a brother to  the
         Second Appellant from whom they had become separated upon departing
         Afghanistan and of whom they had subsequently had no news.
      8. The difficulty with that drafting is that it does not offer a  fair
         and accurate representation of the evidence,  as  recorded  by  the
         Judge [12]. There is no suggestion in the grounds  that  the  Judge
         mis-recorded the evidence that  he  was  given,  and  there  is  no
         witness statement from Counsel who appeared below to support such a
         suggestion. In the course of his evidence the Judge noted that  the
         First Appellant accepted that there were other  family  members  in
         Afghanistan, although he had claimed that he had not seen them  for
         some time. The Appellants made no attempt  to  identify  who  these
         family  members   were,   where   they   lived,   their   financial
         circumstances, or when precisely they had last been in contact  and
         the circumstances (if any) in which they had  parted.  The  written
         evidence offered by the Appellants simply ignored their  existence.
         As the Judge particularly  noted,  Counsel  expressly  declined  to
         pursue any re-examination. Thus, for whatever reason,  it  was  the
         Appellants who declined  to  offer  relevant  evidence  upon  their
         inability to access support from family networks.
      9. Although the Appellants evidence appears now to be presented as the
         basis for an argument that it was not reasonable for  the  Tribunal
         to expect the Appellants  to  seek  the  support  of  these  family
         members upon return, or, for the Tribunal to expect such support to
         be forthcoming from them, that argument must fail.  The  Appellants
         actually sought to pursue a quite different case, namely that  they
         had no family in Afghanistan at all. Once  that  was  exposed,  and
         properly rejected, they  failed  to  provide  the  Judge  with  any
         reliable evidence to explain why they  could  not  be  expected  to
         obtain support from their own family networks, whether  within,  or
         without Afghanistan.
     10. In my judgement it is quite clear when the decision is  read  as  a
         whole that the Judge quite properly concluded that they had  failed
         to establish that they had no access to  family  support  networks,
         and, that the Judge was referring to the family members  the  First
         Appellant had referred to in oral evidence when he  concluded  that
         the Appellants could turn to them for  support  [12].  Nor  was  it
         irrelevant that the Judge was able to find,  upon  the  Appellants'
         own evidence, that they must have been able to enjoy a  comfortable
         lifestyle in Kabul prior to their decision to depart Afghanistan if
         they were able to sell their business for US$70,000.
     11. The burden of proof lay upon the Appellants to establish that  they
         were entitled to international protection. It is  in  my  judgement
         quite clear from the Judge's decision that they failed to discharge
         it, and why they failed to do so. To put it bluntly the  Judge  was
         not satisfied that they had told him the truth, and thus  they  had
         failed to establish that they lacked  support  mechanisms,  whether
         from within, or from outside Afghanistan. He was  plainly  entitled
         to that conclusion on the evidence that was before  him.  There  is
         therefore no merit in the third ground.
     12. The reality is that the second ground is, as Ms Mendoza accepts,  a
         simple complaint that the Judge declined to depart from the country
         guidance to be found in TG. The assertions made by the draftsman as
         to arbitrary outcomes in protection claims by Afghan Sikhs are  not
         supported by evidence, and as such must be discounted.  TG  remains
         country guidance, and  it  was  therefore  for  the  Appellants  to
         persuade the Judge with  cogent  and  reliable  evidence  that  the
         situation within Afghanistan had deteriorated  to  such  an  extent
         that he should depart from that guidance. As Ms Mendoza accepts, it
         was open to the Judge on the evidence before  him  to  reject  that
         argument. He  did  so,  and  he  gave  adequate  reasons  for  that
         conclusion. Thus there is no merit in the second ground either.
     13. The final ground to be argued was the first. This asserts that  the
         Judge failed to properly apply the  guidance  to  be  found  in  TG
         concerning  the  position  that  would  be  faced  upon  return  to
         Afghanistan by the First Appellant's  wife.  The  draftsman  argued
         that any Sikh woman in  Afghanistan  is  a  prisoner  in  her  home
         because she must refuse to cover her face on religious grounds.
     14. The difficulty with this approach  is  that  rather  than  being  a
         complaint that the guidance to be found  in  TG  was  not  properly
         applied by the Judge, it is in reality  a  complaint  that  TG  was
         wrongly decided. The evidence concerning Sikh women was reviewed in
         TG #91-93, and a sharp distinction was  drawn  between  women  with
         family protection from male family members, as the Appellant's wife
         enjoys, and those who do not.  The  latter  might  be  entitled  to
         international  protection  as   a   result   of   their   increased
         vulnerability as members of  a  minority  religious  group  without
         protection from abduction and forced religious conversion, but  the
         former were not.
     15. As to the position of an Afghan woman who left her house uncovered,
         the reaction from the male population would be  the  same  whatever
         her religion might be [#92]. Thus all women would ordinarily behave
         in such a way as to travel outside their home,  covered.  The  Sikh
         and Hindu religions do not require  a  woman  to  cover  themselves
         outside the home; but equally the  evidence  singularly  failed  to
         establish that on religious grounds they are required to refuse  to
         do so. Wearing a covering to avoid male harassment is not therefore
         a denial of a fundamental element  of  religious  belief  taken  to
         avoid persecution.


    Conclusion
     16. Accordingly, notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which  permission  to
         appeal was granted, I confirm the Judge's decision to  dismiss  the
         asylum, Article 3, and humanitarian protection appeals. There is no
         material error of law in the approach taken by  the  Judge  to  the
         appeals that requires his decision to be set aside and remade.



DECISION


    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  4
    October 2018 contained no material error of  law  in  the  decision  to
    dismiss the Appellants' appeals which requires that decision to be  set
    aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.




Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellants  are
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them. This  direction
    applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent. Failure to comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 15 April 2019
