
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/09994/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 May 2018                          |On 9 May 2018                      |
|                                       |                                   |
|                                       |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHAMERAN AHMAD
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:             Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:         Ms J Sachdev of Bury Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2.  The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings  this  appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley, promulgated  on  20  November
2017 which dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum and ECHR grounds,  but
allowed the appeal on Humanitarian Protection grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 8 April 1994 and is a national of Iraq.  On  17
September 2017 the Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Ransley ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision on asylum and ECHR grounds, but allowed the appeal on  Humanitarian
Protection grounds. Both parties lodged grounds of  appeal.  On  6  December
2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer refused to grant permission to  appeal
to the appellant but granted permission to appeal to the respondent stating

      1. Both parties seek permission to appeal against a decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Ransley promulgated on 20  November  2017  whereby
      the appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  asylum  was
      dismissed but in relation to ancillary protection was granted.


      2. I am satisfied that the applications are in time as they were filed
      on 4 December 2017 and 24 November 2017 respectively.


      3. There is no merit in the appellant's  application.  The  Judge  was
      entitled to find he had not established he was  at  risk  due  to  his
      father's alleged past Ba'ath party work or due to his religion for the
      reasons  she  gave.  The  grounds  amount  to  nothing  more  than   a
      disagreement with that.


      4. It is arguable that the Judge may have materially  erred  regarding
      the option of internal relocation in light of  [112]  of  AA  and  the
      latest the background evidence produced by the respondent.

5. The appellant submitted renewed Grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
and on 2 March 2018  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  refused  permission  to
appeal stating

      1. The appellant, a national of Iraq, appeals against the respondent's
      decision to refuse his  asylum  and  human  rights  claim.  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Ransley dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights
      grounds, but allowed it on humanitarian protection grounds. The First-
      tier Tribunal has granted permission to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
      appeal the  Judge's  decision  on  humanitarian  protection,  but  has
      refused permission to the appellant to appeal the decision  on  asylum
      and human rights  grounds.  The  appellant  now  seeks  to  renew  his
      application for permission in the Upper Tribunal.  However  permission
      is again refused for the same  reasons  as  given  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


      2. The Judge, having given full consideration to the appellant's claim
      and the evidence before her, provided  full  and  cogent  reasons  for
      rejecting the appellant's account of his father's  employment  by  the
      Ba'ath party and his account of the killing of his father.  The  Judge
      had full regard to the  background  information  relied  upon  by  the
      appellant in addressing the delay in the revenge killing of his father
      and also considered the death certificate produced by  the  appellant.
      The Judge noted inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence about  the
      death threat and was unarguably entitled to take such  inconsistencies
      into account and to accord the weight that she did to the evidence  as
      a whole. The Judge also had regard to the appellant's claim to  be  at
      risk as a Sunni Muslim and provided cogent reasons for concluding that
      he would not be at risk on that basis. The  Judge's  adverse  findings
      and conclusions were unarguably cogently reasoned and were  fully  and
      properly open to her on the evidence before her. The  grounds  do  not
      disclose any arguable errors of law in the Judge's decision.

The Hearing

5.(a) For the respondent, Mrs Aboni moved the grounds of  appeal.  She  told
me the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
credible witness, and rejected the appeal on asylum grounds but  found  that
the appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection. She told me that  the
Judge's error lay in consideration of internal relocation,  and  whether  it
was reasonable for the appellant to relocate from Baghdad to  the  IKR.  She
told me  that  although  the  Judge  touches  on  internal  relocation,  her
findings are not adequate.

(b) Mrs Aboni told me that as the appellant is  not  from  IKR  he  will  be
returned to  Baghdad.  She  reminded  me  that  the  Judge  found  that  the
appellant has access to his ID card and so would not be without a  CSID.  As
a result, she told me that the appellant's return is feasible and  he  would
have access to services and support. Mrs Aboni told me that the  judge  only
considered travel between Baghdad &  IKR  by  road,  when  she  should  have
considered the availability of a flight from Baghdad to Erbil.

(c) Mrs Aboni told me that the Judge's consideration of internal  relocation
is inadequate, and creates a material error of law. She urged me to set  the
decision aside.

6. For the  appellant,  Mrs  Sachdev  relied  on  the  appellant's  rule  24
response and the skeleton argument  prepared  for  the  appellant,  together
with a bundle of  documents  lodged  in  advance  of  today's  hearing.  She
reminded me that  the  respondent's  decision  accepts  that  the  appellant
cannot return to Baghdad. The  Judge's  reliance  on  paragraph  46  of  the
reasons for refusal letter goes without challenge.  She  told  me  that  the
Judge considered all of the background  information  together  with  country
guidance. At [42] the Judge found  that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to
obtain a CSID, but Ms Sachdev told me that the border to IKR  is  now  close
to IDPs. She urged me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

7. The  focus  in  this  case  is  entirely  on  the  question  of  internal
relocation. The grounds of appeal relied on  paragraphs  112  &  113  of  AA
(Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC).  The  Court  of  Appeal
amended the country guidance in AA  (Iraq)  CG  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944.  The
following guidance is also found in AA (Iraq)[2017]

    D.     INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


    14.    As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:


         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);


         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;


         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


    16.    There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).


8. At [42] of the decision the Judge finds that the appellant has access  to
his national identity card and so we will be able to obtain a CSID. At  [43]
the  Judge  correctly  takes  the  starting  point  to   consider   internal
relocation from  the  respondent's  position  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
letter. The respondent's position at [46] of the reasons for refusal  letter
is that relocation to Baghdad is not reasonable for this  appellant.  It  is
common ground  that  the  appellant  is  a  Kurd,  he  speaks  only  Kurdish
(paragraph 45 the reasons for refusal letter)

9. The focus  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter,  and  in  the  Judge's
decision, is clearly drawn on the ability of the appellant to make  his  way
from Baghdad to the IKR. The following guidance is found in AA


    E.     IRAQI KURDISH REGION


    17.    The Respondent will only return P to the  IKR  if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.


    18.    The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


    19.    A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain  entry
         for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a
         further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can  remain  for  longer,
         although K will need to register with the authorities  and  provide
         details of  the  employer.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.


    20.     Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably  be  expected
        to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
        to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
        assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
        IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
        employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
        family and friends in the IKR.


    21.     As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in  a  home
        area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

10. The appellant is a Kurd but he does  not  originate  from  IKR.  Between
[43] and [46] of the decision the Judge considers the viability of  internal
relocation. The Judge takes guidance from AA and then finds at [46] that  it
is not reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to Baghdad.

11. The Judge's reasoning is brief, but it  is  sufficient.  The  respondent
accepts that  the  appellant  cannot  be  returned  to  the  IKR.  It's  the
respondent's position that the appellant will be  returned  to  Baghdad  and
from there make his way to IKR.  Mrs  Aboni  told  me  that  the  respondent
intends to return the appellant to Baghdad. The argument presented to me  is
that the Judge has not considered the option of  internal  air  travel  -  a
flight from Baghdad to Erbil. The Judge's finds at [44] that travel  is  not
possible because of the risk of attack from militia.

12. It would have  been  helpful  if  the  Judge  expressly  considered  the
viability of air travel, but at [46] the Judge draws  the  findings  in  the
decision together by saying that the appellant is entitled  to  humanitarian
protection because

      (a) his home province is in a contested area


      (b) the respondent accepts that it is not  reasonable  to  expect  the
      appellant to relocate to Baghdad, and


      (c) the appellant does not originate from the IKR

13. The fundamental flaw in the argument  presented  by  the  respondent  is
that the respondent  accepts  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  return  the
appellant to Baghdad at paragraph 46 of the reasons for refusal letter.  The
respondent does not challenge [43] of the decision, where the  Judge  refers
to the respondent's acceptance that it is unreasonable for the appellant  to
relocate to Baghdad.

14. If it is not possible to return the appellant to  Baghdad,  then  it  is
not possible for the appellant to start his journey from Baghdad to IKR.

15.  On the  facts  as  the  Judge  found  them  to  be,  the  appellant  is
distinguishable by his ethnicity as a Kurd, his  language  (Kurdish  Sorani)
and his religion,  and  so  will  be  viewed  as  a  member  of  a  minority
community. The appellant might have a CSID; but  he  does  not  have  family
members or  friends  in  Baghdad  able  to  accommodate  him;  there  is  no
suggestion that the appellant can find a sponsor to access a hotel  room  or
rent accommodation; He has no network of support in Iraq. Although  Kurdish,
he has not lived in IKR. He does not come from IKR, so the  respondent  will
send him to Baghdad.

16.  Five of the seven factors set out in paragraph 15 of the  annex  to  AA
(Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944 count against the  appellant.  One  factor  is
neutral, and only one factor (available CSID) is in the appellant's  favour.
On the facts as the Judge found them to be,  and  placing  reliance  on  the
guidance given in AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944, the appellant's  profile
indicates that it cannot be reasonable to  return  the  appellant  to  Iraq.
Internal relocation is unduly harsh.

17. If returned to Iraq the appellant would be treated  as  a  Kurd  from  a
contested area. As a displaced Kurd, the appellant would  be  treated  as  a
man from a minority ethnic group. The appellant has no  support  in  Baghdad
(Where the respondent will leave him, even though the respondent has  always
said that it is unreasonable to return the appellant to  Baghdad).  He  will
be expected to make the final part of the journey alone,  from  a  dangerous
starting point without access to accommodation or food.  It is  most  likely
that he will not have access to accommodation and  employment  within  Iraq.
He therefore  faces  the  prospect  of  destitution  if  returned  to  Iraq.
Internal relocation is unduly harsh.

18. In this case the Judge clearly took correct  guidance  from  AA  v  SSHD
[2017] EWCA Civ 944. Having taken correct guidance in law and made  findings
of fact the Judge reached his conclusion. It is not a  conclusion  that  the
respondent likes but it is a conclusion which was  reasonably  open  to  the
Judge on the facts as she found them to be.

19. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

20. There is nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  In
reality the appellant's appeal amounts to little more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as she found them  to  be.  The
respondent might not like the conclusion that the Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result of the correctly applied legal  equation.  The
correct test in law has been  applied.  The  decision  does  not  contain  a
material error of law.

21.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

22.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

  The  appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 20 November 2017, stands.


Signed        Paul Doyle
  Date  8 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle





