
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09914/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 October 2018                            |On 08 November 2018           |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                    [S M]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Yemets
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   On 27 September 2017 the respondent  took  a  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant's protection claim.  The appellant, a  national  of  Ukraine,
    based his claim on his fear that if returned he would be imprisoned and
    ill-treated for evading military service.  The  appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (FtT).  On 8 August 2018 Judge Greasley of that
    Tribunal dismissed his appeal.

2.   The appellant's grounds are essentially twofold, both focusing  on  the
    judge's treatment  of  the  documentary  evidence,  in  particular  two
    military summons dated 25 February and 31 March 2016 and a decision  of
    a  court  in  Ukraine  sentencing  him  in  absentia  to  four   years'
    imprisonment.  The first ground takes issue with the judge's  treatment
    of the expert evidence inasmuch as it relied  on  an  unduly  stringent
    requirement that the professor who wrote the expert report  demonstrate
    that he had based his findings on a much wider  comparative  sample  of
    military summons; the second assails the judge's  reasons  for  finding
    the summons documents not genuine.

3.   I consider the appellant's grounds are made out.  In  relation  to  the
    expert's report from Professor Galeotti  dated  26  October  2017,  the
    judge stated this at paragraphs 65-68:

         "65. I have carefully considered the expert report of Prof Galeotti
             dated 26 October 2017,  which,  for  reasons  that  follow,  I
             afford limited evidential weight.  The author of  this  report
             indicates that his instructions only included consideration of
             the two call-up papers (or summons), and the court  ruling  of
             25 November 2016.  He has not been provided with the  detailed
             refusal decision of the respondent, nor indeed any records  of
             interview provided by the appellant.  I find  that  these  are
             significant  and   surprising   evidential   omissions.    The
             Professor has not been provided with  all  relevant  material,
             which is  critical  in  cases  such  as  this  if  an  overall
             assessment is to be made.


         66.  The author has  not  had  the  advantage  of  considering  the
             appellants claims more widely, and makes no specific reference
             or analysis in relation  to  the  concerns  regarding  timings
             appearing particularly within the two summonses.  I find  that
             again these are important evidential omissions.


         67.  In addition, the professor bases his comparative analysis only
             on consideration of 25 other  summonses  and  12  other  court
             determinations.  I find these are not significant numbers.  He
             explains that he has considered these and that such  documents
             have been provided from both military and  judicial  officers,
             but he provides no  information  whatsoever  as  to  in  which
             capacity, or indeed in  which  context,  such  documents  were
             provided, and how they have been analyzed.


         68.  Nor has the author provided by way of any annex  any  redacted
             comparative documents which he claims he  has  analyzed,  when
             making comparisons between those documents and the  questioned
             documents in the appeal before me."

     The judge's criticisms clearly drew on  his  summary  of  the  expert's
    findings at paragraphs 39-41, in particular paragraph 43:

         "43. In relation to the court ruling document, this was again found
             to be typical of that dispatched  to  record  a  sentence  and
             appeared to be genuine.  The author had handled more  than  12
             determinations in this format including some shown to  him  by
             military  and  judicial  officials  and  did  retain  six  for
             comparison.  The professor found that there was  some  variety
             in the format used by different court's to  record  judgements
             but this document followed one of three main approaches.   The
             documents style, language, Crest, stamp, font and format  were
             the same of those in such determinations.  The  document  also
             included correct legal terms and sighted legal clauses in  the
             Criminal Code and Procedure Code."

4.   In defence of the judge's treatment of the expert evidence, Ms  Everett
    highlighted that the judge's reasons for finding the  report  deficient
    went much further than the lack of a wider database for the purposes of
    comparison and noted that the expert  had  not  seen  the  reasons  for
    refusal decision or other relevant file documents.  I would agree  with
    Ms Everett that in many cases the failure of an expert to  have  looked
    at the Reasons for Refusal Letter and related  documents  significantly
    reduces the weight that can be attached to an expert report, but it was
    clear in this  case  that  the  professor  was  primarily  tasked  with
    carrying  out  document  verification,  which  is  a  relatively  self-
    contained issue.  And in  discounting  the  report's  findings  on  the
    documents, the judge's criticisms do in my judgment impose too  onerous
    a standard.  The professor's credentials as an expert in this area  are
    impressive by anyone's  standards  and  the  professor's  expertise  in
    relation to such documents  comprised  not  just  his  comparison  with
    twelve other similar documents, but drew on his contacts  with  a  wide
    range of Ukrainian law enforcement  personnel.   He  had  also  handled
    thirteen other such documents in the past.  Hence,  whilst  his  report
    was not written with sight of the  reasons  for  refusal,  the  judge's
    reasons for rejecting it do not do justice to the expert's demonstrated
    knowledge base.

5.   I also consider that the appellant has made out the  second  ground  of
    challenge to the judge's treatment of the documentary evidence.  It  is
    clear from paragraph 63 that the judge  attached  significant  negative
    weight to the perceived inconsistency between the appellant's  evidence
    that  the  court  summonses  were  hand-delivered  via  a  postman  and
    background country evidence to different effect as set out  in  a  2013
    report by the  Canadian  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  (IRB).   The
    difficulty with such reliance is on the IRB analysis as  regards  hand-
    delivering is that it was expressly doubted by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    paragraph 98 of VB and Another (Draft evaders  and  prison  conditions)
    Ukraine CG [2017].  Since at paragraph 71 the judge sought to  rely  in
    this appeal on the guidance set out  in  VB,  this  was  a  significant
    error.

6.   Taken together, these errors constitute a material error of  law  since
    if the judge had not made them it may be he  would  have  assessed  the
    evidence differently and reached a different outcome.  Ms Nnamani  also
    disputed the accuracy of the judge's reference to  the  second  summons
    stating "4.30", but that is not a matter I need deal with having  found
    a material error of law.

7.   I do not consider that I can preserve any of the  judge's  findings  of
    fact and for that reason I see no alternative to remitting the case  to
    the FtT.
          Direction

8.   In order to better assist the next judge  in  assessing  this  case,  I
    direct that the appellant's  representatives  produce  a  supplementary
    report from Professor Galeotti by end of November 2018 which  addresses
    the issues which concerned Judge Greasley relating to the  times  given
    in the documents (see paragraphs 60-62 of the judge's  decision).   The
    professor should also be sent the SSHD's Reasons for Refusal Letter and
    interview record and asked to say whether these cause him to revise any
    of his original findings.

9.   To summarise:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Greasley).


    The appellant's  representatives  must  comply  with  my  direction  to
    produce a supplementary expert report by end of November 2018.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 26 October 2018

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



