
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA099652016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On 27 June 2017                          |On 03 July 2017               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                               FILIMON SOLOMON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C Boyle of Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Robson promulgated on  9  March  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on asylum and ECHR grounds, but  allowed  the  appeal  on
Humanitarian Protection grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 1st April 1990 and is a  national  of  Eritrea.
On 4 March 2016, the appellant arrived in the UK and claimed asylum.   On  2
September 2016, the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's  application.



The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Robson ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal on asylum and ECHR  grounds,
but allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds, because he  found
that the appellant is an Eritrean national who had  left  Eritrea  illegally
and would be perceived to be a draft evader if he returns to Eritrea.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  3  April  2017  Designated  Judge
Manuell gave permission to appeal stating

      "1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robson dismissed the appellant's  asylum
      appeal, but allowed  his  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
      appeal in a decision and reasons promulgated  on  9  March  2017.  The
      appellant claimed that he was at risk if returned to  Eritrea  because
      of his illegal exit and escape from military service.


      2. The grounds of onwards appeal dated 22 March 2017 were in time.  In
      summary then mount a reasons challenge and assert that the Judge erred
      by failing to consider that the consequences of the finding of illegal
      exit and draft evasion gave rise to an unanswerable asylum claim.


      3. The grounds are arguable in light of  [55]  of  the  decision.  The
      Judge seems to have misunderstood the consequences  of  his  findings,
      reluctantly reached as they obviously were given the  largely  adverse
      credibility assessment. It must be said that it is not easy to see why
      the Judge decided to allow the appeal on any basis."

The Hearing

6. Mr Boyle moved the  grounds  of  appeal.  He  took  me  to  [55]  of  the
decision, where the Judge finds that the appellant is an  Eritrean  national
of national service age  who  would  be  perceived  as  a  draft  evader  if
returned, and is a person who has exited Eritrea illegally. He  reminded  me
of MST and Others (national service - risk  categories)  Eritrea  CG  [2016]
UKUT 00443 (IAC) and told  me  that  the  Judge's  findings  at  [55]  alone
establish that the appellant is entitled to succeed on  asylum  grounds  and
article 3 and 4 ECHR grounds. He told me that the fact that the Judge  finds
that the appellant is not a credible witness and rejects  the  substance  of
the appellant's overall account is entirely irrelevant. He urged me  to  set
the decision aside and substitute my own decision allowing  the  appellant's
appeal.

7. Mr Diwnycz told me that he could not resist the appeal. He told  me  that
no challenge is taken to the Judge's findings at [55] of the  decision,  and
confirmed that those findings indicate that there is  a  real  risk  to  the
appellant if he returns to Eritrea.

Analysis

8. In MST and Others (national service - risk categories) Eritrea CG  [2016]
UKUT 00443 (IAC)  it was held that (i) Although reconfirming  parts  of  the
country guidance given in MA (Draft evaders -  illegal  departures  -  risk)
Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059  and  MO  (illegal  exit  -  risk  on  return)
Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT  00190  (IAC),  this  case  replaces  that  with  the
following: (ii) The Eritrean system  of  military/national  service  remains
indefinite and since  2012  has  expanded  to  include  a  people's  militia
programme,  which  although  not  part  of  national  service,   constitutes
military service; (iii) The age limits for national service  are  likely  to
remain the same as stated in MO, namely 54 for men and 47 for  women  except
that for children the limit is now likely to be 5 save  for  adolescents  in
the context of family reunification. For peoples'  militia  the  age  limits
are likely to be 60 for women and 70 for men; (iv) The categories of  lawful
exit have not significantly changed  since  MO  and  are  likely  to  be  as
follows: (a)  Men aged over 54; (b) Women aged over  47  (c)  Children  aged
under five (with some scope for adolescents in family  reunification  cases;
(d) people exempt from national  service  on  medical  grounds;  (e)  People
travelling abroad for medical treatment; (f) People  travelling  abroad  for
studies or for a conference; (g) Business and sportsmen; (h) Former  freedom
fighters   (Tegadelti)   and   their   family   members;    (i)    Authority
representatives in leading  positions  and  their  family  members;  (v)  It
continues to be the case (as in  MO)  that  most  Eritreans  who  have  left
Eritrea since 1991 have done so illegally. However, since there are  viable,
albeit still limited, categories of lawful  exit  especially  for  those  of
draft age for national service, the  position  remains  as  it  was  in  MO,
namely that a person whose asylum claim has not been found  credible  cannot
be assumed to have left illegally. The  position  also  remains  nonetheless
(as in MO) that if such a person is found to have left Eritrea on  or  after
August/September 2008, it may be that inferences can  be  drawn  from  their
health history or level of education or their skills profile as  to  whether
legal exit on their part was feasible, provided that such inferences can  be
drawn in the light of adverse credibility findings.  For  these  purposes  a
lengthy period performing national service is likely to enhance  a  person's
skill profile; (vi) It remains the  case  (as  in  MO)  that  failed  asylum
seekers as such are not at risk of persecution or serious  harm  on  return;
(vii)   Notwithstanding   that   the   round-ups   (giffas)   of   suspected
evaders/deserters,  the  "shoot  to  kill"  policy  and  the  targeting   of
relatives of  evaders  and  deserters  are  now  significantly  less  likely
occurrences, it remains the case, subject to three  limited  exceptions  set
out in (vii) (c) below, that if a person of or approaching  draft  age  will
be perceived on return as a draft evader or deserter, he or she will face  a
real risk of persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment contrary to  Article
3 or 4 of the ECHR. (vii) (a) A person who is likely to be  perceived  as  a
deserter/evader will not be able to avoid exposure to such real risk  merely
by showing they have paid (or are willing to pay) the diaspora tax  and/have
signed (or are willing to sign) the letter of  regret;  (vii)  (b)  Even  if
such a person may avoid  punishment  in  the  form  of  detention  and  ill-
treatment it is likely that he or she will be assigned to perform  (further)
national service, which, is  likely  to  amount  to  treatment  contrary  to
Articles 3 and 4 of the ECHR unless he or she falls within one  or  more  of
the  three  limited  exceptions  set  out  immediately  below  in  (vii)(c);
(vii)(c)) It remains the case (as in MO) that there are persons  likely  not
to face a real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  notwithstanding  that
they will be perceived on return as draft  evaders  and  deserters,  namely:
(1) persons whom the regime's military and  political  leadership  perceives
as having given them valuable service (either in  Eritrea  or  abroad);  (2)
persons who are trusted family members of, or are themselves  part  of,  the
regime's military or political leadership.  A  further  possible  exception,
requiring a more case specific analysis is (3) persons (and  their  children
born afterwards) who fled (what  later  became  the  territory  of)  Eritrea
during the War of Independence; (vii) Notwithstanding  that  many  Eritreans
are effectively reservists having  been  discharged/released  from  national
service and unlikely to face recall, it  remains  unlikely  that  they  will
have received or be able to receive official confirmation of  completion  of
national service. Thus it remains the case, as in MO that "(iv) The  general
position adopted in MA, that a  person  of  or  approaching  draft  and  not
medically unfit  who  is  accepted  as  having  left  Eritrea  illegally  is
reasonably likely to be  regarded  with  serious  hostility  on  return,  is
reconfirmed, subject to limited  exceptions..."  (ix)  A  person  liable  to
perform service in the people's militia and who is  assessed  to  have  left
Eritrea illegally,  is  not  likely  on  return  to  face  a  real  risk  of
persecution or serious harm. (x) Accordingly, a person  whose  asylum  claim
has not been found credible, but who is able  to  satisfy  a  decision-maker
(a) that he or she left  illegally,  and  (b)  that  he  or  she  is  of  or
approaching draft age, is likely to  be  perceived  on  return  as  a  draft
evader or deserter from national service and as a result face  a  real  risk
of persecution or serious harm; (xi) While likely to be a rare case,  it  is
possible that a person who has exited lawfully may on forcible  return  face
having to resume or commence national service. In such a  case  there  is  a
real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  by  virtue  of  such  service
constituting forced labour contrary to Article 4(2) and  Article  3  of  the
ECHR; (xii) Where it is specified  above  that  there  is  a  real  risk  of
persecution in the context of performance of military/national  service,  it
is highly likely that it will be persecution for a Convention  reason  based
on imputed political opinion.

9. Between [39] and [55] of the decision, the Judge rejects the  appellant's
account and gives his reasons for doing so. At [55]  of  the  decision,  the
Judge finds that the appellant is an Eritrean  national,  who  left  Eritrea
illegally, who is of national service age and who will  be  perceived  as  a
draft evader on return to Eritrea. MST says at headnote (vii) that a  person
with that profile is entitled to protection as a refugee,  and  succeeds  on
article 3 and 4 ECHR grounds.

10. Instead of finding that  the  appellant's  appeal  succeeds,  the  Judge
dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum  appeal  and  allowed  the   appellant's
humanitarian protection appeal. That is clearly a material error of  law.  I
therefore set the decision aside. I am able to substitute my own decision.

11. MST tells me that if  [55]  of  the  decision  stood  on  its  own,  the
appellant's appeal on asylum  and  ECHR  grounds  would  be  successful.  No
challenge is taken to the findings at [55]  of  the  decision.  I  therefore
substitute my own decision allowing the appeal on asylum grounds.

12. As I have found the appellant is a refugee I cannot consider whether  he
qualifies for humanitarian protection.

13. Therefore, I  find  the  appellant  is  not  eligible  for  humanitarian
protection.

14. As I have found the appellant has established  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution, by analogy I find that his  claim  engages  article  3  of  the
Human Rights Convention because he  would  face  a  real  risk  of  torture,
inhuman or degrading treatment  if  he  were  returned  to  his  country  of
origin.

15.   Article 4 of the 1950 Convention is a prohibition on slavery.  I  have
found that the appellant will be perceived to be a  draft  evader  who  left
Eritrea illegally. In MST and Others (national service  -  risk  categories)
Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC)  it was held (inter alia) that

    "(vii) (a) A person who is likely to be perceived as a  deserter/evader
    will not be able to avoid exposure to such real risk merely by  showing
    they have paid (or are willing to pay) the diaspora tax and/have signed
    (or are willing to sign) the letter of regret; (vii) (b) Even if such a
    person may avoid punishment in the form of detention and  ill-treatment
    it is likely that he or she  will  be  assigned  to  perform  (further)
    national service, which, is likely to amount to treatment  contrary  to
    Articles 3 and 4 of the ECHR ..."

I have found that return to Eritrea would breach the appellant's  rights  on
article 3 ECHR grounds. By analogy I find the appeal succeeds on  article  4
ECHR grounds.

Decision

16. The First-tier Tribunal decision promulgated on 9 March 2017 is  tainted
by material errors of law. The decision is set aside.

17. I substitute my own decision.

18. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds

19. The appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.

20. The appeal is allowed on article 3 and 4 ECHR grounds.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 30 June2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

