
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09453/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 June 2019                      |On 2 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                  MR K D K
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mahmood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on 3  April  1966.
    He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 18 August  2016  to
    refuse his asylum and human  rights  claim  raised  in  response  to  a
    deportation decision made in March 2015 following  his  conviction  for
    conspiracy to facilitate a breach of immigration laws.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 4 March 2019 Judge  O'Malley  (the  judge)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal because she found he was not  at  risk
    on return but that in any event he could relocate.  As regards  Article
    8, she found the respondent's decision proportionate.

 3. The grounds claim the judge erred as follows:

      i) Failure to  consider  the  expert  report  or  failure  to  provide
         adequate reasoning with regard to the report.

     ii) Error in the judge's consideration of the threat by the Taliban.

    iii) Error in relation to the newspaper articles from  the  Daily  Urran
         and Daily Mahasib.

     iv) Error in relation to the appellant's reasons for leaving  the  UNDP
         job.

      v) Error in the judge's approach to deportation aspects and Article 8.



 4. Judge Grant-Hutchinson refused permission to appeal on 29  March  2019.
    She said inter alia as follows:

         "2.  It is submitted that the judge has erred in law

             (a)  by failing to consider the expert report  or  failing  to
                  provide due reasons in consideration of it and the  weight
                  to be given to it in the round alongside the witnesses;

             (b)  by finding that the evidence given by the witnesses is in
                  part  truthful,  in  part   exaggeration   and   in   part
                  fabrication which  shows  an  error  of  approach  in  not
                  considering the evidence in the round;

             (c)  in the consideration to the threat by the Taliban;

             (d)  in the assessment  of  the  evidence  pertaining  to  the
                  newspaper articles;

             (e)  in relation to the appellant's intentions for leaving the
                  UNDP job; and

             (f)  in relation to relocation for the family unit which would
                  be harsh or the fact that it would be harsh to  sever  the
                  appellant's children from him (as his  wife  and  children
                  have made  separate  applications)  considering  that  the
                  three children have been in the UK since August  2011  and
                  two are qualifying children and one child is now age 19.

         3.   The judge has carefully considered  all  the  documentary  and
             oral evidence  including  the  evidence  as  detailed  in  the
             grounds for permission to appeal  which  is  summarised  above
             before coming to a decision.  The judge has  made  appropriate
             findings which she was entitled to make.  It was open for  the
             judge to consider what weight she felt it appropriate to place
             on all the evidence before her.  The  judge  has  applied  the
             statutory law and case law  properly.   The  judge  has  given
             detailed reasons for her decision.

         4.   The grounds disclose no arguable error of law."

 5. The grounds were renewed to the Upper Tribunal.  In particular:

 6. As regards ground 1, that the judge erred when she  concluded  at  [41]
    that "I am not satisfied to  put  weight  on  evidence  given  only  in
    writing where it relates to areas in dispute" because the judge thereby
    excluded from her assessment a notable part of the evidence relied upon
    by the appellant from both within and outside the  UK.   Whilst  weight
    was a matter for the judge, it was  an  error  to  give  no  weight  to
    certain evidence.

 7. As regards ground 2, the judge imposed too high a burden  of  proof  in
    respect  of  the  newspaper  reports.   Further,  she  gave  inadequate
    reasoning.  She said at  [76]  that  the  newspaper  reports  were  not
    genuine, her reasoning being that  the  newspapers  were  not  from  an
    accurate source and that there was no evidence  that  the  groups  were
    with whom he was working in 2004.  The issues the judge referred to  at
    [77] about Mr Mohammed should have been put specifically  to  him.   If
    such findings about the "inadequacy" of his evidence were going  to  be
    raised.

 8. As to ground 3, the protection claim was made out  on  the  facts  such
    that the judge erred in dismissing the appeal.

 9. As regards ground 4, the judge erred because she failed  to  follow  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 33.  The ills of the parents should not  fall  at
    the feet of the children.  JG (s.117(6): reasonable to leave UK) Turkey
    [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC) was also relevant.

10. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Phillips granted permission to appeal on 24
    May 2019.  He said inter alia as follows:

         "2.  First it is asserted that the Tribunal  erred  in  giving  'no
             weight' to written evidence and 'no weight' to  reports  given
             by friends.  In my judgment this reveals  an  arguable  error.
             The weight given to evidence is a matter for the judge and  it
             may be that the judge will find that little or limited  weight
             can be given to certain types of  evidence  but  to  give  'no
             weight' because evidence is in writing may  arguably  indicate
             that too high a burden is being required.

         3.   Secondly it is asserted that  inadequate  reasoning  has  been
             given or too high a burden  of  proof  sought  in  respect  of
             newspaper reports in the finding that  reports  submitted  are
             not genuine.  I find no arguable error here."At  paragraph  78
             the judge concludes that she is not satisfied that the reports
             are genuine.  This finding is explained as was  open  to  her.
             She did not make a finding that the reports were not  genuine.



         4.   Ground 3 is not argued.  The assertion is that 'the protection
             claim was made out even on the facts  as  found'.   The  judge
             found at paragraph 83 that there was no well-founded  fear  of
             the Taliban.  The finding on internal flight in the  following
             paragraph was  not  therefore  made  on  the  basis  that  the
             appellant had had a well-founded fear in his home area.

         5.   Ground 4 refers to the Article 8 decision and asserts that the
             judge has not fully taken account of the  recent  decision  in
             KO, the best  interests  of  the  children  generally  or  the
             Mibanga principle.  This  ground  is  arguable.   Two  of  the
             appellant's children are qualifying  children.   There  is  no
             reference to  the  best  interests  of  the  children  in  the
             decision or to the recent jurisprudence including KO.

         6.   All grounds may be argued."

Submissions on Error of Law

11. Mr Mahmood relied upon the grounds.  The judge had been supplied with a
    considerable quantity of documentation with which she failed to engage.



12.  Mr  Whitwell  conceded  what  he  described  as  the   judge's   "poor
    phraseology" at [41] of  her  decision  but  overall,  there  had  been
    detailed consideration of the evidence.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13. The appellant had made a protection claim and  the  judge's  obligation
    was to give that claim the most anxious scrutiny.  Clearly,  the  judge
    erred in saying that she would give no weight to a  proportion  of  the
    appellant's evidence.  The issue for me must  be  whether  the  judge's
    error was material.

14. The judge carried out a careful and  comprehensive  assessment  of  the
    evidence. She rejected a  significant  proportion  of  the  appellant's
    evidence for the reasons she gave at [38]-[41].  She accepted that some
    of the evidence  was  truthful,  some  was  exaggerated  and  some  was
    fabricated.  She said that  those  findings  were  not  a  bar  to  the
    appellant's success.  She gave reasons why she  was  not  persuaded  by
    some of the  evidence.   That  was  because  she  found  it  internally
    inconsistent.  She dismissed the protection claim because she found the
    inconsistent evidence related to fundamental issues.   Although  saying
    that she would not put weight on evidence given only in writing and  in
    particular, that evidence set out by the appellant's  friends  who  did
    not attend the hearing, the judge explained why it was that she did  so
    at [41].  The evidence related to significant areas in dispute.   There
    was no opportunity for the respondent to  cross-examine.   It  was  not
    clear how the evidence came to those who wrote letters in support.  The
    written evidence of the appellant's  wife  had  been  supplied  by  her
    husband who reported in turn that it was given to him by someone  else.
    The judge said in such circumstances that she could not be clear of the
    provenance of information.  Having set out the  difficulties  that  she
    had with some parts of the evidence, the judge set out her reasons  for
    her findings at [43]-[90],  including  her  consideration  of  internal
    relocation.  She took into account the oral evidence at the hearing  of
    Dr Giustozzi and gave comprehensive reasons why she did not accept  the
    appellant's account.  The judge's findings were clearly open to her  on
    the evidence.  The grounds fail to establish any  material  error  with
    regard to the judge's approach to the protection claim.

15. The judge went on to consider the  appellant's  family  life  at  [98]-
    [114].  The grounds fail to explain how it is that the judge  erred  as
    regards Article 8.  She made detailed findings as to why  it  was  that
    the public interest  in  the  appellant's  deportation  outweighed  his
    family life here.  She said it was pertinent to note that his Article 8
    claim did not feature in evidential terms during the  hearing  and  the
    only reference to Article  8  was  at  the  conclusion  of  Mr  Jarro's
    submissions when he indicated that the appellant also  sought  to  rely
    upon Article 8.

16. Nevertheless, the judge took into account considerable  family  history
    at [98]-[114].  The judge's decision that it would not be unduly  harsh
    for the appellant's wife and children to remain here was open to her on
    the evidence.  The appellant's wife was supported by her  brother  here
    with accommodation and funds.  She has English language  skills  and  a
    degree  in  political  science.   The  judge  took  into  account   the
    appellant's wife's medical condition but found there was nothing in her
    history which made it unduly harsh for her to remain here  without  the
    appellant.  See [102]-[104].

17. The judge took into account that the appellant's wife and children  had
    outstanding applications for leave to remain in their own  right;  they
    have since been granted.  The judge took into account the  report  from
    Jasmine Smith, independent social worker,  the  children's  educational
    aspirations and their extended family relationships.  The judge did not
    consider it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain here  with
    their mother, notwithstanding the appellant's deportation.

18. The grounds fail to explain how it is given the  judge's  detailed  and
    nuanced findings and decision that her failure to consider the family's
    circumstances, in line with KO or  JG  (not  a  deportation  decision),
    amount to a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The judge made no material error of law and her decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 27 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
