
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/09340/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 April 2021                     |On 30 April 2021                     |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   JIE HE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China, born on 19  May  1996.   The  SSHD
    refused his asylum claim by a letter issued on 17 September 2019.   FtT
    Judge David C Clapham SSC refused his appeal by a decision  promulgated
    on 10 December 2019.

 2. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  set  out  in  his
    application dated 28 January 2020.

 3. The grounds, in summary, and omitting citations, are:

    (1)   - evidence from witness:

         (i) at [57], rejection of  evidence  from  a  witness  that  police
         showed her an arrest warrant, and evidence from the appellant  that
         immigration officials were bribed: to dismiss  evidence  as  "self-
         serving" is inadequate;

         (ii) at [57], error  to  discount  evidence  from  witness  because
         account of appellant already found to be false.

    (2)   - inadequate reasons:

         (i) at [53] inadequate reasons for finding it  unclear  why  police
         would be interested in appellant, when it was to  be  inferred  his
         friend gave his name to police who aimed to arrest demonstrators;

         (iii) at [53], inadequate reasons for finding  no  specific  reason
         for Xin He to disclose appellant's details to police; by inference,
         the reason was that when interrogated and / or ill-treated he would
         give names;

         (iv)  at  [54],  inadequate  reasons  for  not  accepting   claimed
         frequency of police visits;

         (v) at [56], inadequate assessment whether there might have been  a
         typographical error in the interview, "2001" instead of "2011".

 4. By a skeleton argument dated 27 April 2020 the  SSHD  responds  to  the
    grounds, in summary as follows:

    (1) is only disagreement; judge reviewed evidence in detail, and had to
    do so in some order; unsurprising to start with appellant; findings  on
    his evidence include:

    (i) incorrect on date of Jasmine Revolution;

    (ii) no adequate explanation for failing to mention  demonstration  the
    previous day, but then claimed it was one of the reasons for the one he
    attended;

    (iii) no explation for there being news reports about the demonstration
    the day before, but not the one he attended;

    (iv) no explanation, given very limited involvement, why of interest to
    the police, or his name disclosed;

    (v) no explanation for no knowledge of other members of his group.

    Cogent reasons for finding about warrant.

    (2) only further disagreements; suggestion of typographical  error  not
    advanced at the hearing.

 5. The appellant's response dated 29 April 2020 does not add substantially
    to the grounds.

 6. In his oral submissions Mr Winter drew attention  to  passages  in  the
    cases cited in support of ground 1:

    MJ (Singh v Belgium: Tanveer Ahmed unaffected) [2013]  UKUT  00253,  at
    paragraph 33:

         We should say in passing that we agree with the point  made  by  Ms
         Laughton in submissions concerning  the  use  of  the  term  "self-
         serving".  If that were the only basis upon  which  the  judge  had
         rejected evidence then we would find it to  be  lacking  in  proper
         reasoning.  No doubt an appellant will generally,  if  not  always,
         find it of assistance to put forward evidence that assists his case
         and to that extent such evidence may be regarded as "self-serving",
         but  that  cannot  in  any  sense  be  said  to  be  a  reason  for
         marginalising it.  The use of this term is, in general,  unhelpful,
         but in this case it does  not  in  our  view  materially  flaw  the
         determination because of the other matters we have identified above
         which justified the judge in coming to the findings that he did.

    R (on the application  of  SS)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("self-serving" statements)  [2017]  UKUT  00164  (IAC),  as
    headnoted:

         The expression "self-serving" is, to a large extent, a protean one.
         The expression itself tells us little or nothing. What is needed is
         a reason, however brief,  for  that  designation.  For  example,  a
         letter written by a third party to an applicant  for  international
         protection may be "self-serving" because it bears the hallmarks  of
         being written to order, in circumstances where the applicant's case
         is that the letter was a spontaneous warning.

    In AR v SSHD [2017] CSIH 52, where after dealing  with  a  question  of
    verification of documents, and of  viewing  all  the  evidence  in  the
    round, the Court said at paragraph 36:

         Similar comments apply to the lack of any proper consideration  and
         assessment of the evidence from  the  supporting  witness  and  the
         statement from the proprietor of the gay club.  One  cannot  simply
         dismiss this evidence, or in effect  ignore  it,  because  one  has
         already decided that the claimant's account is false.   No  finding
         was made by  the  First-tier Tribunal  judge  as  to  whether  the
         evidence was credible and reliable, and if not, for what reason.

    Mr Winter referred to S v SSHD [2011] SLT 1058, [2010] CSIH 90, at [9 -
    12]; the point of principle is clear from [9]:

         We are of the view that the Tribunal did err in  law  in  assessing
         the credibility of the first applicant and his  wife.  We  consider
         that the  Determination  discloses  a  structural  failing  in  the
         approach of the Tribunal in that it  indicates  that  the  Tribunal
         reached conclusions as to the incredibility of the accounts of  the
         first applicant and his wife before considering the significance of
         the evidence  of  other  witnesses.  The  evidence  of  F  A  S  in
         particular was of direct personal experience and contained  details
         which were plainly material in relation to the credibility of  core
         elements of the account of the first applicant and his  wife  about
         their origins, nationality and clan membership  as  well  as  their
         experience of mistreatment. It was thus corroborative  evidence  on
         material aspects of the evidence of the  first  applicant  and  his
         wife that ought to have been considered along with  their  evidence
         and  any  other  relevant  evidence  in  the  round  before   final
         conclusions in relation to the credibility of the  first  applicant
         and his wife were reached. To leave such significant  material  out
         of account in assessing credibility in this case was  an  error  of
         law of  such  significance  as  to  vitiate  the  decision  of  the
         Tribunal.

 7. On ground 2, Mr Winter submitted that  the  evidence  yielded  a  clear
    inference that the appellant's name might have been  disclosed  to  the
    police; the judge did not analyse his evidence at interview that  phone
    messages passed between him and the group leader; and the judge  stated
    various findings baldly, without reasons.

 8. Summing up, Mr Winter submitted that grounds 1 and ground 2, separately
    or together, left reasoning by which the outcome would  not  inevitably
    be the same, and so a rehearing was required.

 9. Ms Isherwood in her submissions  sought  to  identify  reasons  in  the
    decision, to show that it disclosed no error once read as a whole.   On
    ground 2 (v), she said it was not for the judge to search for  possible
    explanations in favour of the appellant when those were not  suggested.
    Further, she referred to the decision  at  [16],  where  the  appellant
    confirmed that he had thought the group behind the  Jasmine  Revolution
    formed in 2001 not 2011, having been told so by a senior  member.   She
    argued that the judge's findings, including those on  the  evidence  of
    the appellant's girlfriend, were not reached in isolation  but  in  the
    round.  The judge was entitled to note, for example, that  the  witness
    carried little credit, given her devious immigration history, and  that
    the allegation of bribery to transit the airport was made  up  only  in
    course of oral evidence.

10. Mr Winter replied that even if the respondent was right about ground  2
    (v), that was not key; some of the respondent's points were re-argument
    on the merits, based on the decision where  it  set  out  evidence  and
    submissions, but it was the reasons which were crucial; and there was a
    lacuna regarding the evidence from the witness, as in the cases  cited,
    where decisions were  not  saved  by  formal  recitals  of  considering
    evidence in the round.

11. I am obliged to both representatives for their helpful submissions.

12. The epithet "self-serving" is unhelpful, and best avoided.

13. The passage from [57] in which the term appears is:

         The speculation is that the group leader disclosed the  appellant's
         name to the police, but speculation is all it is and the claim that
         there is an arrest warrant does not ... sit with the fact that  the
         appellant was able to leave the airport and exit China ...  despite
         a facial recognition system ...  that officials had been bribed  is
         a convenient and self-serving suggestion ... weakened by  the  fact
         that  it  was  only  under  cross-examination  that  the  appellant
         suggested that officials had been bribed ...

14. The judge does not use the term without "a reason, however brief".   He
    mentions inconsistency with background evidence and the late  emergence
    of the explanation.  Those are factors he was entitled to consider,  in
    which no error has been alleged.

15. In further context, the passage appears after a  cautious  analysis  of
    the absence of news reporting of the claimed event; a self-reminder  to
    look at the evidence in the round; a reference to  supporting  evidence
    "from those who claim to have seen the arrest warrant"; and  a  comment
    on lack of explanation why there would be an arrest warrant.

16. Amongst that the judge says that he regards the evidence  of  witnesses
    to the warrant as "designed to bolster  the  case  of  the  appellant".
    That phrase is rather ambivalent, along the  same  lines  as  the  term
    "self-serving"; but it also must be read in context.

17. Looking both at [57] and at the decision in full, the appellant has not
    shown that the judge classified evidence  as  "self-serving",  or  used
    similar terms, as  a  reason,  on  its  own,  for  not  accepting  that
    evidence.

18.  The  appellant  has  not  shown  a  structural  failing  by   reaching
    conclusions on the incredibility of the account of the appellant before
    considering the significance of  the  evidence  of  anyone  else.   The
    approach in the decision is holistic.

19. Neither part of ground 1 is established.

20. Ground 2 challenges adequacy of reasoning, but  selectively.   It  does
    not acknowledge the judge's full  reasoning,  as  relied  upon  by  the
    respondent in written and oral submissions.

21. Sub-grounds (i) and (iii) overlap.  The appellant  suggested  that  his
    name had been disclosed to the police.   Whether  that  allegation  was
    speculative, or a reasonable inference, was for the  judge  to  decide,
    after weighing all the evidence.  Whether  his  resolution  is  legally
    supportable depends on all the reasons he gave.

22. There is no sub-ground (ii).

23. Sub-ground (iv) blandly asserts absence or inadequacy  of  reasons  for
    not accepting the claimed frequency of police visits.

24. At [54] the judge firstly notes some inconsistency in  the  appellant's
    evidence about this, and secondly declines to accept what he  says,  on
    the view that the police would not waste time  and  resources  in  this
    way.  The appellant has made  no  direct  challenge  to  that  specific
    reasoning.  This must be put in context of China being a highly policed
    and authoritarian society, as the judge was  aware,  but  also  of  the
    relative triviality of the suspected offending, and of what  the  judge
    made of the appellant's other allegations.

25. On  ground  2  (v),  the  respondent's  submissions  were  sound.   The
    suggestion of a typographical error is a possibility on the face of the
    interview record, but this is  an  afterthought.   Even  if  the  judge
    should have perceived the possibility, the issue is extinguished by the
    fact that the appellant, as recorded by the judge, stood  by  the  2001
    date in his oral evidence.

26. Ground 2 does not show that the reasons in the decision are  less  than
    legally adequate, either on the issues selected, or on a  fair  reading
    of the entire decision.

27. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

28. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




       Hugh Macleman


       22 April 2021
       UT Judge Macleman




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

