
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/09193/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 June 2017                        |     On 16 June 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                                     M R
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Counsel, instructed by Thompson & Co
                    Solicitors (Morden)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M  R
    Oliver which was promulgated on 7 April  2017.   The  appellant  is  an
    Iranian youth, aged 16  when  the  matter  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, who made a claim for asylum alleging fear of persecution upon
    his return to Iran.  The judge dismissed the appeal on  asylum  grounds
    in what on any account is a short but nonetheless clear determination.

2.   The appellant was given permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on
    three of the five grounds which accompanied the application.

3.   The first ground relates to an alleged failure to  consider  and  apply
    policy guidance promulgated by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, Processing Children's Asylum Claims (12 July 2016)   As  is
    accepted by the Secretary of State there is no mention to  that  policy
    guidance in the course of the determination.  However, it is abundantly
    plain  from  the  decision  that  the  judge  was  well  aware  of  the
    appellant's youth  and  took  that  into  account  in  considering  his
    evidence and all the surrounding circumstances. Page 40 of the guidance
    reminds those implementing it that a 'case by case' should  be  adopted
    and I can see nothing to suggest  any  departure  from  its  letter  or
    spirit.

4.   The concept of a minor covers everything from a babe-in-arms  to  those
    just shy of their eighteenth birthday, and discretion must  be  applied
    to reflect growing levels of maturity.  The evidence here was that  the
    appellant returned home to discover that his parents  and  his  younger
    brother had been taken away.  The appellant at that time was aged about
    15 or 16, the same age as his neighbour's son.  It seems then  that  an
    uncle took the view that the appellant was in danger and  spirited  the
    son away.  The judge did not draw any adverse inference  based  on  the
    age, maturity or otherwise of the appellant. He simply - and properly -
    applied  his  mind  to  the  material  before  him  making  appropriate
    allowance for the appellant's age and the particular  circumstances  of
    the case.

5.   The second ground of appeal comprises a  criticism  of  the  judge  for
    taking  an  adverse  view  of  this  matter  due  to  the  absence   of
    corroborative evidence.  It is helpful to  read  paragraph  20  of  the
    judge's determination in full:

         "There is no evidence in support of the appellant's claim that  his
         parents were arrested and no evidence from his uncle,  who  appears
         to have left him to fend for himself in the  United  Kingdom.   The
         appellant's complete ignorance of any basis for his parents' arrest
         is difficult to reconcile with his age.   The  coincidence  of  his
         uncle passing [the  appellant's  home]  is  striking.   No  enquiry
         appears to have been made as to what had happened to  his  parents.
         No reason is suggested why  the  reason  for  his  parents'  arrest
         should extend to a fear that he, then  a  15  year  old,  would  be
         arrested on  return.   His  uncle,  according  to  the  appellant's
         account, did not pause for  thought  before  taking  the  appellant
         away.  This would appear to demonstrate that he knew that there was
         a basis for the arrests.  He went out of his way to assist him  but
         has not informed the appellant of what he knew or sought to contact
         and assist him in the United Kingdom to confirm his account."

6.   I do not read that paragraph as suggesting that there was  any  adverse
    finding made by the judge in consequence of any lack of  corroboration.
    The judge merely records what he  considered  to  be  relevant  factual
    findings, namely that an uncle had been  involved  in  the  appellant's
    departure from Iran and that that uncle had not assisted the  appellant
    following his arrival in the United Kingdom.  Those matters are part of
    the factual matrix of the case, properly recorded  the  course  of  the
    determination, and I can see no substance in the allegation  that  this
    amounts to an error of law.

7.   I turn then to the third and final ground advanced by Mr Khan  for  the
    appellant. This is a more generalised allegation of  failure  to  apply
    the most anxious scrutiny to this particular case.   Mr  Khan  puts  it
    attractively in saying that in a case where there  is  scant  evidence,
    where by the very nature of the child being spirited away, he is unable
    to contribute meaningfully  to  the  factual  background,  there  is  a
    heightened responsibility on a primary fact-finder to set out  findings
    on the evidence, as opposed to the absence of evidence.

8.   In my assessment,  the  judge  has  properly  undertaken  the  judicial
    function of making findings and applying anxious scrutiny to the  case.
    The judge took into account all that he had heard and read  during  the
    course of the hearing, noting enquiries which might have been made  and
    those that  did  not  yield  any  particular  result.   The  judge  was
    perfectly entitled to come to the conclusion on the evidence  that  the
    appellant had not discharged the burden of proof which lay upon him  in
    demonstrating a well-founded fear of persecution on  his  return.   The
    fact that there was a paucity of evidence is something which the  judge
    took into account as he was entitled, indeed obliged, to do.

9.   In essence, Mr Khan's complaint is mere disagreement with the  decision
    the judge came to.  There is no error of law. It therefore follows that
    this appeal must be dismissed. I record for the avoidance of any  doubt
    that this appellant still has the benefit  of  discretionary  leave  to
    remain until he reaches the age of 18.


Notice of Decision

The appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
affirmed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     16 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



