
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09188/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2019                          |On 27th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [N P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Behbahani, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr A Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  9th  August  1997.   The
    Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK in July 2017  by  plane  and
    claimed asylum on 11th January 2018.  Her claim for asylum was based on
    a contention that she had a well-founded fear of persecution in Iran on
    the basis of her membership of a  particular  social  group,  namely  a
    woman in Iran who is the potential victim of a  forced  marriage.   Her
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 12th July 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Keeffe sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  22nd  July  2018.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 5th September 2018 the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 19th September 2018 Grounds of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds made the following contentions:-

      1) That there had been a failure by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to
         make proper findings  based  on  the  evidence  before  her  and/or
         failure to properly take into account the Appellant's  explanations
         before making her findings.

      2) That there had been a failure to properly consider the plausibility
         of the Appellant's account.

      3) That there had been findings based on material mistakes of fact.

      4) That there had been an unreasonable  expectation  of  corroborative
         evidence.

      5) That there had  been  a  failure  by  the  judge  to  consider  the
         background material within their proper context.

      6) There had been a failure to make any proper findings in respect  of
         the Appellant's sister's evidence.

 4. On 12th October 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Page refused  permission
    to appeal.  On 5th November 2018 renewed Grounds of Appeal were  lodged
    to the Upper Tribunal.  These renewed grounds consist  of  a  two  page
    analysis by the Appellant's instructing solicitor as to why  the  judge
    refusing permission was wrong and attached to that the original Grounds
    of Appeal.

 5. On 21st December  2018  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grimes  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Grimes noted that it was contended in  the
    sixth ground that the judge had erred in failing  to  make  any  proper
    findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  sister's  evidence.   The
    Appellant's bundle contains a statement from her sister.  The judge had
    said at paragraph 4  that  she  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant's
    sister.  However, the judge had  made  no  reference  to  the  sister's
    evidence in the "Findings"  section  of  the  decision.   Judge  Grimes
    considered that it  was  arguable  that  the  failure  to  assess  this
    evidence was a material error,  particularly  in  the  context  of  the
    finding that the Appellant provided no corroborating evidence  to  show
    that her father was a  wealthy  businessman  with  connections  to  the
    Iranian government.  Whilst Judge  Grimes  considered  that  the  other
    grounds had less  merit,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  all
    grounds.

 6. On 5th February 2019 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  It is on the above basis that the  appeal  comes
    before me to determine whether or not there is a material error of  law
    in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant
    appears by her instructed solicitor, Mr  Behbahani.   Mr  Behbahani  is
    very familiar with this matter.   He  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and he is the author of the Grounds of Appeal and the  amended
    Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Melvin.  Mr Melvin is also  familiar  with  this
    matter.  He is the author of the Rule 24 response  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal  which  I  have  read  and  considered.   Unlike  many  Rule  24
    responses, this is  a  detailed  response  extending  to  some  fifteen
    paragraphs.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Mr Behbahani acknowledges that the main basis upon which  Judge  Grimes
    has granted permission is the contention that there has been a  failure
    to look  at  the  Appellant's  sister's  evidence  but  he  starts  his
    submissions by addressing the Grounds of Appeal in the order  in  which
    they are produced.  He asked me to look at paragraphs 27 to 42  of  the
    Appellant's interview and submits the judge has failed to properly take
    into account the entirety of the Appellant's answer particularly within
    the context of  the  evidence  which  she  had  given  in  her  witness
    statement  and/or  other  evidence.   He  submits  that  there  is   no
    inconsistency  and  that  the  response  at  question  42  is  entirely
    consistent with the details the Appellant had already provided  to  the
    interviewing officer in her answer to question 27 and clearly indicates
    exactly what the Appellant had explained in her witness statement.   He
    consequently submits that the finding by the  judge  that  there  is  a
    contradiction between the Appellant's answers to these questions in the
    interview record are actually not supported by the evidence before  the
    judge.

 8. He reiterates his contention that there has been a failure to  properly
    consider the plausibility of the  Appellant's  evidence  and  that  the
    judge's findings are based entirely on her own impression  rather  than
    taking into account the evidence that was before her.  He submits  that
    it is necessary to carry out a thorough assessment of the evidence  and
    given the factual nature of the evidence that was  before  her,  namely
    that of the Appellant's sister  who  had  been  cross-examined,  it  is
    essential for the judge to have regard to that evidence  when  reaching
    her conclusion.

 9. He asked me to give due consideration to the witness statement  of  the
    Appellant's sister,  pointing  out  that  there  are  two  particularly
    important issues therein.  Firstly, he asked me to  note  the  sister's
    reference to the characteristics of her father's ill-treatment, firstly
    of herself and secondly of her mother, and secondly that there had been
    a failure by the judge to  consider  that  evidence  which  he  submits
    renders the judge's findings on plausibility unsustainable.  He submits
    that in reaching implausibility findings the judge has failed not  only
    to apply the correct legal test, but also reached conclusions based  on
    her own perception when there was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  to
    support them.

10. Mr Behbahani turns briefly to the other grounds, submitting that  there
    has been a failure to give anxious scrutiny  to  the  evidence  by  the
    judge and that there was evidence  before  the  judge  that  there  are
    forced marriages throughout Iran and that there is no  protection  when
    someone is forced into a marriage.  He notes that at paragraph  31  the
    Appellant has been criticised for  not  having  provided  corroborative
    evidence to show the status of her father and his business  partner  as
    influential  individuals  in  Iran  with  close  connections  with  the
    government.  He acknowledges that position but submits that  it  cannot
    really be said that evidence would have been available  to  be  brought
    before the Tribunal in these circumstances and that the judge  has  put
    too great an onus on the production of such evidence.

11. For all the above reasons he considers that there are  material  errors
    of law and that  the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

12. Mr Melvin in response relies on his Rule 24 and submits that this is an
    attempt by the Appellant to reargue the case.  Whilst he accepts  there
    are similar witness statements,  he  points  out  that  the  judge  has
    focused on discrepancies within the  evidence  and  contends  that  the
    judge has looked at  the  evidence  and  made  findings  that  she  was
    entitled to.  With regard to the position of the objective evidence  in
    relation to  forced  marriages,  he  points  out  that  the  judge  has
    addressed this at paragraphs 35 and 36 but that the objective  evidence
    is far stronger  with  regard  to  difficulties  that  might  face  the
    Appellant if she lived in a rural part of Iran, pointing out  that  she
    lives  in  Tehran  where  the  position  is,  he  contends,  different.
    However,  he  submits  that  there  is  no  suggestion  made  that  the
    Appellant's father is connected to the  government.   He  asked  me  to
    dismiss the appeal.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. The inherent plausibility of  an  Appellant's  claim  is  part  of  the
    assessment to be carried out when looking at the overall position of an
    Appellant's credibility.  It is theoretically correct that an Appellant
    need do no more than state his or her claim but that claim  does  still
    need to be examined for consistency and inherent  plausibility  and  in
    nearly every case external information against which the claim could be
    checked will be available.  In this case I am satisfied that the  judge
    has failed to look at all the evidence.  The judge has failed  to  have
    regard to the first part of the Appellant's answer to  question  42  in
    her asylum interview and, importantly, has  failed  to  give  full  and
    proper consideration  and  make  proper  findings  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's sister who had provided a detailed  witness  statement  and
    had given oral evidence.  I pose the question as to whether or not  the
    failure to consider the evidence of the  Appellant's  sister  fully  is
    material.  The answer is that it may be and as such,  the  decision  is
    unsafe.  It is only right that the evidence of the  Appellant's  sister
    is properly assessed and to expect the judge to show full and  thorough
    consideration of the evidence produced and to consider  the  extent  to
    which it is corroborative of  the  Appellant's  own  written  and  oral
    testimony.

16. Consequently, it is possible that the judge's findings have been  based
    on her own perception and on a basis where there was no evidence before
    the judge to reach the findings that she did.  In such circumstances  I
    am satisfied that the submissions made by Mr Behbahani have  merit  and
    that the arguments maintained by Mr Melvin, both orally and as set  out
    in the Rule 24 response, are not sustainable.

17. It is possible that had the judge looked at the evidence fully and, not
    as appears to be the case imposed her own  pure  perception,  that  the
    judge may have come to another conclusion.  In such  circumstances  the
    correct approach is  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and to remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing.  I emphasise, however, that that  is  not  to  say  that
    another judge on considering all the evidence will ultimately come to a
    different conclusion to that of the original First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter  for  the  rehearing
of this matter.

 1) On the finding that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains
    material errors of law the decision is set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  the
    first available date 28 days hence for rehearing with an ELH  of  three
    hours.

 2) That the appeal is to be before any Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    other than Immigration Judge O'Keeffe.

 3) That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

 4) That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve an  up-to-date
    bundle of both subjective and/or objective  evidence  upon  which  they
    seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 5) That in the event that the Appellant and/or any witnesses to be  called
    require an interpreter at the restored hearing,  then  the  Appellant's
    instructed solicitors should notify the Tribunal within seven  days  of
    receipt of these directions.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
