
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09797/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2019                  |On 31 December 2019                  |
|Decision given orally                |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     ER
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Haddow, Latta & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan senior presenting officer,


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an order for anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  disclosure  of  any
    matter that may lead to the identification of the appellant  and  other
    parties  to  these  proceedings.   Any  breach  may  lead  to  contempt
    proceedings.

 2. This appeal comes before me by  way  of  remittal  from  the  Court  of
    Session pursuant a Joint Minute of the parties, whereby  the  Court  of
    Session has remitted the case to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a  further
    decision in the appeal by the appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, against
    the Secretary of State's decision dated 26  August  2016  refusing  the
    claim based on the appellant's fear that he  would  be  ill-treated  if
    returned to Iran owing to his conversion to  Christianity  from  Islam,
    the faith into which he was born.

 3. The appellant's claim is based on activities in Iran prior  to  arrival
    in the United Kingdom where he stopped attending the mosque in 2013/14.
     The appellant became acquainted with Christianity through a  childhood
    friend, [H].  The appellant became aware of [H]'s Christianity in 2015.
     They and a third individual called [S], met during the summer of  2015
    when they talked about the differences between Christianity  and  Islam
    and thus the appellant's conversion to the former began.

 4. A wooden hut located in the appellant's family's orchard was chosen  as
    an area where they would  have  discussions  about  Christianity  every
    Sunday.  After  some  eight  to  ten  meetings  in  this  location  the
    appellant took his mother to the hospital in a neighbouring city  where
    he stayed overnight in his aunt's house.  Whilst there  he  received  a
    telephone call from his maternal uncle in December  2015  stating  that
    the orchard hut had been raided as was his family home during which the
    appellant's belongings  and  his  laptop  were  taken.   The  appellant
    remained in the neighbouring city (Mahabad) until arrangements were put
    in place for him to leave Iran.  This was by lorry on 22 December 2015.
     The appellant was fingerprinted in Greece on 25 December although  not
    detained.   Under  the  control  of  agents   the   appellant   arrived
    clandestinely in the United Kingdom on 4 March 2016 and claimed  asylum
    the same day.

 5. The Secretary of State questioned the appellant about his claim  on  16
    August 2016 and rejected the account  of  conversion  in  Iran  in  its
    entirety.

 6. In the light of the direction pursuant  to  the  Joint  Minute  setting
    aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands it is unnecessary
    to dwell on any aspect  of  that  decision  except  to  note  that  the
    evidence before the Tribunal was  of  the  appellant  practising  as  a
    Christian in the United Kingdom at Easterhouse Baptist Church  and  the
    Tron Church and three witnesses, Alexander  Waddell,  Catherine  (Katy)
    Swan and John Taylor gave evidence in support.  Reverend Waddell is the
    Minister at Easterhouse Baptist Church, Katy Swan, who is also a member
    of Easterhouse Baptist Church, had started  a  Bible  group  for  three
    Kurdish Iranians, and John Taylor is a member of the Tron Church.   The
    appellant also relied on Facebook activity in respect of his faith.

 7. Both parties understood the hearing before  me  to  be  for  directions
    following the remittal by the Court of Session.  That was not the case.
     After discussion both agreed that in the in the light of the time that
    has past since the case was before the FtT and  having  regard  to  the
    nature of the claim the better course would  be  for  the  case  to  be
    remitted to the FtT for a further decision by a differently constituted
    tribunal.  I find error of law in the decision of the FtT  as  directed
    by the Court of Session and I accede to the remittal of the  appeal  to
    the FtT in the light of the extant of fact finding required.

 8. The Secretary of State is directed  to  serve  on  the  other  party  a
    statement of its case within 21 days taking  account  of  the  evidence
    what was previously before  the  FtT.   The  remittal  meanwhile  takes
    effect.

NOTICE OF DECISION

Error of law has been found and the case  is  remitted  to  the  First  tier
Tribunal.



Signed                                  Date 23 December 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

