
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09501/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Liverpool
   Decision & Reason Promulgated
|On 27th November 2017                     |    On 18th January 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     ZM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Rosemarine, Counsel instructed by Direct
Access
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq,  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  born  in
    1990.  He appeals with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Spencer) to  dismiss  his  human  rights  &  protection
    appeals.








    Anonymity


 2. The Appellant has made a claim for  international  protection.   Having
    had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity  Orders
    I therefore consider it appropriate to make an order in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that  he  is  an  apostate  from
    Islam. When he claimed asylum in 2016 he  told  officers  that  he  had
    started to question Islam when he was a child, and that he had  thought
    deeply about the matter, extensively reading the Qur'an and researching
    religion generally.  The Appellant explained that although  Iraq  is  a
    very religious country, it is easy to  doubt  religion  where  so  many
    people are being killed in its name. His father had thrown him out when
    he was approximately 17 years old but had let him  back  in  after  the
    Appellant had apologised and (falsely) told him  that  he  would  start
    praying again.


 4. Once at university the Appellant's doubts led him to get into arguments
    with fellow students, and lecturers. He gradually became ostracised  as
    people started to realise that he was no longer a  Muslim.  In  October
    2015 the Appellant was introduced by a friend, H,  to  a  group  called
    'Love of Judaism', described in  the  evidence  as  a  group  promoting
    friendship between Kurds and Israelis, and the right of Jewish Kurds to
    be able to return to the region.    The  Appellant  wanted  to  support
    this group because he believed that Jewish people  should  be  able  to
    live in Kurdistan if they wished - this aim had a particular  resonance
    for the Appellant because his own maternal grandfather had been Jewish.
    His mother had been subjected to prejudice  because  of  this  and  the
    Appellant wanted to combat such bigotry.

 5. The Appellant states that he left Iraq  because  he  started  receiving
    threats over the telephone, and because in December 2015 his  friend  H
    disappeared.  On the [  ]  December  2015  the  Appellant  was  at  his
    girlfriend's house when he received a call from his sister telling  him
    that their house was being raided. Three men had come and searched  the
    Appellant's room. They took his laptop and papers. They asked how  long
    the Appellant had been helping Jews. His brother was attacked and  they
    set fire to the Appellant's room. Immediately after this the  Appellant
    was again threatened over  the  phone.   He  left  Kurdistan  with  the
    assistance of his uncle.

 6. The Appellant claims that after he arrived in the UK  his  sister  told
    him that the authorities had found H's body in a river, and it was said
    that he had drowned. The Appellant believes that H  was  murdered.   He
    now fears those who have threatened him (whom he identifies as  Islamic
    extremists) and his own father (whom he believes may kill  him  himself
    as an act of 'honour').

 7. The Respondent did not believe that the Appellant was an  apostate,  or
    that he had experienced any problems as a  result  of  his  beliefs  on
    religion  in  Iraq.   The  entire  claim  was  rejected  for  want   of
    credibility and protection was refused.

 8. When the matter came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant
    relied on his own evidence, as set out  in  his  screening  and  asylum
    interviews, and his witness  statements.   He  further  relied  on  the
    following additional material:

              i)  A  letter  dated  10th  December  2016  from  Moshe  Izit,
                 Secretary of 'Love of Judaism'. The letter was  emailed  to
                 the Appellant's former solicitor directly  in  response  to
                 contact from her. Mr Izit states  that  the  Appellant  has
                 been a member of his organisation since  October  2015.  He
                 was one of the members they have  recruited  in  Kurdistan,
                 with the aim of discussing Judaism  with  other  Kurds  and
                 ascertaining the will  of  the  Kurdish  people  to  accept
                 Judaism returning to their  country.  Mr  Izit  understands
                 that the Appellant was threatened by an  unknown  terrorist
                 group and believes that if he were to return  to  Kurdistan
                 his life may be in danger.  Mr  Izit  confirms  that  other
                 members of the organisation have been killed,  for  example
                 [H].


             ii) Membership card issued to the Appellant by Love of Judaism;

            iii)  Email  exchange  between  'organisation  staff'  and   the
                 Appellant's former  solicitor  in  which  they  answer  her
                 questions about the group, the Appellant and H via an email
                 address '[ ]@gmail.com';


             iv) A reference  letter  written  by  one  of  the  Appellant's
                 lecturers at [ ] University, [FM], [ ]. The  reference  is
                 undated but  bears  two  telephone  numbers  and  an  email
                 address. [FM] states that the Appellant is a  well-educated
                 student  who  was  liked  by  "almost  all"  students   and
                 teachers. The reference was emailed directly from  [FM]  to
                 Mr Rosemarine, and the relevant emails were  reproduced  in
                 the bundle;

              v)  Email  from  the  Appellant's  sister  addressed  to   the
                 Appellant's former solicitor in which she gives her version
                 of events including her account of returning to her  family
                 home on the night of [ ] December 2015 to  find  her  house
                 had been raided and that the men in question had beaten her
                 brother and set fire to the Appellant's bedroom. She states
                 that her father had become angry, believing the  attack  to
                 have been perpetrated by  the  family  of  the  Appellant's
                 girlfriend (upon discovery of the relationship),  but  when
                 he was told what the men had  said  about  the  Appellant's
                 work with Jews he became very aggressive and threatened the
                 Appellant himself, calling him a 'Devil'. This document  is
                 provided in the original Arabic with certified translation.

             vi) A letter from the Appellant's brother explaining how on the
                 night of the [ ] December 2015 he was confronted  by  three
                 armed and masked men at his front door. They pointed a  gun
                 at him and told him to stay quiet.  They  asked  where  the
                 Appellant was and when he said he did not know he  was  hit
                 in the face with the butt of a gun.  One went to check  the
                 Appellant's room whilst the other two questioned him.  They
                 beat him and told him that his  brother  was  working  with
                 Jews. They ransacked the room and set  fire  to  it  before
                 they left. Three pictures are attached showing a room  with
                 what appears to be fire damage. This document  is  provided
                 in the original Arabic with certified translation.

            vii)  A  letter  from  a  man  who  identifies  himself  as  the
                 Appellant's uncle confirming inter alia that the  Appellant
                 had contacted him and asked him to  help  him  leave  Iraq,
                 which he  had  done.  This  document  is  provided  in  the
                 original Arabic with certified translation.

           viii) A medical report dated [ ] December 2015 issued by the  A&E
                 at  [ ]  Hospital  stating  that  a  person  named   [the
                 Appellant's brother's name] was treated there for  a  wound
                 to his nose, two wounds to his head, cyanosis on  the  left
                 eye, and cyanosis on the left side of chest.  The cause  of
                 damage is recorded as "forced violent action from  external
                 source". This document is provided in the  original  Arabic
                 with certified translation.

             ix) Country background information including an  article  about
                 the editor of a pro-Israeli magazine who was  kidnapped  in
                 Kurdistan in 2012, and then spent 3  years  in  an  Iranian
                 jail before being released.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant had given  a  detailed
    account throughout his claim, and that his oral evidence had  generally
    been consistent with the  evidence  he  had  previously  given  in  his
    witness statements and interviews.  The Tribunal found however, that in
    respect of certain matters the account was not supported by the country
    background material.    In particular the Tribunal adopted a point made
    in the 'reasons for refusal letter': the objective evidence on Iraq was
    that individuals who openly declare  that  they  have  left  Islam  are
    subjected to extreme violence, whereas it was the Appellant's  evidence
    that he had been only subjected to  verbal  abuse  and  threats.    The
    Tribunal found  the  glowing  reference  provided  by  the  Appellant's
    lecturer to be inconsistent with his claim that he became known for his
    atheistic views; it was apparent from the  man's  name  that  he  is  a
    Muslim, and the Tribunal did not consider it  credible  that  he  would
    have provided that reference  were  the  claim  now  made  true.    The
    Tribunal  further  considered  there  to  be   inconsistency   in   the
    Appellant's claim  (at  his  screening  interview)  that  he  had  been
    threatened by Daesh, and his evidence that he did not know the identity
    of his tormentors.   In respect of the various items  of  corroborating
    evidence, the Tribunal found that it could attach "no weight"  to  them
    because the originals  were  not  submitted  and/or  their  source  was
    unclear; the emails, for instance, could have been sent by  anyone  who
    had set up an account in those names.  Finally the Tribunal found  that
    the Appellant's credibility was damaged by his failure to claim  asylum
    in a safe third country en route  to  the  UK:  section  8  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act  2004  applied.    Overall
    the Tribunal concluded that the Appellant's credibility  was  "severely
    damaged" and the entire  claim  is  rejected.  The  appeal  is  thereby
    dismissed.




    The Appellant's Challenge


10. The written grounds of appeal are difficult to follow but having  heard
    the submissions of Mr Rosemarine they can be distilled to the following
    complaints. It is submitted that the determination is flawed for  these
    errors of law:


              i) Failure to make clear findings of fact on material issues.


                 The Judge fails to make a clear reasoned finding on whether
                 or not the Appellant is in fact an atheist, and thereby  an
                 apostate from Islam.


             ii) Failure to take relevant evidence into account/place weight
                 on relevant evidence.


                 The Appellant had relied upon witness statements set out in
                 emails sent  from  his  brother,  sister,  and  uncle.  The
                 Tribunal mentions these documents at paragraph  50  of  the
                 determination where it states that they can  be  given  "no
                 weight". This is submitted to be  Wednesbury  unreasonable,
                 given the consistency between the detailed accounts in  the
                 emails, the account given by the Appellant and supported by
                 medical evidence, and the fact that the  emails  themselves
                 were sent from email accounts which clearly identified  the
                 sender.   The  identity  documents  of  each  witness  were
                 supplied.


                 The Appellant  had  further  submitted  country  background
                 evidence  specifically  going  to   the   risk   faced   by
                 atheists/associate of Jews/apostates. None of that evidence
                 was  assessed  when  the  Judge  came   to   evaluate   the
                 credibility of the account.


                 The Appellant submitted a medical  report  relating  to  an
                 attack on his brother. At paragraph 51 of the determination
                 the Tribunal states that "no weight" can be attached to  it
                 because it appeared only as a "poor quality photocopy".  It
                 is submitted that this  was  not  a  lawful  approach.  The
                 medical report was properly translated, its Sorani  version
                 appeared on headed paper with full contact details provided
                 and it bore a stamp from the reporting physician.


                 The evidence from 'Love of Judaism' is  similarly  afforded
                 no weight at all when it is considered at paragraph  46  of
                 the determination.  This  evidence  included  a  membership
                 card, and a letter.   It is submitted that it was  perverse
                 to attach no weight to the letter on the  grounds  that  it
                 was not an original, when it was clearly sent directly from
                 the organisation to the Appellant's  then  lawyers.  As  an
                 email it is an 'original'.


            iii) Perversity


                 The Judge rejects the Appellant's claim inter alia  on  the
                 grounds that he would have suffered  significantly  greater
                 harm than he claims to have done had he openly declared his
                 atheism in  university  lectures  as  he  claims.  This  is
                 submitted to be perverse reasoning because a) the objective
                 country material does not  state  that  all  atheists  will
                 always be subjected to serious harm and b)  because  it  is
                 the Appellant's case that  he  was  in  fact  targeted  for
                 violence. To reject an internally consistent  and  detailed
                 account on  the  basis  of  a  misreading  of  the  country
                 background material is a serious error of law.


                 The 'glowing reference' from the university professor could
                 not rationally be taken as evidence against the Appellant's
                 case. It was written by a lecturer who liked the  Appellant
                 for him to use as an  employment/education  reference.  The
                 Appellant had nowhere claimed that this lecturer  had  been
                 hostile to him.




    The Secretary of State for the Home Department's Response


11. I am grateful to Mr McVeety for the robust but  realistic  approach  he
    took in his submissions. He accepted that if the claims were true,  the
    Appellant would be a refugee.  He also accepted that the  Tribunal  may
    have attached undue weight  to  the  alleged  discrepancy  between  the
    Appellant's  evidence  that  he  did  not  know  the  identity  of  his
    persecutors and elsewhere describing them as 'Daesh'; he accepted  that
    that term may  have  been  used  as  a  generic  reference  to  Islamic
    extremists.  He did not however accept that the First-tier Tribunal had
    erred in law. The reasons it gave for rejecting the account  were  good
    ones.  Mr McVeety did not accept that the  Judge  had  failed  to  make
    findings on risk  on  return.  The  Judge  makes  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant is not an atheist at paragraph 57 of  the  determination.  He
    looked at the evidence holistically and finding the Appellant not to be
    credible, rejected the entire account.  He specifically takes a Tanveer
    Ahmed approach to the documents. That was an approach lawfully open  to
    him.  Perversity is a high test and here it is not met.  It is  correct
    to say that  the  Tribunal  did  not  address  the  country  background
    material, but this omission cannot be material: it was accepted that if
    the claim were true it would be made out.  The background material  was
    not capable of assisting the Appellant's case any further.  As  to  the
    submission that it was  perverse  to  discount  the  evidence  of  [FM]
    because his middle name was 'Ahmed', Mr McVeety pointed  out  that  the
    Judge had not plucked this notion out of thin air:  the  Appellant  had
    said in his statement that this had been part of his own name,  but  he
    had renounced it because it is associated with Islam.




    Error of Law: Discussion and Findings


12.  The  weight  to  be  attached  to  individual  items  of  evidence  is
    classically a matter for the judge.   The Upper Tribunal can, and will,
    only interfere with findings in respect of weight where they are flawed
    by a demonstrable error of law. In this case, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has decided to attach no weight at all to various items of  potentially
    corroborative evidence. Whilst this is perhaps  surprising,  is  it  an
    error of law?


13. I accept Mr McVeety's submissions that the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    limit the weight that could  be  placed  on  the  statements  from  the
    Appellant's family members given that they were  not  present  to  have
    their evidence tested. The reason given however for deciding  to  place
    no weight at all on the documents was that the email accounts could not
    be "verified"; the Tribunal could not therefore be satisfied that  they
    were in fact sent  from  the  Appellant's  relatives.  In  making  that
    finding the Tribunal appears to have given no consideration to the fact
    that these  statements  were  supported  by  the  photocopied  identity
    documents of each witness (which in the case  of  his  siblings  showed
    shared parentage), and by an email chain demonstrating  how  they  were
    sent directly to the Appellant's  solicitor,  with  the  sending  email
    addresses  each  corresponding  to  the  sender's  name  and  identity.
    Further each statement bears the (Iraqi) mobile telephone number of the
    sender.  Ultimately it may not be possible, from the UK,  to  "verify",
    for instance, that the email address associated  with  the  Appellant's
    sister is one registered in Iraqi Kurdistan, or  that  the  IP  address
    corresponds to her home. Considered globally however, the fact that the
    letters were  supported  by  these  additional  documents  was  plainly
    relevant. At a minimum it made it less likely that these statements had
    simply been typed out by the Appellant. I  find  that  the  failure  to
    consider that supporting material was a significant omission.


14. Looking at the content of the letters I am further concerned  that  the
    Tribunal has failed to consider the  totality  of  the  evidence.   The
    Appellant's sister, brother, and uncle all gave very detailed accounts,
    from their own perspectives, which were  arguably  entirely  consistent
    with his own. That was a matter  capable  of  attracting  some  weight,
    albeit diminished because of the absence of the  witnesses.   In  those
    circumstances I cannot be satisfied that it was reasonably open to  the
    Tribunal to attach no weight to this material.

15. I am further satisfied that the Tribunal erred in its approach  to  the
    evidence from 'Love of Judaism'.  This material  was  rejected  on  the
    grounds that  it  was  not  'original'.   This  reasoning  is  hard  to
    understand, given that the letters were communicated by email.   Again,
    the chain of communication, via the Appellant's  solicitors,  had  been
    demonstrated.

16. There was some debate, at the hearing before  me,  about  the  approach
    taken to the letter of reference from the appellant's former  lecturer,
    [FM].  Mr Rosemarine took great exception to the  Tribunal's  reasoning
    on this point.  The Tribunal, noting that the gentleman's  middle  name
    was Ahmed, deduced that he must be a Muslim.  Since he did not use  the
    letter to denounce the Appellant as an atheist, the Tribunal  concluded
    that the  Appellant's  claims  to  that  effect  must  be  untrue.   Mr
    Rosemarine contended that this approach was perverse, not least because
    of the assumption  as  to  the  gentleman's  religious  adherence.   In
    respect of that latter point, Mr McVeety pointed out that  it  was  the
    Appellant himself who associated the name Ahmed with Islam, claiming at
    paragraph 66 of his own statement  that  he  had  denounced  that  name
    because of its religious connotations.    Mr Rosemarine further  argued
    that there was no justification for the Tribunal's assumption that [FM]
    would  even  be  aware  of  the  Appellant's  difficulties  with  other
    students.

17. Taken at its highest, the letter  of  reference  added  little  to  the
    Appellant's case.  Although [FM] does note that the Appellant was  well
    liked by "almost" all students, and it may be  that  something  can  be
    inferred from that, the letter contains no positive confirmation of the
    Appellant's central claim, namely that  he  is  an  atheist.   To  that
    extent  I  agree  with  Mr  McVeety  that  it  is  of  only  peripheral
    importance.  I am not, however satisfied that it was reasonably open to
    the Tribunal, for the reasons that it gives, to  weigh  the  letter  so
    heavily against the Appellant.  The reasoning is as follows: Muslims do
    not like atheists, this man is a Muslim, and  therefore  the  Appellant
    cannot  be  an  atheist.   I  am  satisfied  that  this  reasoning   is
    irrational.  It fails to take account of the following matters.  First,
    the fact  that  [FM]'s  parents  chose  to  name  him  Ahmed  gives  no
    indication at all of his own religious beliefs; a  person  named  David
    cannot automatically be assumed to be a practising  Jew,  much  less  a
    Peter could be assumed to be Christian.    Second, there was nothing in
    the evidence to indicate that this particular member of the faculty was
    aware of the Appellant's religious  beliefs:  the  determination  finds
    this to be the case because he is the 'Dean'. That is an error of fact.
    It is apparent from [FM]'s letter  and  attached  CV  that  he  is  not
    currently a Dean, he having only held that  position,  at  a  different
    institution, in 2010. It further assumes that if he was  aware  of  the
    difficulties that the Appellant claims to have had that he  would  have
    had a view about them.


18. That brings me to the next ground of appeal.  Mr  Rosemarine's  central
    complaint is that the Tribunal adopted the  Respondent's  flawed  logic
    when examining the Appellant's historical account.   That logic is  set
    out at paragraph 22 of the refusal letter and at paragraph  36  of  the
    determination.  Reference is made to country background material  which
    gives examples of apostates  from  Islam  being  subjected  to  serious
    physical harm in Iraq: since the Appellant does not claim to have  been
    harmed in this way himself, his claim  must  be  false.  Mr  Rosemarine
    objects to this reasoning. The objective material does not  state  that
    anyone who raises any question about Islam is immediately subjected  to
    serious harm by any Iraqi  who  happens  to  become  aware  of  it.  It
    indicates that there have been instances where people have been harmed.
    In refusing this claim on the ground that the  Appellant  has  not  yet
    been attacked is perverse and contrary to the Refugee Convention.

19. I am  satisfied  that  this  ground  is  made  out.   It  was  not  the
    Appellant's case that he had openly denounced Islam in the  sense  that
    he had stood on a soapbox on campus and declared his lack of faith.  He
    had given detailed examples of the kind of conversations  that  he  had
    raised at university which made people distrust and ostracise him.  One
    was when he challenged a lecturer who was recommending the use of siwak
    over toothpaste. Siwak is a kind of twig that the Prophet Muhammad  had
    habitually used to clean his teeth. Its  use  is  therefore  sunna.  In
    challenging this notion the Appellant would  certainly  have  attracted
    some opprobrium,  but  the  objective  material  falls  well  short  of
    establishing that anyone who departs  from  the  sunna  is  immediately
    killed  or  subjected  to  physical  assault.   It  was  part  of   the
    Appellant's case that his views on  individual  subjects  caused  other
    students to be hostile to him, but he did not claim  that  it  was  his
    view on siwak  that  placed  his  life  at  risk.  Rather  it  was  his
    involvement in the 'Love of Judaism' organisation and  his  association
    with H which attracted the attention of extremists who were prepared to
    take more drastic action than shouting at the Appellant in the street.

20. I am satisfied, in light of the findings that I  have  made,  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal must be  set  aside.  That  is
    because the errors that the Appellant has established go to  the  heart
    of the appeal.



    The Re-Made Decision


21. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant who  must  demonstrate  to  a
    standard of reasonable likelihood that he has a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Iran today. The reason for the feared persecution  would
    be 'religious belief' or rather a  lack  of  it.   In  the  context  of
    Islamic extremism in Iraq it might also be said to be imputed political
    opinion.


    The Evidence


22. The historical factual basis of the Appellant's case is as follows:

              i) He was born  a  Muslim  to  a  family  of  mixed  religious
                 heritage, his maternal grandfather having been Jewish;


             ii) He ceased to consider himself a Muslim some 8-9 years ago;

            iii) The Appellant has personally encountered discrimination and
                 harassment falling short of 'serious harm' as a  result  of
                 views he has openly  expressed  in  Iraq  (including  being
                 temporarily  evicted  by  his  father,  being  abused   and
                 ostracised by fellow students);

             iv) The Appellant was a member of an organisation called  'Love
                 of Judaism' whilst in Iraq;

              v) The Appellant's family members have suffered direct serious
                 harm as a result of his views. His  brother  was  assaulted
                 and the family home was raided, ransacked and set on fire;

             vi) The Appellant's friend is believed to have suffered  direct
                 serious harm as a  result  of  views  he  shared  with  the
                 Appellant (H went missing and was found  drowned,  believed
                 to have been murdered);

            vii) The Appellant has received direct threats to his  life  and
                 person, by way of telephone and to his family members.

23. To this historical narrative the Appellant adds the following matters:


           viii) Since his arrival in the UK he has continued to  hold,  and
                 has developed, his atheistic views.



24. In addition to the documents  summarised  at  paragraph  7  above,  the
    Appellant relies on the following:


              i) His membership card for the British Humanist Association.


             ii) A letter of support from Maryam Namazie,  spokesperson  for
                 the Council of Ex-Muslims of Britain  (plus  the  Wikipedia
                 entries for Ms Namazie and her organisation).

            iii) A statement by Mr Guy Otten, Chair  of  Greater  Manchester
                 Humanists, dated 30th October 2017. Mr Otten confirms  that
                 the appellant is known to him as an attendee of meetings of
                 the  humanist  association   in   Stockport   and   Greater
                 Manchester. He and Mr Otten discussed  the  plight  of  the
                 Yezidis in the Levant, who were being attacked by Daesh. Mr
                 Otten's daughter is a journalist who  has  written  a  book
                 about the Yezidis and  the  Appellant  was  very  concerned
                 about the fate of this minority group.  Since that  initial
                 meeting the Appellant has enrolled on a course run  by  the
                 Humanists at Friends House in Manchester. Mr Otten believes
                 the Appellant to be sincere in his statement that he is  an
                 atheist.

             iv) A statement dated 30th October  2017  by  Louise  Courtney,
                 also a member of the  Humanist  Association.  She  confirms
                 that she has seen the Appellant at various meetings and has
                 held discussions with him about his beliefs. She  describes
                 him as a close  friend  and  she  believes  him  to  be  an
                 atheist.

              v) A statement dated 2nd November 2017 by Robin Grinter,  Vice
                 Chair of the Greater Manchester Humanists, who  facilitated
                 the seven  week  course  attended  by  the  Appellant  (and
                 referred to by Mr Otten). Mr Grinter writes that during the
                 course the Appellant offered illuminating personal insights
                 into  key  elements  of  humanism,   and   made   carefully
                 considered and perceptive contributions which  were  valued
                 by other participants.

             vi) A death certificate for the Appellant's friend H,  said  to
                 have been obtained by the Appellant's brother and  sent  to
                 him in the UK.  It states  that  the  cause  of  death  was
                 drowning, with signs of beating to the body. This  document
                 is  produced  in  the  original  Arabic  with  an   English
                 translation.

            vii) A statement by Rabbi Arnold Saunders, Rabbi of  the  Higher
                 Crumpsall and Higher Broughton Hebrew  Congregation,  dated
                 29th October 2017.  Rabbi Saunders was asked to comment  on
                 the material produced in this appeal from the  organisation
                 'Love of Judaism', in particular the form of Hebrew used on
                 the Appellant's membership card and the supporting letters.
                  Rabbi Saunders looks at three Hebrew terms that appear  on
                 those documents.  He states that  all  are  modern  Israeli
                 Hebrew terms only.  They  are  not,  to  the  best  of  his
                 knowledge, found before Ben  Yehuda's  creation  of  modern
                 Hebrew.   The  phrase  'Haver  Ha'amut'  is  translated  as
                 'member of the organisation'. Rabbi  Saunders  states  that
                 this use of the legal term 'amut'  (to  mean  organisation)
                 would generally only be by an Israeli. It therefore appears
                 to him highly likely - he  also  uses  the  phrase  'beyond
                 doubt' - that the materials, or rather the Hebrew text that
                 appears on them, was written by an Israeli.

25. The country background material consists in the main of articles in the
    press. As Mr McVeety points out, they are of  limited  relevance  given
    the Respondent's concession that a grant of asylum  would  have  to  be
    made if the factual claims are made out. I think it important, however,
    to note two themes that emerge from these articles.


26. The first is that religious freedom  and  pluralism  in  Kurdistan  are
    under threat from Islamic extremism. For instance, an  article  in  the
    online Kurdish newspaper Rudaw dated 2nd May  2017  is  concerned  with
    death threats made by an  Imam  against  young  Muslims  who  had  been
    converting to Zoroastrianism in protest against Daesh.  An  information
    request response produced by  the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of
    Canada on the 2nd September 2016 reports that  there  are  many  social
    media platforms catering for non-believers in Iraq but they  must  keep
    their membership lists secret in order to  protect  users'  identities.
    Writers who criticise, or  who  are  perceived  to  criticise,  Islamic
    values have had fatwas issued against them by conservative clerics  and
    there  is  a  growing  fear  of  being  denounced  as  a  'blasphemer',
    particularly in areas where there are armed militants.

27. The second is  that  there  is  a  fear  of  Israeli  infiltration  and
    influence in Kurdish areas. There are documented  instances  of  Mossad
    operating in Iraq, for instance in  a  2006  report  by  the  US  State
    Department suggesting that Mossad was responsible for the assassination
    of 550+ scientists and academics in Iraq, and in  a  BBC  article  from
    September 2006 on Israeli military training to Kurdish  forces.   There
    are also a number of  articles  reporting  on  Iranian  paranoia  about
    Israel, Jewish organisations and individuals  buying  or  appropriating
    land in Kurdistan.  The  Jewish  blogger  'Elder  of  Ziyon'  wrote  in
    September 2016 about reports in the Arab media to the effect  that  the
    Israelis are particularly interested in the shrine of the Prophet Nahum
    in Qush, the shrine to the Prophet Jonah in Mosul and the tomb  of  the
    Prophet Daniel in Kirkuk.  He  connects  these  reports  to  conspiracy
    theories concerning the foundation of  'Greater  Israel'.   An  article
    from the Jerusalem Post in November 2012 reports on an individual being
    sentenced to death in Iran on charges of spying in  Kurdistan  for  the
    Israeli government.


    Discussion and Findings

28. I have read and taken account of the Respondent's reasons  for  refusal
    letter dated 26 August 2016.  I note  therein  (at  paragraph  23)  the
    Respondent's acknowledgement of the Appellant's explanation as  to  why
    he left Islam, the treatment and problems that he faced as a result.  I
    have read the Appellant's lengthy  witness  statements  and  interviews
    myself.  I find that he has given a detailed and cogent explanation  of
    his emotional journey from being a Muslim child to  an  atheist  adult.
    The catalyst for his investigations was the killing of a Yezidi girl by
    her family, who were 'dishonoured' by her relationship  with  a  Muslim
    boy. This made the young Appellant consider the meaning  and  point  of
    religious belief.  As he grew up, and witnessed  numerous  killings  in
    the name of religion in his country, he was  increasingly  led  to  the
    view that it causes more problems than it solves.


29. The primary  reason  given  by  the  Respondent  for  disbelieving  the
    Appellant's account, is as discussed above, that his account  of  being
    humiliated and alone  was  inconsistent  with  the  country  background
    material that apostates are killed in Iraq.  I have read and considered
    carefully the Appellant's account of his days at university.    He  did
    not at any stage claim to have  openly  denounced  Islam,  nor  any  of
    Islam's core beliefs.  Had he done so, then  perhaps  the  Respondent's
    reasoning would have been more persuasive.   However,  the  Appellant's
    activities appear  to  have  been  confined  to  raising  questions  on
    individual issues such as the use of siwak.  Whilst I cannot  rule  out
    the possibility that a  very  fervent  Muslim  may  have  taken  action
    against the Appellant in the form of physical violence  for  expressing
    such views, the absence of such an attack does not render  the  account
    inherently incredible.   Overall I found the Appellant's account of his
    days at university, and his atheist beliefs to be consistent,  detailed
    and credible.

30. The Appellant's  involvement  with  'Love  of  Judaism'  was,  in  this
    context, harder to understand.  If he had become a fervent atheist  why
    was he associating himself with another religious faith?  The answer is
    well explained by the Appellant at question  52  the  asylum  interview
    record.  He explains that he grew up seeing his mother insulted because
    of her Jewish heritage, and that he came to see an affinity between the
    Jewish people and the Kurds: they are both peoples from the Middle East
    who have suffered and faced persecution.  The Appellant states that his
    affiliation to 'Love of Judaism' was not borne of any desire to convert
    to that religion, rather it was an expression of his desire to  support
    the  rights  of  all  faiths  and  all  religions  in  Kurdistan.   The
    Appellant's own evidence is supported in large measure by the  evidence
    that has been provided directly from the organisation itself.  Mr  Izit
    confirms that the Appellant was a member, as does the membership  card.
    Importantly Rabbi Saunders has been able to confirm that  the  language
    used on the card is the modern Hebrew used in Israel.  He considers  it
    to be very unlikely that it has been written by anyone  other  than  an
    Israeli.  That is of significance for two reasons.  First, it makes  it
    far less likely that that the  Appellant  himself  has  generated  this
    material.   Second,  it  is  consistent  with  the  country  background
    information which indicates that there  is  some  Israeli  presence  in
    Kurdistan, for instance, the BBC report on  military  personnel.   This
    would tend to support the Appellant's evidence that extremist  elements
    were alarmed by the group and sought to kill those involved with it.


31. I now turn to consider the Appellant's evidence about the attack on his
    family home in December 2015.  The Appellant himself was not present to
    witness this attack.  Rather it is  narrated  by  his  brother  M,  his
    sister K, and his uncle A.  I have set out above,  the  Respondent  has
    not  had  the  opportunity  to  test  the  statements  of  these  three
    witnesses.  As such, they can only be given  limited  weight.   I  note
    however, the great detail given in each one.

32. The Appellant's sister narrates how on the night of [ ]  December  2015
    the family had been invited to dinner at their paternal  uncle's  home.
    She remarks that her father was pleased that the Appellant had  elected
    to join them.  She had noticed that her brother  was  well-dressed  and
    was carrying a package.  Sometime after dinner, she noticed that he had
    disappeared.  She was informed by her younger sister that he  had  gone
    to visit a friend.  When she,  her  father  and  other  family  members
    returned to the family home sometime after 10 o'clock they saw that the
    front door was open and  they  could  smell  burning  and  smoke.   Her
    brother M came to the door.  His face was  visibly  swollen  and  there
    were many signs of beating on his face.  He told them that three  armed
    men had raided the house and that they were looking for the  Appellant.
    When they realised that he was not there they  became  very  angry  and
    forced him to tell them where the Appellant was.  He  showed  them  his
    room and they immediately began to  search  it.   They  said  that  the
    Appellant was evil and  that  he  was  working  with  Jews  to  destroy
    Muslims.  They took some papers and the Appellant's laptop and set fire
    to the room.  The Appellant's sister describes that night as one of the
    worst nights of her life.  Her father was  furious  and  commanded  the
    family to pray and beg for forgiveness.  He swore that he himself would
    punish the Appellant.   Her  mother  fainted  twice.   The  Appellant's
    sister makes clear at the outset of her statement that she is not happy
    about her brother's beliefs.  She does not regard  them  as  acceptable
    but she wishes to help her brother because  she  does  not  think  that
    people should be victims of their thoughts.  On the night of the attack
    it was she who contacted the Appellant to tell him what  has  happened.
    She also spoke with their uncle and asked him to do whatever is  needed
    to save the Appellant's life.  Since her  brother  left  Iraq  she  has
    continued  to  help  him,  for  instance  by  obtaining   the   medical
    certificate in respect of her brother's injuries.  In her statement she
    goes  into  some  detail  explaining  the  difficulties  she  faced  in
    obtaining that document.  Her statement concludes with a poignant  plea
    to the Appellant's solicitor to help him.  She says that she has always
    felt that he is her "most unlucky brother" and that his whole life  has
    gone by the wind.

33. The Appellant's brother states that on the night  in  question  he  was
    alone in the family home.  Sometime between 9 and 10pm he heard someone
    knocking at the door.  When he answered it, he was confronted by  three
    masked gunmen.  They pointed the gun at him and  demanded  that  he  be
    silent.  They entered and shut the door behind them.  They demanded  to
    know where the Appellant was.  They used many taboo  words  that  M  is
    embarrassed to mention in writing.  They told him that his brother  had
    been working with Jews and asked how long this had been going on.  They
    tortured M including hitting him with the back of a gun.   They  wanted
    to know the names of his friends.  They ransacked the room and set fire
    to it before leaving.  M states that he was scared, shocked  and  badly
    beaten.  Whilst he was searching for his  mobile  phone  the  fire  was
    getting bigger and had filled the entire room.  He could hardly control
    it.   When his father returned home, he got very angry.  He  said  that
    Satan had been living in his house.  The next day M  attended  hospital
    for treatment to his injuries.

34. The final statement is from the Appellant's uncle.  He states  that  on
    the night of [ ] December 2015 he had come home  from  work  tired  and
    gone to bed.  He was woken by his wife, who said that his nephew was on
    the telephone.  As soon as he heard his voice he knew that he was  very
    anxious.  His voice was trembling and he asked for help.  He asked  his
    uncle to send somebody to rescue him.  After the call  was  finished  A
    telephoned his sister,  the  Appellant's  mother.   The  telephone  was
    answered by K.  She said that her mother was not  well  and  that  some
    robbers had come to the house to kill the Appellant. A immediately left
    his home in  Hawler  (Erbil)  and  drove  to  Qaladze  to  collect  the
    Appellant.  On the journey home to A's house, the Appellant admitted to
    him that he had been volunteering with a Jewish  organisation.   A  had
    heard that there was a secret band in Kurdistan; it seemed to A that in
    getting involved as he did  the  Appellant  had  acted  carelessly  and
    foolishly.  He had put  himself,  and  his  family  into  danger.   The
    remainder of the statement is concerned with the steps that A  took  to
    secure safe passage for the Appellant out of Iraq.


35. I have borne in mind that as the Appellant's  relatives  all  three  of
    these witnesses may wish  to  assist  him  and  to  that  extent  their
    evidence cannot be considered objective. I further remind  myself  that
    it is untested evidence and that there is no indication before me  that
    the Respondent has positively verified (either by use of the  telephone
    numbers or email addresses provided) that the senders are who they  say
    they are. That said it is evidence that I attach some weight to,  given
    its level of detail (from three different perspectives) and its general
    consistency with the Appellant's account.

36. The final element of the account is the death of H. Again, that is  not
    a matter that the Appellant can speak to directly. The reports  of  H's
    death have come to him from third parties. The only direct evidence  is
    the death certificate, produced in the Arabic with a certified  English
    translation.   I have  considered  the  fact  that  this  document  was
    produced late in the day, and  that  the  Respondent  has  not  had  an
    opportunity to verify it. I further bear in mind  that  such  documents
    are easily produced by, and purchased from,  forgers  in  Iraq.    That
    said I note that it is consistent with the account overall.


37. Having considered all of the evidence in the round, and having  applied
    the lower standard of proof, I am satisfied that the Appellant has made
    out the factual basis of  his  claim.  His  own  detailed  evidence  is
    consistent  with  the  statements  made  by  his  family  members,  the
    supporting material from 'Love of Judaism', the medical report  on  his
    brother and the death certificate relating to H.  I  find  the  account
    overall to be consistent with the background material,  which  suggests
    that there is reported to be an Israeli presence in Kurdistan, and more
    importantly that such reports have created an  atmosphere  of  paranoia
    and hostility, which finds particular resonance  in  Islamic  extremist
    circles.  I am satisfied that an association with a group such as 'Love
    for Judaism' would be reasonably likely to place  the  Appellant  at  a
    real risk of serious harm in his home area of Kurdistan.  I am  further
    satisfied (and indeed it was not argued by the  Respondent  that  there
    was) that there  is  no  internal  flight  option  in  this  case.  The
    Appellant would be an atheist, and therefore an 'apostate' wherever  he
    went in Iraq and would accordingly find himself at risk for that reason
    wherever he lived.

38. It follows that I need not make any finding on the evidence of Mr Otten
    and the other Manchester humanists,  save  to  note  for  the  sake  of
    completeness that Mr Otten did attend the  hearing  before  me.  He  is
    known to myself and Mr McVeety as he was, until he retired in 2011,  an
    Immigration  Judge  sitting  at  Manchester  Piccadilly.   Mr   McVeety
    indicated that he had no questions for Mr Otten so  his  statement  was
    admitted into the evidence unchallenged.

    Decisions

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and it is set aside.


40. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on protection grounds.

41. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                               28th December 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf
on the 26th April 2017

