
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal ref: PA/09790/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 03 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    S A R
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. FtT Judge Bristow  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 January 2020.

 2. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  set  out  in  his
    application for permission, filed on 17  February  2020.   Ground  (a),
    directed against the FtT's refusal of permission, is  irrelevant.   His
    substantive complaints are at (b) - (j).

 3. FtT Judge Kebede granted permission by a  decision  dated  27  February
    2020:

         "Arguably the judge failed to  have  regard  to  arguably  material
         evidence ... in the appellant's ... bundle.  Whilst it may be  that
         the evidence would not have led to a different credibility finding,
         given the inconsistencies noted by the judge in the other evidence,
         it is ... arguable ... there was evidence which ought to have  been
         addressed ..."

 4. On 1 May 2020, the UT issued directions with a view to deciding without
    a hearing whether the FtT erred in law and, if so, whether its decision
    should be set aside.  Parties were also given the opportunity to submit
    on whether there should be a hearing.

 5. On 5 June 2020, the appellant filed submissions in response, at  [1  i]
    and at [3] inviting the UT to set aside the decision  of  the  FtT  and
    remit for a fresh hearing.

 6. At [1 iii] the appellant asks, if the UT does not find an error of law,
    for an oral hearing, "to put forward his points and  participate  in  a
    hearing.  In fairness, the appellant should be entitled to a hearing".

 7. In a submission filed on 11 June 2020, the respondent submits that  the
    FtT made no material errors and the appeal should  be  dismissed.   The
    SSHD asks for decision "on the papers", and says there is no particular
    reason why oral argument is required.

 8. The first question is whether there should be a hearing.

 9. Oral arguments are sometimes "game-changing".  However, fair resolution
    of issues such as the present on written materials is a course provided
    for  in  the  rules;  is  common  practice  in  this   and   in   other
    jurisdictions; and is well within professional and judicial competence.
     The appellant does not develop any argument on why an oral hearing  is
    necessary in his particular case.  He  has  had  ample  opportunity  to
    explain his position.  His alternative  request  at  [1  iii]  (to  use
    another colloquialism) aims for "a second bite at the cherry".

10. I find no feature of this case such that it cannot be resolved  without
    an oral hearing.  It may be dealt with fairly and justly, in  terms  of
    rules 2 and 34, on the written materials.

11. Ground (b) is accurate, to the limited extent that the disappearance of
    Yafis (a Shia Muslim tv  host)  is  not  explicitly  mentioned  in  the
    decision.  However, judges do not have to mention every  specific  item
    or allegation.  The matter is  covered  by  rejecting  the  appellant's
    claim to have been involved with tv news.  He does not show that, on  a
    full and fair reading of the claim and of  the  decision,  this  matter
    required specific consideration.

12. Ground (c) complains of misreading a death certificate at [30-32],  but
    it is plainly within reason to find  it  contradictory  to  describe  a
    death, allegedly from murder, both as "unnatural" and as "normal".

13. The ground overlooks the further (although lesser) feature noted by the
    judge: the name on the certificate did not fully  correspond  with  the
    appellant's account.

14. There is no value in saying that the certificate "can be verified".  It
    was for the appellant to establish his case.  He does not say  that  at
    any earlier stage he suggested that the onus passed  to  someone  else.
    It is far too late to raise such a point in grounds of  appeal  to  the
    UT.

15. Ground (d) alleges that the judge should not have founded on  different
    versions of the name in newspapers and on the  death  certificate,  but
    again does not show that the judge's view was not a reasonable one; and
    overlooks other reasoning, such as absence of reference at interview to
    the matter, which later became a significant component of the claim.

16. Ground (e) is wrong both about the decision and  about  the  law.   The
    judge did not "require corroboration".  At  [42]  he  directed  himself
    that there is no such requirement.   He noted the absence  of  evidence
    which the appellant might reasonably have  been  expected  to  provide.
    That approach is thoroughly established in  the  UNHCR  guidelines  (to
    which the ground vaguely refers), in the immigration rules, and in case
    law.

17. The grounds insist and disagree, and complain of no rounded assessment;
    but they do not fairly represent the reasoning in  the  decision  as  a
    whole.

18. The appellant arrived at the UK border on 12 September 2016 saying that
    he was here to attend his graduation and for no  other  reason,  before
    claiming on 13 September 2016 that he was here in fear of  persecution.
    That of course was not conclusive, but the judge was entitled  to  take
    it at [41] as "strongly indicative".  He gave numerous  other  reasons,
    several of which are unchallenged in the grounds.

19. Ground (l) and (m), going to sufficiency of protection and to  internal
    relocation, are only continued disagreement.  As those issues  were  in
    the alternative, they need not be explored further.

20. The grounds do  not  undermine  the  decision  as  a  legally  adequate
    explanation of why the appeal was dismissed.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  Parties have not  addressed  that
    matter.  Anonymity is retained.

23. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.


    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.




