
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09394/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2020 and 21 January   |On 23 February 2021                  |
|2021                                 |                                     |
|via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                  ML (IRAQ)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Allison, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to are set out,  where  relevant,  in  the
decision below.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly in their remote form.

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 13
    September 2019  to  refuse  the  appellant's  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection claim.  The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of  Iraq.   While
    he has given a number of  dates  of  birth,  and  relied  on  different
    aliases, for the purposes of this decision, I will proceed on the basis
    that he was born on 16 December 1995.

 2. The respondent also served a "supplementary" decision dated 22  January
    2020, which seeks to address the appellant's return to Iraq in light of
    SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG  [2019]  UKUT
    400 (IAC), which was handed down after the original refusal decision.

Procedural Background

 3. The appellant's appeal against respondent's decision  of  13  September
    2019 was initially dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in  a  decision
    promulgated by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin on 12  November  2019.
    On 23 January 2020, sitting with Lord Uist, I found that  the  decision
    of Judge Baldwin involved the making of an error of law,  and  set  the
    decision  aside,  insofar  as  it  related  to  the  judge's   findings
    concerning the appellant's ability  to  obtain  Civil  Status  Identity
    Document ("a  CSID")  in  Iraq,  and  the  judge's  findings  that  the
    respondent would offer him a choice of locations in Iraq  to  which  he
    would be returned.  All other findings were preserved. A  copy  of  the
    Error of Law decision may be found in the Annex to this decision.

 4. The scheduled resumed hearing was postponed due to the  pandemic.   The
    matter resumed before me, sitting  alone,  on  18  November  2020,  via
    Skype.  Although the appellant's solicitors  initially  suggested  that
    the appellant would not be able to participate in a  hearing  remotely,
    Mr Allison confirmed on that occasion that appropriate arrangements had
    been made, and that the appellant had been able to secure access  to  a
    suitable location and  device  through  which  to  participate  in  the
    proceedings.  It was, submitted Mr Allison, the  appellant's  preferred
    choice to participate in that manner, as it was far easier and  cheaper
    than having to travel to London.   Unfortunately,  the  interpreter  on
    that  occasion  was  experiencing  significant  internet   connectivity
    issues.  By the time they were resolved, there was not enough  time  to
    complete the hearing.  I heard some evidence from the  appellant.   The
    hearing  had  to  be  resumed  on  21  January  2021.   There  were  no
    significant connectivity problems on that occasion, and the hearing was
    completed.

 5. Mindful of the overriding objective and the need  for  hearings  to  be
    conducted fairly, I was content that it was appropriate to conduct  the
    hearing remotely, as set out above. I recall  that  those  representing
    the appellant had initially objected to  the  hearing  being  conducted
    remotely.  For the reasons given by Mr Allison referred to above, those
    objections were not only abandoned by the appellant, but  participating
    in the  hearing  remotely  was  his  preferred  choice.   Although  the
    November 2020  hearing  encountered  technical  difficulties,  both  Mr
    Allison and Ms Isherwood were content that there had been no unfairness
    to either side, either overall, or upon the conclusion of  the  resumed
    hearing on 21 January 2021.

Factual background

 6. The appellant claims to have arrived in this country  clandestinely  on
    30 June 2016. He claimed asylum the next day. The basis  of  his  claim
    was that he feared his father who  had  threatened  and  attacked  him,
    forcing him to leave the family home and live with  an  aunt.  The  key
    incident was said to have taken place in  March  2013.   The  appellant
    claims to have returned home after drinking alcohol.  His father chased
    him with a gun to the roof of their home.  The appellant jumped to  the
    safety of a neighbour's  roof,  injuring  himself,  and  was  taken  to
    hospital. The appellant's  father  threatened  him  in  hospital.   The
    appellant moved to live with his aunt after some time in hospital.

 7. The appellant claimed his father worked for the Peshmerga, and that  he
    was an influential man in  the  Kurdish  region,  thereby  placing  him
    beyond the protection of the  authorities.    He  left  Iraq  in  2015,
    travelling through  France  to  arrive  here  in  June  2016.   He  was
    encountered by the respondent's officers at border crossing  points  in
    Dunkirk before his successful entry, and gave a number of  aliases  and
    dates of birth on those occasions.

 8. The asylum claim was refused  on  23  December  2016.  The  appellant's
    appeal against that refusal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Spicer on 23 February 2017.  The appellant did not leave  the  country.
    There was no challenge to Judge Spicer's decision.

 9. In February 2019, the appellant was  convicted  of  aggravated  vehicle
    taking, criminal damage, driving while disqualified, and  breach  of  a
    conditional discharge, which had been imposed for motoring offences the
    previous month.  He was sentenced to 3 months' imprisonment. On 2 March
    2019, the Secretary of State served a notice of a  decision  to  deport
    the appellant, pursuant to section 5(1) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.
    On 11 March 2019, the appellant is recorded by the respondent as having
    "made a verbal asylum claim" again stating that his father  would  kill
    him were he to be returned to Iraq.  The  appellant's  representatives,
    Duncan Lewis solicitors, made representations on his behalf on 12  July
    2019. The respondent considered the appellant's  protection  claim  and
    refused it in a decision dated 13 September 2019. That was the decision
    under appeal before Judge Baldwin.

10. Judge Baldwin rejected the appellant's asylum claim, taking the earlier
    decision of Judge Spicer as his starting point. Judge Baldwin  rejected
    the core of the appellant's account relating to the claimed threat from
    his father on  credibility  grounds,  based  partly  on  the  fact  the
    appellant claimed he had gone to live with his aunt, who lived only  an
    hour away from his father.  Shortly  before  leaving  Iraq,  found  the
    judge, the appellant had returned to his father's town, experiencing no
    difficulties. Judge Baldwin noted at [29] that the appellant's  claimed
    Iraqi nationality had been accepted by  an  Iraqi  official,  with  the
    consequence that the appellant  could  be  issued  with  the  necessary
    documentation to facilitate his return.  The judge also found that  the
    combined help of his mother, aunt, or cousin, would be  available  upon
    his return. With that support, the appellant would be able to find  the
    documentation he would need to access employment and accommodation. The
    appellant had worked in the area previously, and it  was  not  credible
    that his cousin would not be prepared  to  use  his  contacts  to  help
    return him to work.

11. Before the Upper Tribunal, the appellant did not challenge the  judge's
    findings concerning the substance of his asylum  claim.   However,  for
    the reasons set out at [10] to [13] of the Error of Law decision, other
    aspects of the judge's reasoning did involve the making of an error  of
    law, and were set aside.  They must now be  reconsidered.   It  remains
    necessary to determine whether the appellant would be able to obtain  a
    CSID (or its successor, an Iraqi National Identity Document, or "INID")
    prior to or upon his return to  Iraq  to  facilitate  his  travel  from
    Baghdad, to where he would be returned,  to  the  Kurdish  region,  and
    whether he would face "very significant obstacles" to his  integration,
    upon his return.

12. The judge had also found that the appellant would be offered  a  choice
    of locations within Iraq to be removed to; that finding  was  also  set
    aside as it was not consistent with the country guidance then in  force
    [12].  In any event, it is now clear (see the skeleton argument  of  Ms
    A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, 6 February 2020  at
    [3]) that enforced returns are only to Baghdad.

13. The appellant's case is that he cannot  be  returned  as  he  would  be
    without the documents necessary to ensure his safe passage from Baghdad
    to the Kurdish region.  He does not have a CSID and has not  memorised,
    or otherwise have access to, the information he requires to obtain one.
     As an undocumented Kurd with no sponsor and  the  inability  to  speak
    Arabic, he could not settle  in  Baghdad.   He  would  face  Article  3
    mistreatment when seeking to return from Baghdad to the Kurdish  region
    without a CSID.  He claims to have lost all contact with his family  in
    Iraq, and would return to a life of destitution  and  homelessness,  as
    well as a risk of death from his powerful father.  Even if  he  managed
    to travel to the Kurdish region, he would be  required  to  attend  the
    Civil Status Office in Kirkuk to obtain a CSID or INID.   Kirkuk  is  a
    "contested" area, and it would not be safe for him to go there.

14. The respondent contends that the appellant would be able  to  obtain  a
    CSID or rely on a "certification letter", make the journey from Baghdad
    to the Kurdish region without encountering Article 3 mistreatment,  and
    there find employment and integrate, drawing on  his  remaining  family
    links.

The hearing

15. The appellant gave evidence at each hearing through  a  Kurdish  Sorani
    interpreter.  I established at the outset of each resumed hearing  that
    the  appellant  and  interpreter  could  understand  one  another   and
    communicate through each other.  The appellant  adopted  his  statement
    dated 3 November 2020 and was cross-examined.

16. I treated  the  appellant  as  vulnerable,  in  light  of  his  medical
    conditions.  In practice, the cross-examination  by  Ms  Isherwood  was
    conducted  in  a  sensitive  and  non-combative  manner.   Mr   Allison
    confirmed that no other reasonable adjustments were necessary.  I  have
    taken the appellant's mental health  conditions,  as  outlined  in  the
    reports of Dr Tarik Al-Kubaisy, a consultant psychiatrist, into account
    when assessing the reliability of his evidence.  The reports are  dated
    25 May 2019 and 15 July 2019.  They  were  before  Judge  Baldwin.   No
    updated evidence was prepared for the proceedings before me.

 Documentary evidence

17. As well as his statement dated 3  November  2020,  the  appellant  also
    relied on the bundle he prepared for the proceedings before the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the report of  Christoph  Bluth,  a  country  expert,
    dated 1 November 2019.

18. I will not recite the entirety of the evidence here.  I  will  set  out
    the salient aspects of the evidence to the  extent  necessary  to  give
    reasons for my findings.

Legal framework

19. The sole issues for my consideration are whether it would  be  possible
    for the appellant to be returned to Iraq without breaching  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under Article 3 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights, or engaging the criteria  for  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection set out in Article  15.b  of  the  Qualification  Directive,
    Directive 2004/83/EC ("torture or inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
    punishment").

20. It is for the appellant to establish his case, to the lower standard of
    the reasonable likelihood threshold.

Discussion

21. I reached the following findings having considered the entirety of  the
    evidence, in the round, to the lower standard of proof.

22. It will be helpful to recall the relevant preserved  findings  of  fact
    upon which my findings must be based.  At  [27],  Judge  Baldwin  found
    that the appellant had remained in Iraq for around 33 months  following
    the claimed March 2013  incident  with  his  father.   The  judge  also
    rejected the appellant's explanation for not having claimed  asylum  in
    France, finding that the responsibility for having not  done  so  could
    not be  shifted  wholly  onto  the  agent  the  appellant  claimed  was
    controlling his travel.   The appellant had been able to live and  work
    in Iraq during the three years prior to  his  departure.   It  was  not
    credible that the appellant's cousin, with whom he  lived  having  left
    the family home, would not provide him with some assistance in  finding
    work and accommodation upon his return [29].  There was  no  reason  to
    believe that the appellant's aunt, cousin  and  family  are  not  still
    where they were when the appellant left Iraq [30].

23. The Iraqi authorities have already accepted  the  appellant  to  be  an
    Iraqi citizen following an interview  they  conducted  with  him  in  a
    detention centre, and Mr Allison did not  contend  that  the  appellant
    could not be returned on a laissez  passer  document.    The  appellant
    also accepted in cross examination  that,  if  he  were  asked  further
    questions during the course of such an interview,  he  would  cooperate
    and answer truthfully.   Mr Allison submits  that  his  willingness  to
    cooperate on a reactive basis if interviewed by the  Iraqi  authorities
    may be distinguished from his unwillingness, and  general  refusal,  to
    take the proactive steps necessary to obtain  a  CSID  or  INID  either
    before or upon his return to Iraq.  As such, the focus of Mr  Allison's
    submissions, as set out below, was the appellant's ability to obtain  a
    CSID or other identity documents necessary for his onward  travel,  and
    subsequent settlement, in Iraq.  I find the appellant  is  "returnable"
    on a laissez passer.

Location of return

24. At [20] of the headnote in SMO, this tribunal recorded that  there  are
    regular direct flights from the United Kingdom to the Kurdish region of
    Iraq, and at [15] of the error of law decision, I identified  that  the
    location of the appellant's  return  was  an  issue  that  fell  to  be
    determined.  However, it is now clear that enforced returns are only to
    Baghdad.  The respondent's skeleton argument referred to  in  paragraph
    11, above, states the following at paragraph 3:

          "Having discussed this matter  with  the  [Home  Office]  removals
          team, it has now come to light  that  although  there  are  direct
          flights to the IKR [Iraqi Kurdistan Region] there  is  no  current
          agreement with the IKR authorities  to  enforce  returns  to  that
          location. Voluntary returnees can be returned to the IKR on  these
          direct flights.  Enforced returnees can only currently be returned
          to  Baghdad.   Therefore,  if  the  appellant  chooses  to  return
          voluntarily, he can be returned to the IKR, otherwise he  will  be
          returned to Baghdad.  The appellant can be returned to Baghdad  on
          a laissez passer as confirmed in SMO and will then need to make an
          onward journey to the IKR.  If the appellant is able to  obtain  a
          CSID prior to travelling to Baghdad or once in Baghdad...  removal
          to Baghdad can then be enforced and he can safely make his  onward
          journey to the IKR."

25. Accordingly, if the appellant is to be returned, it will be by means of
    an enforced return to Baghdad.  He will have to make  his  way  to  the
    Kurdish region by land.  In order to do so, he will  need  a  CSID,  an
    INID or a valid passport.  Paragraphs 22 and 23 of the headnote to  SMO
    provide:



          22. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
          IKR without either a CSID, an INID or a valid passport.  If P  has
          one of those documents, the journey from Baghdad  to  the  IKR  by
          land is affordable and practical and can be made  without  a  real
          risk of P suffering persecution, serious harm, or  Article  3  ill
          treatment  nor  would  any  difficulties  on  the   journey   make
          relocation unduly harsh.

           23.    P will face considerable difficulty in making the journey
          between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a  CSID  or  an  INID.
          There are numerous checkpoints en route, including two checkpoints
          in the immediate vicinity of the airport.  If P has neither a CSID
          nor an INID there is  a  real  risk  of  P  being  detained  at  a
          checkpoint until such time as the security personnel are  able  to
          verify P's identity.  It is not reasonable to require P to  travel
          between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability of P to  verify
          his  identity  at  a  checkpoint.  This  normally   requires   the
          attendance of a male family member and production of P's  identity
          documents but may also be achieved by calling  upon  "connections"
          higher up in the chain of command.

26. Ms Fijiwala, in her skeleton argument dated 6 February 2020, invites me
    to depart from SMO, and to find that the appellant  would  be  able  to
    travel on a so-called "certification letter" issued at Baghdad airport.
     The guidance in SMO is that there is "insufficient evidence"  to  show
    that returnees are issued with a certification letter: see [12] of  the
    headnote.  Ms Fijiwala invites me to reach a different  view  based  on
    correspondence from the Iraqi Embassy in London, specifically a  letter
    from the Ambassador dated 5 September 2018, and a 2 October 2018 letter
    from the Counsellor.

27. That correspondence was considered in SMO at [352] to [372].  At  [374]
    the Upper Tribunal held:

"With very little hesitation indeed, we do not consider the evidence
adduced by the respondent to be sufficiently cogent to cause us to depart
from a clear and consistent line of country guidance authority..."

    Thus SMO considered and rejected the same evidence  which  Ms  Fijiwala
    now proffers as a basis to depart from its conclusions.  To  do  depart
    from SMO on that basis would be irrational, and I decline to do so.

28. Accordingly, much turns on the appellant's documentation,  and  whether
    he will have, or be able to obtain, a CSID or INID.

29. I accept Mr  Allison's  characterisation  of  the  matters  which  must
    determine in order to make findings on the above  issues,  set  out  at
    paragraph 2 of his skeleton argument:

        a. Does the appellant know the volume number and page reference  of
           his Family Book entry, which is required to obtain a CSID in the
           UK?

        b. Can the appellant  obtain  the  necessary  information  for  the
           purposes of obtaining a CSID in the UK?

        c. Is it possible for the appellant to obtain a CSID from Iraq  via
           a proxy?

        d. In the event of the  appellant  having/acquiring  the  necessary
           details, would he provide those details to the Iraqi authorities
           in the UK in order to obtain a CSID prior to his removal?



Does the appellant know the volume number and page reference of  his  Family
Book entry, which is required to obtain a CSID in the UK?

30. The "Family Book" is the term used to describe the records kept in Iraq
    which are used by the authorities to issue identity documentation.   In
    SMO, it was held that the volume and page reference of an entry in  the
    Family Book are required to  obtain  replacement  CSID  documents  from
    outside  the  country.   Notwithstanding  the  phasing  out   of   CSID
    documents, they remain available to those outside  Iraq  through  Iraqi
    Consular facilities: see [13] of the headnote.

31. Paragraph [13] continued in these terms:

"Given the importance of [the volume and page reference information], most
Iraqi citizens will recall it. That information may also be obtained from
family members, although it is necessary to consider whether such relatives
are on the father's or the mother's side because the registration system is
patrilineal."

32. The appellant's written and oral evidence was that he does not remember
    the details necessary to obtain a replacement CSID.  He states that  he
    was a child when he was last issued with a CSID, that his  mother  held
    it, and that she dealt with all matters arising from it.  He  does  not
    know the volume or page numbers of the Family Book, he said.

33. It is clear that the appellant did previously hold a CSID document;  in
    cross-examination, he said that he took it with him on his  journey  to
    Europe, handing to an  agent  in  Turkey  for  return  to  his  mother,
    something that never happened.  The document had expired before he left
    Iraq in any event, and he needed to travel to Kirkuk to renew  it,  but
    it was too dangerous to do so.

34. The appellant's explanation about not knowing the details of the Family
    Book entry does have a degree of credence to it; the appellant  was  20
    years old when he left Iraq and, at the time, Kirkuk  was  a  contested
    area, which supports the suggestion that it was too dangerous to  renew
    the card (see [3] of the headnote to SMO).   I  also  accept  that  the
    appellant no longer  holds  his  expired  CSID;  when  explaining  what
    happened in Turkey under cross-examination, the appellant said that  he
    surrendered the CSID along with his driving licence and  passport.   By
    revealing the prior existence of not only a CSID, but  also  a  driving
    licence and passport, the appellant was confirming that  he  previously
    held the key documents necessary to engage with life in modern Iraq.  I
    accept that evidence, to the lower standard.   He  does  not  currently
    know the information required to obtain a CSID from within  the  United
    Kingdom without assistance.

Can the appellant obtain the  necessary  information  for  the  purposes  of
obtaining a CSID in the UK?

35. A key issue in these  proceedings  is  whether  the  appellant  retains
    sufficient contact with family in Iraq to assist with obtaining a  CSID
    prior to, or upon, his return to Baghdad.  If he retains  contact  with
    his family, he will be able to ask them to send him the volume and  the
    page number to enable him to obtain a CSID in this country, or  may  be
    able to arrange to be met in Baghdad with a replacement  CSID  obtained
    by proxy on his behalf, perhaps by his cousin.

36. The appellant's evidence was that he has lost contact with  all  family
    members.  That claim lacks credibility, for the following reasons.

37. First, the appellant's journey to the United Kingdom was funded by  his
    mother.  It would have been expensive.  Planning the  journey  required
    the cooperation of his cousin, who returned to the  appellant's  former
    home to retrieve  his  CSID  and  other  travel  documents,  and  later
    accompanied him to the bus stop when he left for Turkey.   His  journey
    to this country was a  family  effort,  requiring  considerable  family
    resources.  That implies a commitment which is  not  commensurate  with
    losing all contact once here.  The appellant claimed not to have spoken
    to his mother for  around  18  months,  with  the  last  time  being  a
    telephone call from a detention centre, as his  mother's  phone  number
    now no longer working.  I do not accept that aspect of the  appellant's
    evidence.  It is not consistent with the findings of Judge Baldwin, nor
    the appellant's insistence that the  Kurdish  community  is  close  and
    would provide assistance in locating family members  in  this  country,
    nor the considerable effort the appellant  has  expended  in  order  to
    arrive here, with his family's assistance.

38. Judge Baldwin, of course, found that the appellant's  cousin  would  be
    able to assist the appellant to find work and  accommodation  upon  his
    return.  The appellant's  evidence  before  me  was  that  he  had  not
    attempted to contact his cousin in  Iraq,  mainly  because  he  has  no
    contact details for them.  He accepted under cross-examination that, if
    his cousin came to this country, he could use contacts in  the  Kurdish
    community to locate him, but, curiously, contended that the same  would
    not be true in reverse.  If he, the appellant, were to return to  Iraq,
    he contended that the community would  not  assist  with  locating  his
    cousin.  He said it would not be "practical".

39. That  the  appellant  has  made  no  attempts  to  contact  his  cousin
    undermines the credibility of his account to  be  beyond  contact  with
    him: he has simply never tried.  This  is  despite,  as  the  appellant
    outlined under cross-examination, having  volunteered  in  the  Kurdish
    community with matters such as translation, and helping those who  have
    been here for less time than him.  Nor has the appellant sought to rely
    on the services  of  a  charity,  such  as  the  Red  Cross.   For  the
    appellant's claim to have lost all chance of contacting his  cousin  or
    aunt to be credible, one would expect some efforts on his part to  have
    tried to contact them.  If true, it  reveals  a  lacklustre  and  half-
    hearted attitude to making contact with his family in  Iraq,  providing
    an insufficient basis upon which to base a finding that he has lost all
    contact.  Alternatively, the appellant is not being truthful  with  his
    claims not even to have tried to contact his cousin or family.

40. The appellant added under cross-examination that his  aunt  and  cousin
    were abusive to him when he lived with them, making him leave the house
    early in the morning, preventing  him  returning  until  it  was  late.
    Strikingly for such a significant element of  the  appellant's  current
    narrative, that was the first time he mentioned such difficulties.   It
    was not part  of  the  protection  narrative  he  originally  advanced,
    despite the asylum claim being based on threats from his family.    His
    asylum interview dated 5 December 2016 was silent  on  the  issue;  the
    most he said was that he occasionally slept in a park  because  he  was
    embarrassed to remain in their house for a long time: see question 111.
     There was no suggestion of abuse of any sort.

41. The appellant also has what he described  as  "half-sisters"  in  Iraq;
    sisters with whom he shares a mother, but not  father.   He  could  not
    remember when he last spoke with them.  It had been "such a long time".
     The vagueness of these answers  lacked  credibility,  when  considered
    alongside the matters outlined above.  The appellant added that it  was
    the refusal of his family members to provide him with help and  support
    that led to him being displaced; I reject that aspect of his  evidence,
    given, on his own case, it was his mother who funded his travel to this
    country.  A lack of help and support is not commensurate  with  funding
    an expensive clandestine journey across Europe, to the United Kingdom.

42. Ms Isherwood contends that much of the appellant's evidence is  not  to
    be trusted.  There is  force  to  that  submission,  even  taking  into
    account the appellant's mild depression  and  moderate  anxieties,  and
    their possible impact on the quality of his  evidence.   The  appellant
    has given a number of different aliases  and  dates  of  birth  to  the
    immigration authorities.  He maintained under cross-examination that he
    had never sought to deceive the authorities in this country,  and  that
    he only did so in France.  Specifically, he accepted that he  pretended
    to the French authorities (or the British authorities operating at  the
    juxtaposed controls  border  in  France)  to  be  a  child  upon  being
    intercepted attempting to board a lorry to this country, in order to be
    released and returned to the "Jungle" in Calais.  He  has  demonstrated
    that he  is  willing  to  use  deception  in  seeking  to  achieve  his
    immigration goals.  While one must always be  cautious  before  linking
    lies on one occasion to broader poor credibility findings, when  looked
    at in the round, along with Judge Baldwin's preserved findings, and the
    weaknesses in the appellant's evidence as set out above, such deception
    can acquire a broader significance.

43. I do not accept the appellant's evidence that he has lost  all  contact
    with his family.  I find that he remains in contact with them, and that
    the same support that was available to  him  in  Iraq  will,  as  Judge
    Baldwin also found, continue to be available to him  upon  his  return.
    His  mother  had  custody  of  his  CSID  card  previously,   and   was
    sufficiently well connected  to  work  with  his  cousin  to  fund  and
    facilitate the use of an agent to travel to this country.

44. I find that  the  appellant  will  be  able  to  obtain  the  necessary
    information from his family for the purposes of  obtaining  a  CSID  in
    this country.  While the system is patrilineal, it is  clear  that  the
    appellant's  mother  has  previously  taken  charge  of  obtaining  his
    documentation for him.  There is no reason to conclude that  she  would
    not have the necessary information to hand  at  home,  as  she  plainly
    ensured that he received an education until at least the age of 11, and
    that the appellant had a CSID previously.

45. In light of the above analysis, I find  that  the  appellant's  cousin,
    aunt or mother will be able to assist him to obtain a CSID by providing
    him with the necessary information.

Is it possible for the appellant to obtain a CSID from Iraq via a proxy?

46. Obtaining a CSID by proxy in Iraq is difficult due to the phasing in of
    the INID system, which has  replaced  the  CSID  system  in  the  civil
    offices across Iraq: see [16] of the headnote  to  SMO.   The  headnote
    continues:

"The reducing number of CSA offices in which INID terminals have not been
installed will continue to issue CSIDs to individuals and their proxies
upon production of the necessary information."

47. There is, therefore,  a  reducing  number  of  civil  status  locations
    capable of issuing a CSID.  Civil status offices that have switched  to
    the INID system are "unlikely" to issue a CSID, whether to an applicant
    in person, or a proxy.

48. It is not clear whether the Kirkuk civil office retains the ability  to
    issue CSIDs.  It would be speculation to  conclude  that  it  does.   I
    accept that it is reasonably likely, based on the analysis  in  SMO  at
    [16] of the headnote that it would not be possible for the appellant to
    obtain a CSID from there by means of a proxy.   There  are  diminishing
    prospects of civil status offices issuing CSID cards  to  proxies.  The
    focus of the Iraqi administration is on the provision of INID cards  to
    applicants in person.  As SMO makes clear, the infrastructure is  being
    replaced by INID terminals.  There is a real possibility that a  proxy,
    even armed with the correct information, would not  be  issued  with  a
    CSID card on behalf of the appellant.

49. It is not reasonably likely that the appellant would be able to  obtain
    a CSID by a proxy acting on his behalf in Iraq.

Would the appellant provide the details to  the  Iraqi  authorities  in  the
United Kingdom in order to obtain a CSID prior to his removal?

50. It would be possible, in principle, for the appellant to obtain a  CSID
    from within the United Kingdom, in light of my findings that he has the
    ability to obtain the necessary information from family members in Iraq
    with whom he remains in touch.  See [13] of the headnote to SMO:

"Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID within Iraq, replacement
CSIDs remain available through Iraqi Consular facilities."

51. The appellant would be able to obtain a CSID  from  an  Iraqi  consular
    facility in this country.  Mr Allison submits that the appellant  would
    not be willing to do so, thereby,  in  his  submission,  resolving  the
    appeal in his favour.  Mr Allison categorised this as an "unattractive"
    argument.

52. The appellant's evidence was that he  would  not  proactively  seek  to
    obtain a CSID from within the United Kingdom.  He said  that  he  would
    engage truthfully with the Iraqi authorities in the event they were  to
    question him again,  for  example  as  part  of  the  emergency  travel
    documentation process facilitated by the respondent, but that he  would
    not attempt to obtain a CSID.

53. I do not accept this aspect of the appellant's evidence.  I find  that,
    faced with the prospect of return to Iraq the appellant would rely upon
    or restore his family links in order to be able to obtain the necessary
    information to obtain a card before he returns.   In  his  written  and
    oral evidence, he emphasised the importance of having a CSID card.  For
    example, see [13] of his 3 November 2020  witness  statement.   In  his
    oral evidence, he said that he would engage truthfully with  any  Iraqi
    officials he would be required to confirm his details to.  That is  not
    commensurate with his insistence, in parallel, that he would refuse  to
    obtain a CSID.  I find that the appellant would  be  able  to  use  his
    family links to obtain a CSID prior to his  removal.   It  would  be  a
    criminal offence for the appellant to refuse to cooperate,  and,  in  a
    submission made by the Secretary of State and accepted in HF  (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1276  at
    [102], "it should not readily be assumed that an  asylum  seeker  would
    risk imprisonment by refusing to  co-operate"  with  the  documentation
    process.

54. In any event, as held in HF (Iraq) at [103] and  [104],  an  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection claim should not, as  a  matter  of  principle,
    succeed on the basis of wilful  non-cooperation.   Of  course,  to  the
    extent the appellant contends that removal in  the  face  of  his  non-
    cooperation would infringe his Article 3 rights, that principle  cannot
    apply, as  the  rights  guaranteed  by  Article  3  are  non-derogable.
    However, for the reasons set out above, I do not accept that aspect  of
    the appellant's evidence.

55. Mr Allison sought to rely on HF (Iraq) at [9] to [11] of  his  skeleton
    argument.  The authority is of no assistance to the  appellant's  case,
    as the paragraphs quoted by Mr Allison concern the position of a failed
    asylum seeker who is irremovable due travel  to  documentation  issues.
    By contrast, this appellant is removable.   He  may  be  removed  on  a
    laissez passer.  The primary issue is whether, once he has  arrived  in
    Iraq, he will encounter Article 3 mistreatment on account of not  being
    able to access internal travel documentation.  For the reasons set  out
    above, I find that he will be able to obtain a CSID before leaving  for
    Iraq.  He will thereby be able to make  the  internal  journey  to  the
    Kurdish region without encountering Article 3 mistreatment.  He will be
    able to utilise his family links in the region to obtain  accommodation
    and support, as he did in the 33 months prior to his departure in 2016.

56. Drawing the above analysis together, I find that the appellant would be
    able to secure the necessary documentation to facilitate  his  internal
    journey to the Kurdish region. There, he would be able to draw  on  his
    existing family links in order to find  accommodation  and  employment.
    The Bluth report adds little to this analysis. It was prepared ahead of
    consideration of the appellant's substantive  asylum  claim,  and  pre-
    dates the country guidance given in SMO. The appellant will be able  to
    return to Iraq without the United  Kingdom  breaching  its  obligations
    under Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,  nor  by
    engaging the criteria for humanitarian protection.

Article 8

57. Judge Baldwin dismissed the appellant's appeal on  Article  8  grounds.
    There has been no challenge to those findings, and nor did  Mr  Allison
    pursue any submissions seeking to advance new arguments concerning this
    issue.  The appellant suggested in evidence that he has a  partner  who
    is pregnant, but no further  details  were  provided,  and  the  appeal
    cannot  possibly  succeed  on  the  basis   of   such   unsubstantiated
    assertions.

58. The appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 27 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 27 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09394/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2020                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

        THE HON. LORD UIST (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                     ML
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Allison, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq. For the purposes of this  decision,
    we will proceed on the basis that he was born on 16 December 1995.   He
    has used a number of aliases in the past, including one with  the  date
    of birth of 16 December 2000.

 2. The appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Baldwin promulgated on 12 November 2019, dismissing his appeal  against
    a decision of the respondent dated 13  September  2019  to  refuse  his
    asylum and humanitarian  protection  claim.  That  decision  was  taken
    following representations made by the appellant against a  decision  of
    the respondent to deport him for the commission of two offences; taking
    a vehicle without the owner's consent, and driving with excess  alcohol
    whilst disqualified, uninsured and unlicensed.

Factual background

 3. The appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity. He had  claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis that he was at risk from his step-father,  following  a  dispute.
    He claimed he would not be able to return to the Kurdistan region as he
    did not have the appropriate documentation. He also sought to raise  at
    the hearing before Judge Baldwin  a  new  matter,  namely  his  claimed
    conversion to Christianity, although that matter was not considered  by
    the judge as the Secretary of State had not provided her consent.

 4. The judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  primarily  on  credibility
    grounds. He took as his  "starting  point"  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Spicer promulgated on 23 February  2017  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against an earlier decision of the respondent, dated
    23 December 2016, to refuse to grant him asylum, again  on  credibility
    grounds. Judge Baldwin did not accept the appellant's  claimed  dispute
    with his stepfather, nor his related claim that his father worked for a
    prominent PUK official.

 5. Part of the appellant's case before Judge  Baldwin  had  been  that  he
    would return to Iraq without  a  Civil  Status  Identity  Document  ("a
    CSID"), meaning he would be unable to make the journey to  the  Kurdish
    region from Baghdad, to where he would be returned. Further, without  a
    CSID, claimed the appellant, he would not be able to obtain  employment
    or accommodation, or live a normal day to day life in Iraq.

 6. At [29], the judge dealt with the likely circumstances that would  face
    the appellant upon his return. He noted that  the  appellant  had  been
    able to live and work in Iraq for at least three years before  he  came
    to this country, and there was no good reason to believe that he  would
    be incapable of working again. The judge found that the appellant would
    be able to draw upon the combined help of his mother, aunt or her  son,
    as they had all been able to help him in the past.  In  the  course  of
    that paragraph,  the  judge  made  two  key  findings  which  fall  for
    consideration in these proceedings.

 7. The judge said:

"...there is no longer any need for [the appellant] to be returned to
Baghdad and it is not unreasonable to assume he will be offered a choice of
return to Sulaymaniyah, where his aunt, her son and his family live - or,
if he prefers, Erbil."

    He later added, having found that the appellant would continue to enjoy
    the support of his family, including his aunt, in Iraq:

"With such support, I do not find it credible [that] he would not be able
to obtain any documentation he will need, employment and accommodation,
though he may need to ensure his consumption of alcohol does not again lead
to him putting others at risk..."

Permission to appeal

 8. The appellant was granted permission  to  appeal  by  Designated  Judge
    Schaerf on the basis it was  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  by  not
    considering the appellant's likely circumstances  upon  his  return  to
    Iraq in light of his claims not to have  CSID,  pursuant  to  the  then
    applicable country guidance, contained in AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC).

 9. The appellant also sought permission to appeal on the  basis  that  the
    judge erred by not allowing him to pursue his claim to  have  converted
    to Christianity.  Although Judge Shaerf did not formally  restrict  his
    grant of permission to appeal to the CSID issue,  he  observed  in  his
    reasons for granting permission to appeal that it was not arguable that
    the judge erred in concluding that he had no jurisdiction in respect of
    that part of the claim. Before us, Mr Allison,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant, did not seek to pursue that issue.  For  our  own  part,  we
    entirely agree with Judge Shaerf that there was no jurisdiction for the
    judge below to consider that issue, and therefore no error of  law  can
    arise on that basis.

Discussion

10. It was common ground that the hearing that the judge erred in  relation
    to his conclusion is that the appellant would be able  to  "obtain  any
    documentation he will need". Before  reaching  that  conclusion,  there
    were a number of considerations the judge should have  had  regard  to,
    particularly in relation  to  the  CSID  issue.   Paragraph  1  of  the
    headnote to AAH states that the following considerations were relevant:



i)   Whether P has any other form of documentation, or information about
the location of his entry in the civil register. An INC, passport,
birth/marriage certificates or an expired CSID would all be of substantial
assistance. For someone in possession of one or more of these documents the
process should be straightforward. A laissez-passer should not be counted
for these purposes: these can be issued without any other form of ID being
available, are not of any assistance in 'tracing back' to the family record
and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;

ii)  The location of the relevant civil registry office. If it is in an
area held, or formerly held, by ISIL, is it operational?

iii) Are there male family members who would be able and willing to attend
the civil registry with P?  Because the registration system is patrilineal
it will be relevant to consider whether the relative is from the mother or
father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his CSID would be able to
assist in locating the original place of registration of the individual's
mother, and from there the trail would need to be followed to the place
that her records were transferred upon marriage. It must also be borne in
mind that a significant number of IDPs in Iraq are themselves undocumented;
if that is the case it is unlikely that they could be of assistance.  A
woman without a male relative to assist with the process of redocumentation
would face very significant obstacles in that officials may refuse to deal
with her case at all.

11. The judge simply did not consider any of these issues and  his  failure
    to do so was an error of law, as the parties agree.

12. The judge found that it was  "not  unreasonable  to  assume"  that  the
    appellant would be offered  a  choice  of  return,  whether  to  Erbil,
    Sulaymaniyah or Baghdad.  That was a departure from AAH, which held  at
    paragraph 2 of the headnote that there were no international flights to
    the Independent Kurdish Region, and that all returns  from  the  United
    Kingdom to Iraq were via Baghdad.   The judge appears to have based his
    decision to depart from AAH on  the  respondent's  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note: Iraq: Internal relocation,  civil  documentation  and
    returns, version 9.0, February 2019, at  part  4.   AAH  has  now  been
    replaced by SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)  Iraq  CG
    [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC), which  states  at  [20]  of  the  Headnote  that
    returns may indeed be to  the  Kurdish  region,  or  to  Baghdad.   The
    headnote adds that it "is for  the  respondent  to  state  whether  she
    intends to remove to  Baghdad,  Erbil  or  Sulaymaniyah."   We  do  not
    consider the judge's approach to this issue to  have  been  a  material
    error of law, but, for the reasons set out below, we  do  not  preserve
    this finding, as it is for the respondent to state where she intends to
    return an individual to, rather than for a judge to speculate  that  it
    is "not unreasonable to assume" that an appellant will be  returned  to
    one of three very different locations.

13. The remainder of the decision has not been challenged and we  need  not
    interfere with it.   Although it will be necessary for the decision  to
    be set aside in order to be remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  all  the
    judge's findings of fact may be preserved, with two exceptions.

        a. First, we do not preserve the judge's finding that the appellant
           will be able to obtain the relevant documentation, i.e.  a  CSID
           (or its successor, the INID: see SMO), upon his return to  Iraq.
           It also follows that the judge's consequential findings that the
           appellant would be able to find accommodation and employment, to
           the extent that doing so depends upon the provision of  a  CSID,
           must also be set aside.

        b. Secondly, we set aside the judge's finding  that  the  appellant
           will be "offered a choice  of  return".   SMO  sets  out  a  new
           expectation on the respondent to state which part  of  Iraq  she
           intends to remove an  appellant  to,  and  it  is  against  that
           background that the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's  likely
           return must be assessed.  The process of the respondent  stating
           where she intends to remove an  appellant  to  may,  of  course,
           involve a process of consultation with the  appellant  (that  is
           not a matter for us), but ultimately it is her role  to  enforce
           return to a particular location.  That location, once  specified
           by the respondent, forms an important part of the factual matrix
           within which the prospects of the  appellant  obtaining  a  CSID
           must be assessed.

Postscript

14. At the hearing, Ms Fijiwala handed up a "supplementary letter to refuse
    a protection claim" addressed to the appellant, dated 22 January  2020.
    No explanation was provided as to why this document had been served  at
    such a late stage. It appears to purport to  consider  the  appellant's
    likely circumstances of return in light of the criteria in SMO. It  was
    not relevant to the error of law which we had to consider, and  we  did
    not hear detailed argument upon it.  The letter may be  helpful  to  an
    extent, for it outlines the respondent's likely approach at the resumed
    hearing. We note that the letter does not  state  in  terms  where  the
    respondent proposes to remove the appellant to within the  IKR,  namely
    Erbil or Sulaymaniyah.  It is necessary for the respondent to state her
    intentions in this regard, pursuant to SMO, and we direct her to do  so
    within 14 days of the date of the hearing before us.

Conclusion

15. We set aside the decision of Judge Baldwin for it to be remade  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.  We preserve his unchallenged findings  of  fact,  save
    for those relating to the location of the appellant's return  in  Iraq,
    and his ability to obtain documentation, and all findings consequential
    to that.  We direct the respondent to state where (within the IKR)  she
    intends to return the appellant to, within 14 days of the error of  law
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Baldwin involved the making of an error of law and  is
set aside.  We preserve all his findings of fact, save  for  those  relating
to the location of the appellant's  return  to  Iraq,  and  the  appellant's
ability to obtain documentation and all consequential findings.

The respondent is directed to state where within  the  IKR  she  intends  to
return the appellant to, within 14 days.

The matter is to be reheard in the Upper  Tribunal  for  the  issue  of  the
appellant's circumstances upon his return to be considered.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed Stephen H Smith                                     Date  27  January
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

