
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/09407/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2018                     | On 8 March 2019                   |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    E.G.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
O'Garro promulgated on 15 November 2017 in which she dismissed the
Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated 8 September
2017 refusing asylum in the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 18 June 1995.  She arrived
in the United Kingdom at Gatwick Airport on 27 March 2017 and claimed
asylum on arrival.  A screening interview was conducted on the following
day and a substantive asylum interview held on 3 August 2017.  The
Appellant's application for protection was refused by the Secretary of
State for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated
8 September 2017.


3.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


4.   The appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal for the reasons
set out in the Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro promulgated on
15 November 2017.


5.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 1 November
2018.


6.   I am grateful to both representatives for the helpful discussion and
approach taken in the hearing before me.  In particular, I am grateful for
Mr Bramble's realistic acknowledgement that there were difficulties with
the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and his indication that he did not
seek to resist the challenge raised by the Appellant.  It seems to me that
Mr Bramble's concessions were well made, and were essentially in accordance
with concerns that I had identified for myself in my preliminary reading of
the papers.


7.   In such circumstances, I do not propose to rehearse in full detail the
substance of the Appellant's immigration history. As regards the substance
of her asylum claim, for present purposes the following summary suffices:

         (i) In support of her claim for protection the Appellant relied in
         significant part on her account of an incident that took place on 1
         February 2017, and consequent events.  It was the Appellant's case
         that on that date she attended a meeting of a support group for
         persons suffering from obsessive compulsive disorder. She had
         previously attended such meetings on a regular basis prior to this
         particular occasion.


         (ii) The meeting took place in a mosque, although it was not in
         itself a religious meeting. The Appellant stated "The mosque was
         used mainly because it was free to hold meetings there and it was
         considered a safe venue for women" (paragraph 11 of her appeal
         witness statement signed on 11 November 2017).


         (iii) During the course of the meeting on 1 February 2017 the
         Appellant was called upon to share something of her history and
         experience. (She refers to this, for example, in answer to question
         17 of the substantive asylum interview.)


         (iv) The Appellant has given an account of a difficult upbringing
         and a sense of having been oppressed by a father who was a strict
         adherent to certain tenets of Islam.  The Appellant found this to
         be a rigid environment, which resulted in her feeling that she was
         frequently living in a sinful way, and had given her a guilty
         conscience.  She considers this background as a cause for some of
         her mental health difficulties.

         (v) At the meeting the Appellant spoke of her concerns about the
         restrictions of religion, and advocated that the mothers present
         should not "indoctrinate your children with Islam" (witness
         statement at paragraph 11).


         (vi) The Appellant also related in her asylum interview that she
         had told the meeting that she had "read in a book that even
         Mohammed had schizophrenia" (question 17).


         (vii) The Appellant claims that other women at the meeting became
         angry upon hearing her words, and an altercation or fight broke out
         amongst the people there.  She understood that somebody had made a
         telephone call to the police and in the circumstances, together
         with a friend, she left the meeting and essentially went into
         hiding for a limited period prior to her departure from Iran
         approximately one month later.

         (viii) The Appellant also claims that in consequence of her
         behaviour and statements at this meeting, she became the subject of
         a court summons.  She produced a purported court summons for the
         consideration of the Respondent, and in turn the Tribunal (Annex C
         of the Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal).


8.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not believe the Appellant's account,
and did not accept that the court summons produced by the Appellant was a
genuine document.  In the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
concluded that the Appellant had essentially concocted a story to advance
in support of a false claim for asylum and dismissed the appeal
accordingly.


9.   Before me it is common ground between the parties that in setting out
her decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge fell into error in respect of
the adequacy of her reasons.


10.  I note the following matters as being of particular concern.


11.  The Judge refers to the court summons in these terms:

"The Appellant's court summons in the Remarks section says this:-

'You are required to attend court in respect of the complaint against you
for attending davazdah ghadam meetings ...'" (paragraph 34).

     (In the translation of the summons, the translator makes a note that
'davazdah ghadam' literally means "twelve steps". This appears broadly
consistent with the Appellant's comments at interview to the effect that
the meeting was similar to the sort of meeting that is conducted by
Narcotics Anonymous - see question 17.)


12.  The Judge then stated:

         "This clearly does not describe why the Appellant claimed that she
         has been summoned which she said is because she criticised the
         Islam religion at one public meeting and not merely because she
         attended meetings." (paragraph 35)


13.  However, the Judge has only cited one part of the summons. It appears
that she has disregarded - or otherwise failed to engage with - an earlier
part of the court summons which states the following:

         "Accusation: accused of apostasy; tendency towards and cooperation
         with anti-Islamic groups; personal complaint".


14.  It is clear that the Summons on its face is not limited to an
accusation of 'merely attending meetings' - which was a premise
significantly material to the Judge's critical analysis and rejection of
its genuineness. I accept that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning in
this regard is deficient. Further, notwithstanding the potential validity
of some of the Judge's other observations in respect of the conduct of
court proceedings, there is a material error with regard to the evaluation
of this particular document.


15.  So far as the remainder of the Judge's reasoning is concerned in
respect of the expectation of how court proceedings might be conducted, or
indeed how a court summons might be worded, Mr Hodson drew to my attention
to materials before the Judge that were 'on point', but did not seem to
have been considered.  In the event, it is unnecessary for me to consider
those matters further: no doubt they may be the subject of further scrutiny
when this decision falls to be remade in due course.


16.  One further aspect of the Judge's reasoning that is problematic
emerges from paragraphs 29-31.  The Judge cited country information from
the U.S. Department of State Report of 2016, indicating that the government
"monitored meetings, movements, and communications of its citizens and
often charged persons with crimes against national security and insulting
the regime based on letters, emails, and other public and private
communications" (paragraph 29)  The Judge then comments, perhaps
sustainably, that the Appellant, being an educated person, would have
likely been aware of the fact of the monitoring of persons by the
government in Iran (paragraph 30).  Putting aside that the Judge's
observation in this regard does not seem to engage with the Appellant's
comment that she considered the meeting essentially to be a 'safe place',
what is particularly troubling is the Judge's further observation:

"It also means, because the objective evidence says that the authorities
monitor meetings, there would have been no need for the police to be called
as the authorities would have been present to detain the Appellant if she
had made her speech in public as she claims which would have been
interpreted as being against Islam." (paragraph 31).


17.  This is to misinterpret the evidence and give it a meaning and
significance it does not bear. The Judge has interpreted the evidence that
the government monitors meetings, movements etc. to mean that all meetings
are monitored by the government - irrespective of the persons holding such
meetings or the supposed purpose of such meetings. Moreover, inherent in
the Judge's observation is that a person monitoring a meeting either is a
member of the police, or otherwise has the authority to detain someone such
as the Appellant, and would inevitably so act (even if that meant breaking
cover) rather than permit the police to be called to any incident in the
usual way. The background country information does not support the notion
that there would inevitably have been some sort of government 'watcher'
present at the meeting, or that if there had been he or she would have
revealed themselves by stepping forward rather than letting other members
of the citizenry contact the police in the usual way.


18.  In my judgement the Judge's comments at paragraph 31 must be perceived
as being at least in part material to the Judge's overall evaluation of the
Appellant's credibility. I find the reasoning in this regard to be
unsustainable to an extent that it constitutes an error of law.


19.  At paragraph 28 the Judge comments upon the Respondent's reasons in
the RFRL in these terms:

         "I must say that I find the Respondent has given cogent reasons for
         refusing the Appellant's claim",

before then stating,

         "Nevertheless, I will make my own assessment of the Appellant's
         claim for asylum in the light of the totality of the evidence that
         is before me."


20.  As Mr Bramble pointed out on behalf of the Secretary of State: if it
be the case that the Judge's own reasoning is not sustainable, the Decision
cannot be 'saved' by the Judge's approval of the Secretary of State's RFRL
in circumstances where - as Mr Bramble acknowledges - the First-tier
Tribunal Judge has failed to engage with the Appellant's response to the
RFRL set out over a number of pages and paragraphs in her appeal witness
statement.  The Judge has not otherwise particularised the reasoning of the
RFRL or considered it alongside, and/or reconciled it with, the Appellant's
response.


21.  In all of the circumstances it is common ground between the parties
that the First-tier Tribunal Judge fell into material error of law, and
accordingly that the decision in the appeal is to be set aside.  It is also
common ground - and I accept - that the decision in the appeal should be
remade pursuant to a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  It will
be a matter for the Appellant, if she so wishes, to file and serve any
further evidence; if she does then that should be done in accordance with
the Directions that will be issued in the relisting of this appeal, (which
I anticipate will likely be in standard form).


Notice of Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.


23.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro,
    with all issues at large.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 5 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


