
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09850/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the Tribunal|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008|                                     |
|On 5 February 2021                   |On 23 February 2021                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  I do so because this is a
    protection claim (see Guidance  note  2013  No  1:  Anonymity  Orders).
    Unless and until a court directs otherwise  the  appellant  is  granted
    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    refer to him.  This direction applies both to the appellant and to  the
    respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

The Background

 2. The respondent with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cox) (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")
    who, in a determination promulgated on 11 December  2019,  allowed  his
    protection claim.

 3. I shall refer to the parties as they were before the FtT.

 4. This decision is made without a hearing under rule 34 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules') and is done so
    with the consent of the parties reflected in the email exchanges in the
    correspondence sent to the Tribunal on the 2 and 4 February 2021.

 5. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules. Rule 2(2) explains that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly
    includes: dealing with  it  in  ways  that  are  proportionate  to  the
    importance of the case, the complexity of  the  issues,  etc;  avoiding
    unnecessary formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the  proceedings;
    ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that  the  parties  are  able  to
    participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise  of
    the  Upper  Tribunal  effectively;  and  avoiding  delay,  so  far   as
    compatible with proper consideration of the issues.

 6. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to  help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    further the overriding objective;  and  to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal generally.

 7. Rule 34 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides:

         '34.-"

         (1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may make
         any decision without a hearing.

         (2) The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
         party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider any
         matter, and the form of any such hearing.

         (3) In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
         must hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes of
         proceedings.

         (4) Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper Tribunal
         to-"

         (a) strike out a party's case, pursuant to rule 8(1)(b) or 8(2);

         (b) consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;

         (c) determine an application for permission to bring judicial
         review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or

         (d) make a consent order disposing of proceedings, pursuant to rule
         39, without a hearing.'

 8. In the light of the present need to take precautions against the spread
    of Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the  Procedure
    Rules[1], directions were sent out to the parties on  the  2  September
    2020 that the Upper Tribunal's provisional view  was that it  would  be
    appropriate to determine the following questions without a hearing:

      a) whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved
         the making of an error of law, and, if so

      b) whether that decision should be set aside.

 9. That decision also set out directions. It was sent out the  parties  by
    way of email.  In compliance with those  directions,  submissions  were
    provided by the appellant dated 23 September 2020 and a reply from  the
    respondent on the 7 October 2020.

10. Having had regard to the  grounds,  the  decision  of  the  judge,  the
    submissions and to all the evidence before me, I am  satisfied  that  a
    full account of the facts are set out in the papers  on  file  and  the
    issue to be decided is a  straightforward  one.  No  issues  have  been
    raised other than those addressed in the  written  submissions.  I  was
    mindful as to the circumstances when an oral hearing is to be  held  in
    order to comply with the common law duty of fairness  and  also  as  to
    when a decision  may  appropriately  be  made  consequent  to  a  paper
    consideration: Osborn v. The Parole Board [2013]  UKSC  61;  [2014]  AC
    1115.

11.  In my judgment and in the light of the issues set out in  the  written
    submissions  there is no complexity which necessitates an oral  hearing
    to ensure fairness and that the decision is one which can properly  and
    fairly be made  on  the  papers  taking  into  account  the  overriding
    objective as set out in the Tribunal Procedure Rules which includes the
    issue of delay. This is a course the parties have consented to.

12.  The appellant is a national of Iraq who arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 22 November 2017 with his wife and child and claimed asylum.

13. The respondent refused his claim for protection on 25  September  2019.
    In that decision the respondent accepted his nationality and  also  his
    ethnicity and religion as claimed. However, for the reasons set out  in
    the decision letter, the respondent did not accept that the   appellant
    had given  a credible account that he had come under threat  whilst  in
    Iraq  in the way that he had claimed, and it was  considered  that  his
    account of  his  dispute  with  his  brothers  in  law   had  not  been
    consistent. It was also not accepted that the men  concerned  held  any
    power and influence within the PUK.  The respondent also  rejected  his
    account that he had been shot at nor that he  was  in  hiding.  In  the
    alternative it was considered that  he  could  internally  relocate  to
    another area in the IKR and consideration was given to Article  15  (c)
    of the Qualification Directive.

14. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal against that decision came before the FtTJ on  the  14  November
    2019 and in the decision promulgated  on  11  December  2019  the  FtTJ
    allowed his appeal on asylum grounds.

15. The FtTJ had the opportunity of hearing oral evidence of the  appellant
    and his wife alongside the documentary evidence that had been  advanced
    on his behalf. The  FtTJ  found  that  the  appellant  had  provided  a
    credible account having taken into account the evidence  and  that  the
    appellant had become involved in a dispute with his brothers in law and
    they had threatened to kill him and his family. The judge accepted that
    they had shot at him and also that he would be  of  continuing  adverse
    interest on return to Iraq. The judge was therefore satisfied  that  he
    would be at risk of suffering serious harm  and  that  the  authorities
    could not protect him. The judge also considered the issue of  internal
    relocation at paragraphs 61 - 68 and  reached  the  conclusion  on  the
    evidence that the appellant could not safely or reasonably be  expected
    to relocate to another area in the IKR. He therefore allowed the appeal
    on asylum grounds.

16. The respondent applied for permission to appeal the decision  advancing
    one ground, that the FtTJ had failed to make any findings as to why the
    appellant's fear engaged the Refugee Convention in  the  light  of  the
    decision letter where it was disputed that his claim  in  fact  engaged
    the Refugee  Convention.  Thus,  it  was  argued  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention whilst dismissing the claim for humanitarian protection.

17. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Grant) on 17 January 2020.

18. A Rule 24 response submitted on behalf of the appellant on 23 September
    2020, it was accepted that the FtTJ was in error in allowing the appeal
    on asylum grounds but that the appeal against the  decision  should  be
    allowed on humanitarian protection grounds. The reply  noted  that  the
    FtTJ's positive credibility findings and findings on risk on return had
    not been challenged by the respondent and therefore in the light of the
    single ground of appeal, the appeal should be allowed  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.

19. Following that replies submissions were sent to the tribunal on  behalf
    of the respondent dated 7 October 2020 noting the  concession  made  on
    behalf of the appellant but that the grounds did not indicate that  the
    appeal should be allowed on this basis.

20. Since  the  parties  have  filed  their  written  submissions,  further
    correspondence with the tribunal has followed. The respondent  accepted
    that in light of  her  lack  of  challenge  the  primary  and  positive
    findings  of  fact  by  the  judge  including  the  findings   on   the
    unreasonableness of internal relocation, that the  appellant  would  be
    entitled to have his appeal allowed  on  the  grounds  of  humanitarian
    protection.

21. The respondent therefore invited the tribunal to remake the  appeal  on
    the  papers  dismissing  the  appellant's  claim  under   the   refugee
    Convention that allowing his appeal  on  the  grounds  of  humanitarian
    protection (I refer to the email sent to the  tribunal  on  29  January
    2021).

22. Following that correspondence by email, a reply was received  from  the
    appellant's solicitors sent 1 February  2021  in  agreement  with  that
    course and also invited the tribunal to remake the decision by allowing
    the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

23. The grounds of challenge advanced on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    do not seek to impugn or otherwise challenge the  positive  credibility
    findings made in respect of  the  appellant's  factual  claim  nor  the
    assessment made of risk on return (that he would be at risk of  serious
    harm) or that of internal relocation. That is plainly accepted  now  in
    the email correspondence on behalf of the respondent.

24. It is also accepted on behalf of the appellant that  the  FtTJ  was  in
    error in allowing the appeal on Refugee  Convention  grounds  when  the
    basis of the factual claim did not fall within the Convention  grounds.
    However as both parties agree, on the assessment made by the FtTJ which
    was not challenged by the  respondent's  grounds,  the  proper  outcome
    should have been to allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds
    rather than on asylum grounds.

25.  For those reasons, and in the light of the  parties'  agreement,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of the FtT allowing the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds was an error of law as the factual account did not fall  within
    the Convention grounds although there is no dispute that the  appellant
    would be at risk of serious harm. Therefore, as the  parties  have  set
    out, that part of the decision should be set aside and should be remade
    dismissing his asylum appeal but allowing the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds.



Notice of Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal decision of  the  FtT  allowing
    the appeal on asylum grounds was an error of law and that part  of  the
    decision should be set aside and should be remade allowing  the  appeal
    on humanitarian protection grounds.

    The decision is remade as follows: the appeal is  dismissed  on  asylum
    grounds but allowed on Humanitarian Protection grounds  and  Article  3
    (human rights grounds).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or his family members. This direction  applies  both
to the Appellant and  to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds             Dated:          5 February
2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

