
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09064/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 3 February 2020                   |On 11 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tam, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Wood, I A S (Liverpool)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant,  is  a  national
    of Iraq born on 16 December 1985.  He arrived in the  UK  clandestinely
    on 26 August 2015 and made a claim  for  asylum  the  same  day.   This
    application was refused in a decision  dated  5  September  2019.   The
    Claimant appealed against this decision  and  his  appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Lang in Manchester for hearing on 23 October  2019.
    In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on  30  October  2019  the  judge
    allowed the appeal essentially on the basis that  the  Appellant  would
    face destitution on return if he attempted to relocate in light of  the
    country guidance decision in AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -  internal  relocation)
    Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC) and AA, (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
    00544 (IAC): see [35] and [36].

2.   Permission to appeal was sought, in time, by the Secretary of State on
    the basis: firstly, that the judge had made a material misdirection of
    law on a material matter in allowing the appeal with regard to
    humanitarian protection in light of the judge's previous findings at
    [33] that the Claimant did not have a well-founded fear of persecution
    on return to Iraq and at [35] that the Claimant would be able to obtain
    the original or a replacement CSID card within a reasonable time and
    secondly, that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding
    that it would be unduly harsh for the Claimant to return to the IKR in
    light of the fact that as a Turkman he is a member of a well-
    established minority in Iraq.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bulpitt
    in a decision dated 13 December 2019 in the following terms:

"3.  The central reasoning for the judge's finding that the Appellant is
entitled to humanitarian protection comes at [36].  It is arguable that
this paragraph is inadequate to enable the losing party to know why they
have lost (see MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958) particularly in light of
the judge's earlier findings that the Appellant would not be at risk of
persecution and would be able to obtain a replacement CSID card.  There is
nothing in the paragraph to suggest that the issues identified at
paragraphs (9) and (10) of the headnote of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal
relocation) Iraq (CG) [2018] UKUT 00212 have been considered.

4.   It is hard to decipher what is the error of law suggested in the first
ground which appears to have little merit.  Nevertheless all grounds may be
argued."

    Hearing

4.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, I asked the parties to
    address the impact, if any, of the recent country guidance decision on
    Iraq, that is SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG
    [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC), which was published on 20 December 2019.  Mr
    Tam on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted that the decision in
    SMO did materially impact on the Respondent's grounds of appeal, given
    that at the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, Kirkuk
    was, according to the country guidance then in force, in a contested
    area and now it is not.  Mr Tam drew attention to the fact that the
    Home Office Country Policy and Information Note was before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, Judge Lang, which set out that position.  He
    submitted that this was a plain and obvious point and it was clear that
    the judge had erred in law in failing to find the Claimant could return
    to Kirkuk.

5.   Mr Tam acknowledged the other points relied on by the Secretary of
    State in the grounds of appeal had not been set out in the clearest
    form but it was clear from the grant of permission to appeal by Judge
    Bulpitt that the consideration of risk on return is really confirmed to
    [35] and [36] of Judge Lang's decision and the question of whether the
    Claimant would be able to get his CSID within a reasonable timeframe.
    The judge noted that the Claimant was previously employed and that he
    speaks various languages, but consideration of return to Baghdad was
    extremely brief, merely confined to half a sentence, and the Claimant
    could invoke the assistance of his uncle to obtain a CSID.  Mr Tam, in
    response to a question from the Upper Tribunal, stated that any forced
    return would be to Baghdad, but it was the Secretary of State's
    position that the Claimant could then travel back to Kirkuk, which was
    an ethnically diverse region and was no longer part of what was
    considered to be a disputed area in Iraq.

6.   Mr Tam also sought to rely on the second ground of appeal, which was
    the lack of consideration by the judge of relocation to the IKR in line
    with the country guidance decision in AAH (op cit) that the major
    factors which needed to be considered had not been, i.e. whether the
    Claimant would be able to access any form of financial or familial
    support and that he had an uncle in Iraq who could assist him, nor was
    there any exploration of factors relating to employment and the
    reasoning provided by the judge for allowing the appeal was clearly
    inadequate.

7.   In his submissions on behalf of the Claimant, Mr Wood invited the
    Upper Tribunal to find no error of law or no material error.  He
    submitted that it was difficult to ascertain what the Secretary of
    State's grounds of appeal were arguing and that they appear to be more
    of a critique of Judge Lang's decision.  Mr Wood sought to rely on the
    country guidance decisions in AA and AAH, which set down a number of
    criteria that need to be considered.  He submitted that the issue of a
    CSID is not a silver bullet.  In terms of ground 2, it was unclear what
    the argument is, merely asserting that a Turkman can return to Iraq
    does not begin to demonstrate a material error of law.  The fact that
    there are other Turkmen in Iraq does not necessarily mean that this
    Claimant would be safe.

8.   Mr Wood submitted that the losing party, i.e. the Secretary  of  State,
    can understand from the Decision and Reasons why she has  lost.   There
    are three country guidance decisions which are material and  which  the
    judge applied.  In light of AA the question is whether  there  are  any
    family members in Baghdad.  The judge at [36]  found  that  there  were
    not, that the Claimant was from  a  minority  community  from  an  area
    associated with  ISIS,  i.e.  Kirkuk,  that  he  was  a  Sunni  Muslim.
    Following the decision in BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG  [2017]  UKUT
    00018 (IAC) the Iraqi authorities would not be willing to  provide  him
    with protection.  The judge found that the claimant could obtain a CSID
    but would have other problems.  The Claimant is not from the  IKR.   He
    is from Kirkuk.  There were no family members that he could  live  with
    and concerns about  the  conditions  that  he  would  return  to.   Any
    assistance from the Voluntary Return scheme would not take him very far
    if he was unable to find employment and  there  was  no-one  who  could
    assist him in obtaining work.  The  fact  that  the  Claimant  is  from
    Kirkuk, which is associated with ISIS, may deter future employers.   Mr
    Wood submitted that the outcome was open to the judge on  the  evidence
    before her.

9.   Mr Wood further submitted, with regard to the relevance of SMO that
    the Secretary of State's grounds of challenge did not seek to challenge
    the judge's findings of fact that Kirkuk was unsafe at the date of
    hearing of that appeal.  There had been no attempt by the Secretary of
    State to vary the grounds of appeal so as to include a challenge to the
    judge's findings.  Consequently, SMO was not relevant in determining
    whether there was an error of law.  Mr Wood submitted that the entirety
    of the decision should be left intact.  If, in the alternative, I was
    to find an error of law he submitted that the finding that Kirkuk is
    not safe for this Claimant should be preserved.

10.  In reply, Mr Tam agreed with Mr Wood that the CSID issue was not a
    silver bullet but submitted, however, it is a material factor to
    consider in respect of return.  Mr Tam submitted that the arguments
    based on AA and AAH are not reflected in Judge Lang's decision at [36]
    and the case would be different had those decisions been properly
    considered.  Mr Tan submitted if an error was found that any
    reconsideration could not be limited solely to internal relocation and
    a de novo hearing would be required.

    Findings and Reasons

11.  I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons. I  find  that
    there are material errors of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal
    Judge Lang, in light of the country guidance decision in SMO (op  cit).
    This is because whilst the Judge did not find the  Claimant's  fear  of
    persecution to be credible [33] in light of the country  guidance  then
    in force she found  that  as  his  hometown  is  Kirkuk,  which  was  a
    contested area, he would be at risk of  indiscriminate  violence  there
    [34] and internal relocation would be unduly harsh [36].

12.  In SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity  documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]
    UKUT 00400 (IAC) which was promulgated on 20 December 2019,  the  Upper
    Tribunal  issued  updated  country  guidance,  holding  inter  alia  as
    follows:

         "A. INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ: ARTICLE 15(C) OF THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

         1. There continues to be an internal armed conflict in certain
         parts of Iraq, involving government forces, various militia and the
         remnants of ISIL. Following the military defeat of ISIL at the end
         of 2017 and the resulting reduction in levels of direct and
         indirect violence, however, the intensity of that conflict is not
         such that, as a general matter, there are substantial grounds for
         believing that any civilian returned to Iraq, solely on account of
         his presence there, faces a real risk of being subjected to
         indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm within the scope
         of Article 15(c) QD.

         2. The only exception to the general conclusion above is in respect
         of the small mountainous area north of Baiji in Salah al-Din, which
         is marked on the map at Annex D. ISIL continues to exercise
         doctrinal control over that area and the risk of indiscriminate
         violence there is such as to engage Article 15(c) as a general
         matter.

         3. The situation in the Formerly Contested Areas (the governorates
         of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah and Salah Al-Din) is complex,
         encompassing ethnic, political and humanitarian issues which differ
         by region. Whether the return of an individual to such an area
         would be contrary to Article 15(c) requires a fact-sensitive,
         "sliding scale" assessment to which the following matters are
         relevant.

         4. Those with an actual or perceived association with ISIL are
         likely to be at enhanced risk throughout Iraq. In those areas in
         which ISIL retains an active presence, those who have a current
         personal association with local or national government or the
         security apparatus are likely to be at enhanced risk.

         5. The impact of any of the personal characteristics listed
         immediately below must be carefully assessed against the situation
         in the area to which return is contemplated, with particular
         reference to the extent of ongoing ISIL activity and the behaviour
         of the security actors in control of that area. Within the
         framework of such an analysis, the other personal characteristics
         which are capable of being relevant, individually and cumulatively,
         to the sliding scale analysis required by Article 15(c) are as
         follows:

         .    Opposition to or criticism of the GOI, the KRG or local
             security actors;

           . Membership of a national, ethnic or religious group which is
             either in the minority in the area in question, or not in de
             facto control of that area;

         .    LGBTI individuals, those not conforming to Islamic mores and
             wealthy or Westernised individuals;

         .    Humanitarian or medical staff and those associated with
             Western organisations or security forces;

         .    Women and children without genuine family support; and

         .    Individuals with disabilities.

         6. The living conditions in Iraq as a whole, including the Formerly
         Contested Areas, are unlikely to give rise to a breach of Article 3
         ECHR or (therefore) to necessitate subsidiary protection under
         Article 15(b) QD. Where it is asserted that return to a particular
         part of Iraq would give rise to such a breach, however, it is to be
         recalled that the minimum level of severity required is relative,
         according to the personal circumstances of the individual
         concerned. Any such circumstances require individualised assessment
         in the context of the conditions of the area in question.




         B. DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)

         7. Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad. The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a current or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a Laissez Passer.

         8. No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in
         possession of one of these documents.

         9. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and
         Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
         1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by
         reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of a
         current or expired Iraqi passport or a Laissez passer, if the
         Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account
         of a lack of any of those documents.

         10. Where P is returned to Iraq on a Laissez Passer or expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of
         return by reason of not having a current passport.




         C. CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION

         11. The CSID is being replaced with a new biometric Iraqi National
         Identity Card - the INID. As a general matter, it is necessary for
         an individual to have one of these two documents in order to live
         and travel within Iraq without encountering treatment or conditions
         which are contrary to Article 3 ECHR. Many of the checkpoints in
         the country are manned by Shia militia who are not controlled by
         the GOI and are unlikely to permit an individual without a CSID or
         an INID to pass. A valid Iraqi passport is not recognised as
         acceptable proof of identity for internal travel.

         12. A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the absence of a
         CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is not, in any
         event, a recognised identity document. There is insufficient
         evidence to show that returnees are issued with a 'certification
         letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any such document would
         be recognised internally as acceptable proof of identity.

         13. Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID within Iraq,
         replacement CSIDs remain available through Iraqi Consular
         facilities. Whether an individual will be able to obtain a
         replacement CSID whilst in the UK depends on the documents
         available and, critically, the availability of the volume and page
         reference of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq, which system
         continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity process. Given the
         importance of that information, most Iraqi citizens will recall it.
         That information may also be obtained from family members, although
         it is necessary to consider whether such relatives are on the
         father's or the mother's side because the registration system is
         patrilineal.

         14. Once in Iraq, it remains the case that an individual is
         expected to attend their local CSA office in order to obtain a
         replacement document. All CSA offices have now re-opened, although
         the extent to which records have been destroyed by the conflict
         with ISIL is unclear, and is likely to vary significantly depending
         on the extent and intensity of the conflict in the area in
         question.

         15. An individual returnee who is not from Baghdad is not likely to
         be able to obtain a replacement document there, and certainly not
         within a reasonable time. Neither the Central Archive nor the
         assistance facilities for IDPs are likely to render documentation
         assistance to an undocumented returnee.

         16. The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by
         the use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on return to Iraq, has
         reduced due to the introduction of the INID system. In order to
         obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local CSA office in
         person to enrol their biometrics, including fingerprints and iris
         scans. The CSA offices in which INID terminals have been installed
         are unlikely - as a result of the phased replacement of the CSID
         system - to issue a CSID, whether to an individual in person or to
         a proxy. The reducing number of CSA offices in which INID terminals
         have not been installed will continue to issue CSIDs to individuals
         and their proxies upon production of the necessary information.




         D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN GOI-CONTROLLED IRAQ

         17. Where internal relocation is raised in the Iraqi context, it is
         necessary to consider not only the safety and reasonableness of
         relocation but also the feasibility of that course, in light of
         sponsorship and residency requirements in operation in various
         parts of the country. Individuals who seek to relocate within the
         country may not be admitted to a potential safe haven or may not be
         permitted to remain there.

         18. Relocation within the Formerly Contested Areas. With the
         exception of the small area identified in section A, the general
         conditions within the Formerly Contested Areas do not engage
         Article 15 QD(b) or (c) or Article 3 ECHR and relocation within the
         Formerly Contested Areas may obviate a risk which exists in an
         individual's home area. Where relocation within the Formerly
         Contested Areas is under contemplation, however, the ethnic and
         political composition of the home area and the place of relocation
         will be particularly relevant. In particular, an individual who
         lived in a former ISIL stronghold for some time may fall under
         suspicion in a place of relocation. Tribal and ethnic differences
         may preclude such relocation, given the significant presence and
         control of largely Shia militia in these areas. Even where it is
         safe for an individual to relocate within the Formerly Contested
         Areas, however, it is unlikely to be either feasible or reasonable
         without a prior connection to, and a support structure within, the
         area in question.

         19. Relocation to Baghdad. Baghdad is generally safe for ordinary
         civilians but whether it is safe for a particular returnee is a
         question of fact in the individual case. There are no on-entry
         sponsorship requirements for Baghdad but there are sponsorship
         requirements for residency. A documented individual of working age
         is likely to be able to satisfy those requirements. Relocation to
         Baghdad is likely to be reasonable for Arab Shia and Sunni single,
         able-bodied men and married couples of working age without children
         and without specific vulnerabilities. Other individuals are likely
         to require external support, i.e. a support network of members of
         his or her family, extended family or tribe, who are willing and
         able to provide genuine support. Whether such a support network is
         available is to be considered with reference to the collectivist
         nature of Iraqi society, as considered in AAH (Iraq).




         E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION

         Non-Kurdish Returnees

         29. The ability of non-Kurdish returnees to relocate to the IKR is
         to be distinguished. There are no sponsorship requirements for
         entry or residence in Erbil and Sulaymaniyah, although single Arab
         and Turkmen citizens require regular employment in order to secure
         residency. Arabs from former conflict areas and Turkmen from Tal
         Afar are subject to sponsorship requirements to enter or reside in
         Dohuk. Although Erbil and Sulaymaniyah are accessible for such
         individuals, particular care must be taken in evaluating whether
         internal relocation to the IKR for a non-Kurd would be reasonable.
         Given the economic and humanitarian conditions in the IKR at
         present, an Arab with no viable support network in the IKR is
         likely to experience unduly harsh conditions upon relocation there.




         F. EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS

         30. This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq."

13.  It is apparent from the country guidance that Kirkuk is no longer
    considered to be in an area of internal armed conflict and that, as a
    person from a formerly contested area, the Claimant's case will involve
    'a fact-sensitive, "sliding scale" assessment."

14.  Thus consideration needs to be given as to whether the Claimant can
    properly be returned to Kirkuk, in light of the finding of the First
    tier Tribunal Judge at [35] that the Claimant would by himself or with
    the assistance of his maternal uncle, be able to obtain his original
    CSID or a replacement.

15.  For the avoidance of doubt, even if the new country  guidance  had  not
    been promulgated, I find that the Secretary of State's first ground  of
    appeal is made out in light of the Judge's previous  findings  at  [33]
    that the Claimant did not have a well-founded fear  of  persecution  on
    return to Iraq and at [35] that the Claimant would be  able  to  obtain
    the original or a replacement CSID card within a reasonable time.

16.  I accept Mr Tam's submissions that the Judge failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that it would be unduly harsh for the  Claimant  to
    internally relocate to either Baghdad or the IKR and which  aspects  of
    AAH she sought to rely  upon  to  substantiate  her  findings  in  this
    respect.

17.  It is further apparent that the issue of internal relocation is also
    impacted by SMO if it is found that the Claimant cannot safely return
    to Kirkuk and that his ethnicity as a Turkman will be key in assessing
    his ability to internally relocate, either within Iraq or to the IKR.



Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
appeal is remitted to the First tier Tribunal for a hearing to determine  in
light of the country guidance in SMO, KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC):

    (i)  whether the Claimant can safely be returned to Kirkuk; and

    (ii) if not, whether it would be reasonable and  not  unduly  harsh  to
         expect him to internally relocate.

The unchallenged  findings  by  the  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  the
Claimant does not have a well founded fear of persecution and that he  would
be able to obtain his original CSID or a  replacement  within  a  reasonable
time frame are preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 16 February 2020
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

