
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/09313/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Tuesday 2 February 2021                 |On Tuesday 23 February 2021     |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     E A
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  This is  an  appeal
on protection grounds.  It is therefore appropriate to continue that  order.
 Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr B Hawkins,  Counsel  instructed  by  Arlington  Crown
solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.          The Appellant appeals against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Shore promulgated on 7 April 2020 ("the Decision").  By
      the Decision, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision dated 14 September 2019 refusing his  protection
      and human rights claims.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Turkey.  He came to the UK on  28
      July 2018,  having  been  granted  entry  clearance  as  a  short-term
      student. He claimed asylum on 14 September 2018.

3.          The Appellant claims to be at risk from the Turkish  authorities
      following the failed coup in July 2016.  The Appellant was a  military
      cadet at that time.  He says  that  he  and  his  fellow  cadets  were
      arrested by the authorities and detained for six days as the person in
      charge of the group was suspected of having been involved in the coup.
        The  Appellant's  military  academy  having  been  closed   by   the
      authorities (as were all others), the Appellant returned to his family
      home in Istanbul and pursued his university course for two years.   He
      says that during that time, he expressed  views  against  the  Turkish
      President in conversation with  family  and  friends.   The  Appellant
      claims that warrants have been issued  against  him  on  suspicion  of
      being a member of a terrorist organisation.  The Appellant also claims
      that warrants have been  issued  against  his  brother  for  the  same
      reasons. His brother is in France and has claimed asylum  there.   The
      Appellant also says that the Turkish authorities have begun to  arrest
      former military cadets including those with whom  he  served  in  July
      2016.

4.          The Judge did not accept the claim as credible for  reasons  set
      out at [86] to [107] of the Decision.

5.          The Appellant appeals on nine grounds as follows:

             (1)   The  Judge  has  unreasonably  rejected  the  Appellant's
      evidence as to why he did not  claim  asylum  immediately  on  arrival
      ([88] to [89] and [94] to [95] of the Decision).

            (2)  Paragraph [90] of the Decision concerning  the  Appellant's
      journey to the UK is difficult to follow.

            (3)  The Judge has unfairly dealt with the issue of  differences
      between the answers given  at  the  screening  interview  and  at  the
      substantive asylum interview and has failed to take into  account  the
      Appellant's explanation in that regard ([91] to [93] of the Decision).

            (4)  The Judge's comments  about  the  Appellant's  evidence  at
      interview,  in  his  statements  and  at   the   hearing   are   broad
      generalisations and lack examples ([96] of the Decision).

            (5)  It was not open to the Judge to find as he did at  [97]  to
      [98] of the Decision that the evidence about the Appellant's brother's
      claim lacked plausibility, particularly in light  of  the  documentary
      evidence.

            (6)  The finding regarding the  evidence  from  the  Appellant's
      lawyer in Turkey at [99] of the Decision was a concern not raised with
      the Appellant at the hearing and was therefore unfair;  in  any  event
      the reasoning is inadequate.

            (7)  The Judge's finding at [100] of the Decision regarding  the
      authenticity of screenshots of the documentary evidence  held  on  the
      Turkish computer system ("UYAP") was not open to him on  the  evidence
      regarding that system.

            (8)  It was not open to the Judge to reject the probative  value
      of the expert report in particular regarding the authenticity  of  the
      arrest warrant as the Judge has done at [101] of the Decision.

            (9)  The adverse credibility findings at [102] of  the  Decision
      are undermined by the errors identified in the previous grounds.

6.          Permission to appeal was refused by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Davidge on 28 May 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

            "... 2.    The grounds argue that  Judge  Shore  in  a  decision
           promulgated on 7th April 2020 fell into legal error when he gave
           inadequate  reasons   for   rejecting   the   Appellant's   good
           explanation for the lateness of his application which  was  that
           he did not know  that  he  could  claim  asylum.   There  is  no
           arguable merit  here.   Contrary  to  the  grounds  the  judge's
           conclusion that the Appellant could either have  claimed  asylum
           on arrival at the airport or shortly thereafter, and  failed  to
           do so without reasonable excuse given that he lived amongst  the
           Turkish  diaspora  and  would  have  had  access   to   relevant
           information, is not perverse as these grounds maintain.

            3.   The argument that paragraph 90 is 'hard  to  fathom'  fails
           to make clear why, or what error arises.

            4.   The ground  that  the  judge  should  not  have  considered
           adverse the Appellant's failure  to  mention  detention  at  his
           screening interview because the Appellant's explanation was that
           he had been cut off by the Immigration Officer from giving  full
           details of his claim fails to give a fair reading to the judge's
           decision.  As the judge notes the explanation does  not  explain
           why he said that some military schools were  closed  instead  of
           saying that his military school was closed or why he  said  that
           some  people  were  arrested  instead  of  saying  that  he  was
           arrested, and given he accepts what is recorded as what he said,
           he plainly had the chance to say both.

            5.   Further, the grounds add to the evidence, for  example,  in
           connection with the position in respect of the brother at 59 and
           60 of the judge's decision, providing a later  argument  to  fit
           the way in  which  the  evidence  developed.   It  was  not  the
           Appellant's case that his brother had been released and then re-
           detained  and  the  speculation  that  that  could  explain  the
           position reveals no arguable error  in  the  judge's  reasoning.
           Further, the judge was entitled to find that as the  Appellant's
           brother is safely in France it was adverse that he had failed to
           provide any witness statement in support of his brother's appeal
           here.

                 6.    The grounds reveal no arguable error of law."

 7.         The Appellant renewed his application for permission  to  appeal
      on the same grounds and responded also to Judge Davidge's  refusal  of
      permission.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge
      Gill on 20 July 2020, in the following terms:

            "Ground 7:  It is arguable that the reasons given  by  Judge  of
           the First-tier Tribunal  Shore  (para  100)  for  rejecting  the
           documents submitted from UYAP do not withstand scrutiny.  It was
           the appellant's evidence that  this  was  a  computerised  court
           proceedings system in Turkey that can  be  accessed  by  lawyers
           (para 64 of the Judge's decision).  If the appellant's  evidence
           is   correct,   it   is   arguable   that    the    fact    that
           photographs/screenshots were produced supported the  appellant's
           evidence about the  UYAP  system,  as  para  19  of  the  ground
           contends.


            On the other hand, the judge  gave  several  other  reasons  for
           drawing adverse  credibility  inferences  from  the  appellant's
           evidence.  The background material quoted at para 19(b)  of  the
           grounds was not before the judge and therefore  arguably  cannot
           be relied  upon  in  order  to  establish  that  the  judge  had
           materially erred in law, the burden being upon the appellant  to
           establish his case to the low standard.   It  may  therefore  be
           said that the judge's  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
           appellant's evidence concerning  the  UYAP  system  fell  to  be
           decided on the basis of an assessment of his  credibility  as  a
           whole.  On that basis,  it  may  be  said  that  the  judge  was
           entitled to reject  the  appellant's  evidence  about  the  UYAP
           system.


                  Nevertheless,  this  ground  is  at  least  arguable.   If
      established, it is arguably material.

            Ground 4: It is also arguable that the judge erred by failing to
           explain why he considered  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was
           vague, lacking in detail and inconsistent.


           Although the other grounds have less merit, I will not limit the
           terms in which permission is granted."

8.          Judge Gill gave directions for a remote hearing in  relation  to
      the error of law issue.  So it was that the  appeal  came  before  me.
      The hearing was conducted via Skype for  Business.   The  hearing  was
      attended by the representatives as above and by the Appellant and  his
      solicitor.  There were  no  technical  issues  affecting  the  hearing
      generally.   I was taken  to  documents  in  the  Respondent's  bundle
      before the First-tier Tribunal to which I refer below as  [RB/xx].   I
      also had what is described as the Appellant's Supplementary Bundle  of
      Documents which was prepared for  the  hearing  before  me  and  which
      contains core documents.   That is a tabbed  bundle  and  I  therefore
      refer to documents in that bundle as [AB/tab/xx].

9.          The Appellant has made an application under rule 15(2A)  of  the
      Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  to  adduce  fresh
      evidence.  Mr Hawkins explained that the Appellant changed  solicitors
      following the First-tier Tribunal hearing and that  the  new  evidence
      had been obtained and produced in order to deal  with  some  of  Judge
      Shore's findings.  It  was  accepted  that  the  Judge  could  not  be
      criticised for not dealing with evidence, which was  not  before  him,
      but Mr Hawkins indicated that the fresh evidence was of assistance  to
      underscore the points made about the errors in the  treatment  of  the
      evidence which as before the Judge.   Those documents are to be  found
      in the supplementary bundle to which I refer above.

10.          Having  heard  from  both  representatives,  and  following   a
      concession made by Ms Everett on behalf of the Respondent, I found  an
      error of law in the Decision. I indicated that I would  therefore  set
      aside the Decision and  it  was  agreed  that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted.  I indicated that  I  would  set  out  the  reasons  for  my
      conclusions in writing which I now turn to do.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

11.         The main focus of  Mr  Hawkins's  oral  submissions  was  ground
      seven.  His submissions on that ground also  incorporate  grounds  six
      and eight.

12.         The focus of  ground  seven  is  the  documents  concerning  the
      arrest warrants issued against the Appellant and the UYAP system  from
      which those documents are taken.  Those documents appear  at  [RB/117-
      126].  The starting point is a letter  from  a  solicitor  in  Turkey,
      Talha Aksoy.  His letter dated 11 August 2018 ([RB/120]) explains  the
      documents which were obtained as follows:

            "... [EA] with the identification number  [given]  (Republic  of
           Turkey) has applied to us for the purpose of confirming the fact
           that an arrest decision and an  investigation  has  been  opened
           with the charge  of  'being  a  member  of  the  FETO/PDY  Armed
           Terrorist Organisation' and in order to prove  that  the  asylum
           application request has been based on justified reasons.


            According to the information and documents  (annexed  documents)
           received  in  the  records  of  the  National  Judicial  Network
           Programme (UYAP)  about  [EA]  with  the  identification  number
           [given] (Republic of Turkey) under the  accusation  of  being  a
           member of the FETO/PDY (Fetullah Terror  Organisation/  Parallel
           State Structure) Armed Terrorist  Organization,  there  are  the
           investigation file of the Public Prosecutor of Kocaeli with  the
           file number [given] and the arrest file of Public Prosecutor  of
           Kocaeli with the file number [given].  Both OHAL (the  State  of
           Emergency) and KHK (the Decree Laws) and the confidentiality  of
           the investigation were cited, so it was not possible  to  obtain
           documents from the above mentioned files physically.


            About [EA]with the identification number  [given]  (Republic  of
           Turkey), the investigation is ongoing, according  article  314/2
           the Turkish Penal Code, from 5 years to 10 years imprisonment is
           foreseen for this crime.  The punishment for those convicted  of
           the same article are increased  by  half  percentage,  according
           article 5/1 of the Anti-Terror Law  No.  3713.   According  that
           [EA] from 7,5 years to 15 years as a result of the trial will be
           sentenced to imprisonment.


            The above information is based on the documents I  submitted  in
           the appendix and the investigation I made at the courthouse  and
           I certify the accuracy of this information with my signature."
                 [emphasis in the original]

13.         The screenshots themselves appear at  [RB/122-126].   Given  the
      lawyer's explanation, I do not need to set out  what  those  documents
      show.

14.         Judge Shore had the lawyer's letter and screenshots before  him.
       He also had the evidence of the Appellant about these and  the  other
      court documents recorded at [64] to [67] of the Decision as follows:

            "64. The Appellant  had  found  out  about  the  warrant  issued
           against him around the second week of September  2018.   It  was
           when he was attending a language course.  There is a system that
           only solicitors can use called UYAP.  His solicitor made a check
           and found two warrants were issued  against  him.   One  was  an
           arrest warrant.  One was a  detention  warrant.   After  he  had
           submitted the documents to the Home  Office,  they  wanted  more
           documents and then they formally obtained this document from the
           court where the warrants were issued.  The document was  a  page
           A61 and the purported original was handed up.

            65.  Mr Badar asked the Appellant why  it  had  taken  him  from
           September 2018 to January 2020 to obtain the  original  of  page
           A61.  He said it was easy to get a screen shot of the arrest and
           detention warrants, but harder  to  obtain  the  original.   His
           solicitor had to go to  the  court  personally.   Eventually  he
           obtained it.  The Appellant confirmed that the document that had
           been handed up was the actual document that  the  solicitor  had
           obtained from the court.

            66.  The Appellant was asked if  there  was  a  covering  letter
           with the original of A61, but said that there were  'some  other
           documents, but [he] did not recall any of  them  that  described
           that document'.  His solicitor in the United  Kingdom  had  told
           him that A61 needed translating and to be sent to an  expert  to
           confirm [its authenticity].  That was how it should be  sent  to
           the court.  The expert has provided a report of genuineness.

            67.  Mr Badar challenged the authenticity  of  the  document  on
           the basis that it looked like it had been produced on a standard
           printer and  did  not  look  like  an  official  document.   The
           Appellant responded by saying that, in state offices, they  have
           normal printers.  The solicitor got it from the court.  There is
           nothing more the Appellant could do  to  make  the  Home  Office
           believe him.  He  had  sent  screenshots,  but  these  were  not
           enough.  He was told by his  solicitor  that  the  expert  could
           validate A61 and that is what happened.  The Appellant said that
           he did not know how he could make  Mr  Badar  believe  when  the
           expert says it is real."

15.         The document at A61 appears now at [AB/B/24] with a  translation
      on the preceding page.  As I understand it, it was not  translated  as
      such when submitted to the First-tier Tribunal but was the subject  of
      an expert report verifying it.  The translation as  now  submitted  in
      its material part appears to show that  an  arrest  warrant  has  been
      issued against the Appellant for  membership  of  an  armed  terrorist
      organisation, which crime is said to date back to 2016.   The  warrant
      directs the Appellant's production to the Public  Prosecutor's  Office
      once he is found.  The document is dated 16 July 2018 and said  to  be
      signed electronically by the Judge and clerk.

16.         The document as it was before Judge Shore was the subject of  an
      expert report of Dr Derya Bayir, a qualified lawyer affiliated to  the
      Istanbul Bar Association.  Her report is at pages [63] to [64] of  the
      First-tier Tribunal bundle.  The challenge to the Judge's treatment of
      that report forms the Appellant's ground eight.  The expert, at [2] of
      the report, sets out her understanding of her duty to the  court.   At
      [3],  she  sets  out  her  expertise.   She  says  that  she  is   "an
      acknowledged expert on legal and political issues concerning  Turkey".
      She works as a consultant for a law firm in Istanbul and  is  also  an
      academic  at  the  University  of  London.   Her   expertise   is   in
      "international human rights, minority rights law, and Turkish law  and
      jurisprudence on ethno-religious minorities".  At [4] and [5]  of  the
      report, Mr Bayir  confirms  that  she  has  seen  the  arrest  warrant
      document and that she has been asked to comment on the authenticity of
      it.  She explains at [6] of the report her methodology which  consists
      of comparing the document to "original documents  of  similar  types".
      Her findings about the document appear at [7] to [13]  of  the  report
      before concluding at [14] of the report that "[i]n light of all  these
      findings, I have concluded that the arrest warrant  in  question  does
      not contain any irregularities and is compatible with what  one  would
      expect in a genuine  arrest  warrant  documentation".   Ms  Bayir  has
      written a supplementary report which appears at [AB/B/38-40]  to  deal
      with the Judge's criticisms of her evidence.

17.         The Judge dealt  with  these  documents  at  [99]  to  [101]  as
      follows:

            "99. I find that the  letter  dated  11  August  2018  from  his
           lawyer in Turkey [R119-R110] [sic] about the documents that were
           submitted is not credible.  I was not taken to any  evidence  by
           the Appellant or  Mr  Knight  that  sought  to  corroborate  the
           existence and/or status of the firm ('ahd')  or  the  individual
           lawyer (Talha Aksoy).  Such information  is  readily  available.
           The existence of the lawyer was challenged in  the  reasons  for
           refusal  and  errors  in  the  letter  were  pointed  out.   The
           Appellant made no attempt to obtain a statement from his  lawyer
           to clear up the errors.  I was not shown the  original  envelope
           in which the document from the  lawyer  was  sent.   I  find  it
           incredible that the lawyer whose letter  [R120]  says  that  the
           Appellant applied to him  to  confirm  that  warrants  had  been
           issued and then sent the documents to  the  Appellant's  father,
           rather than to the Appellant direct.

            100. The documents  submitted  from  UYAP  were  photographs  or
           screenshots, which undermines their authenticity.  I  also  note
           that the Appellant has not produced a bill from the  lawyer.   I
           find that the letter does not describe how the  lawyer  obtained
           the documents, just that he did.  I find that the  principle  in
           TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA  Civ  40  applies  to  the  Appellant's
           assertions on the issue of the letter from the lawyer in  Turkey
           and the documents that  he  purportedly  sent  and  affects  his
           credibility.

            101. I can attach little weight to the report of Dr Bayir  dated
           19 February 2020 [A63-A64].  In AAW (expert evidence  -  weight)
           Somalia [2015] UKUT 673 (IAC) it was  held  that  a  failure  to
           comply with the Senior President's Practice Direction may affect
           the weight to be given to expert evidence.  Dr  Bayir  says  she
           has borne  in  mind  paragraph  10  of  the  Senior  President's
           Practice Direction, but has failed  to  include  the  prescribed
           statement of truth.  She has failed to properly  and  fully  set
           out the nature  of  her  expertise  insofar  as  it  relates  to
           assessing the validity of the document at page A61 and  has  not
           shown her qualification to act as an interpreter.  No proper and
           full interpretation of the document at page A61 was provided, so
           I find the report to be of little probative value.  I find  that
           the Tribunal was not provided [by] with a certified  translation
           of the document at page A61 and I can therefore give it  little,
           if any, weight for the reasons set out above."

18.         Certain of  those  criticisms  are  well  founded.   Mr  Hawkins
      accepted that there was no translation of the arrest warrant  document
      before Judge Shore.  Nor was there the evidence now produced about the
      lawyer's  bona  fides.   Although  Dr  Bayir  has  indeed  provided  a
      statement of her duty  to  the  court,  she  herself  accepts  in  her
      supplementary report that the original version of her report  sent  to
      the solicitor did not contain a statement of truth but that  she  sent
      an amended version on the same day.   It  appears  that  the  (former)
      solicitors included the wrong version in the bundle.

19.         I was also not wholly impressed with  the  submission  regarding
      Dr Bayir's relevant expertise.  As  I  observed  at  the  hearing,  Dr
      Bayir's area of practice is not in criminal law.  It may be that as  a
      specialist  in  international  human  rights  law  and  dealings  with
      minorities in the judicial system in Turkey,  she  has  acquired  some
      knowledge of the workings of the criminal law system  and  familiarity
      with documents, but her  expertise  is  not  as  obvious  as,  say,  a
      criminal law practitioner in this field.  That  said,  as  Mr  Hawkins
      pointed out, she has explained in some detail  what  led  her  to  the
      conclusion that the document was genuine.  She  is  clearly  a  person
      with some authority as a lawyer and, overall,  the  reasons  given  by
      Judge Shore for giving her report little weight are thin.

20.          In  any  event,  and  as  Ms  Everett  conceded,  the   Judge's
      criticisms have to be looked at in the light of the  further  evidence
      now available.  There is now for example confirmation of the  lawyer's
      standing.  There is confirmation from Dr Bayir that she had provided a
      report which is attested to by a statement of truth.  There is  now  a
      translation of the arrest warrant.  Although, as Ms Everett submitted,
      and I accept, what is asserted  is  an  error  of  fact  arising  from
      documents which were not before the Judge, errors of fact are  capable
      of amounting to errors of law if the new evidence shows that the Judge
      has misunderstood material facts arising from the evidence  which  was
      before the Judge (see by way of example  Haile  v  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal [2001] EWCA Civ 663 and the discussion of the  principles  in
      that and other cases in E v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2004] EWCA Civ 49).

21.         Independently of the Respondent's concession, I also accept  the
      challenge  made  in  ground  seven  that  Judge  Shore's  reasons  for
      rejecting the screenshots as corroboratory evidence do  not  withstand
      scrutiny.  The lawyer's  letter  coupled  with  the  Appellant's  oral
      evidence explains that  the  records  are  held  electronically.   The
      lawyer explains that he attended the court house, but  was  unable  to
      obtain physical documents due to confidentiality  restrictions.    The
      Appellant gave some oral evidence  about  the  electronic  system  for
      recording warrants. No reason is given why the accessing of  documents
      from a screen which would inevitably lead to evidence in the  form  of
      screenshots is undermining of the authenticity of that evidence.

22.         As Mr Hawkins submitted and I  accept  the  evidence  about  the
      court documents is of particular importance in this case because it is
      accepted by the Respondent that if the Appellant is indeed of interest
      to the Turkish authorities for the reasons he gives, he  would  be  at
      risk on return.

23.         Although Mr Hawkins did not  abandon  reliance  on  any  of  the
      other grounds, I as Judge Gill, do not consider those other grounds to
      have much if any merit. I do not  consider  that  there  is  merit  in
      ground four as Judge Gill thought there might be.   Although  [96]  of
      the Decision does consist of general comments  about  the  Appellant's
      evidence, those criticisms have to be read  in  the  context  of  what
      precedes that paragraph which does provide reasons for rejecting  some
      of the Appellant's evidence and the record of the Appellant's evidence
      at [38]  to  [74]  of  the  Decision.   However,  although  there  are
      sustainable adverse credibility findings made by Judge Shore which are
      not the subject of successful challenge, I am satisfied that,  due  to
      the errors  identified  and  accepted  arising  from  the  Appellant's
      grounds six to eight, it is appropriate to  set  aside  the  Decision.
      Although, as I say, there are adverse credibility findings  which  are
      sustainable,  those  are  based  on  rejection  of   the   potentially
      corroboratory evidence in the form of the court documents as evidenced
      by the documents to which I have already  made  reference.   For  that
      reason, if that documentary evidence is accepted, it may well  make  a
      difference to the view taken of the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
      claim.  As such, it would not be appropriate to preserve  any  of  the
      findings made by Judge Shore.

24.         For  those  reasons,  I  conclude  that  grounds  six  to  eight
      disclose errors of law  in  the  Decision  and  I  therefore  set  the
      Decision aside in its entirety.  The  credibility  of  the  protection
      claim will therefore need to be  considered  completely  afresh.   For
      that reason, I agreed with the representatives that this appeal should
      be remitted for a de novo hearing.


CONCLUSION

25.         For the foregoing reasons, grounds six to eight disclose  errors
      of law in the Decision. It is therefore appropriate to set  aside  the
      Decision.  I do not preserve any  findings.   For  the  reasons  given
      above, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a de novo hearing.  Both representatives  submitted  that
      this was the appropriate course.


DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore  promulgated
on 7 April 2020 is set aside in its entirety.  No  findings  are  preserved.
The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-hearing  before  a
Judge other than Judge Shore.



Signed           L K Smith                         Dated: 9 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
