
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09389/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2019                     |On 1 May 2019                        |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                MAJLINDA PECA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M. C. Benitez of counsel, instructed by J.
McCarthy Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms B. Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1.   The Appellant is a national  of  Albania.  It  is  her  case  that  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom  on  11  October  2015  and  contacted  a
    solicitor the next day. Her solicitor then contacted  the  Home  Office
    and the reference for that  call  was  18674.  This  evidence  was  not
    challenged by the Respondent at the hearing before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Quinn. The Respondent also accepts that  the  Appellant  attended
    the Asylum Intake Unit in Croydon on 22 October 2015 and was  given  an
    appointment  for  a  screening  interview  on  4  November  2015.   Her
    substantive asylum interview was conducted on 25 November 2015.

 2.  The Appellant was pregnant when she arrived in the United  Kingdom  and
    her daughter was born on 14 February 2016. The Appellant's  application
    for asylum was refused  on  18  March  2016.  However,  the  Respondent
    withdrew this decision at a hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    31 August 2016 so that her case could be  referred  into  the  National
    Referral Mechanism. A positive reasonable grounds decision was made  on
    19 September 2016 but on 26 February 2018 the Competent Authority found
    that on a balance of probabilities she had not established that she had
    been a victim of human trafficking.

3.   Her application for asylum was refused for a second  time  on  18  July
    2018 and  the  Appellant  appealed.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Quinn
    dismissed her appeal in a decision promulgated on 28 November 2018. She
    also appealed against this decision and on 27 March 2019  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted her permission to appeal.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING
4.   Counsel for the Appellant made brief  oral  submissions  and  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer said that she  was  not  going  to  make  any
    further submissions as she was of the view that  the  first  ground  of
    appeal was made out. It was also her view that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   In TD & AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016]  UKUT  00092  (IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that:



    "Much of the guidance given in AM & BM (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG
    [2010] UKUT 00080 (IAC) is maintained. Where  that  guidance  has  been
    amended or supplemented by this decision it  has  been  highlighted  in
    bold:


         "a)  It is not possible to set out a typical profile of  trafficked
             women from Albania:  trafficked women come from all  areas  of
             the country and from varied social backgrounds.

         b)   Much of Albanian society is  governed  by  a  strict  code  of
             honour which not only means that trafficked women  would  have
             very considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home
             areas on return but also will affect their ability to relocate
             internally.  Those who  have  children  outside  marriage  are
             particularly vulnerable.  In extreme cases the close relatives
             of the trafficked woman may  refuse  to  have  the  trafficked
             woman's child return with her and could force her  to  abandon
             the child.


         c)   Some women are lured to leave Albania with false  promises  of
             relationships or work. Others  may  seek  out  traffickers  in
             order to facilitate their departure  from  Albania  and  their
             establishment in  prostitution  abroad.  Although  such  women
             cannot be said to have left Albania against their will,  where
             they have fallen under the  control  of  traffickers  for  the
             purpose of exploitation there is  likely  to  be  considerable
             violence within the relationships and a lack of freedom:  such
             women are victims of trafficking.


         d)   In the  past  few  years  the  Albanian  government  has  made
             significant efforts to improve its  response  to  trafficking.
             This includes widening the scope  of  legislation,  publishing
             the Standard Operating Procedures, implementing  an  effective
             National Referral Mechanism, appointing a new Anti-trafficking
             Co-ordinator,  and  providing  training  to  law   enforcement
             officials.  There is in general a Horvath-standard sufficiency
             of protection, but it will not be  effective  in  every  case.
             When considering whether or not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
             protection  for  a  victim  of  trafficking   her   particular
             circumstances must be considered.


         e)   There is now in place a reception and reintegration  programme
             for victims of trafficking. Returning victims  of  trafficking
             are able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases'
             may be able to stay there for  up  to  2  years.  During  this
             initial  period  after  return  victims  of  trafficking   are
             supported and protected. Unless the individual has  particular
             vulnerabilities such as physical or mental health issues, this
             option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable; whether it
             is must be determined on a case by case basis.


         f)   Once asked to leave the shelter a victim  of  trafficking  can
             live on her  own.  In  doing  so  she  will  face  significant
             challenges including, but not limited to,  stigma,  isolation,
             financial  hardship  and  uncertainty,  a  sense  of  physical
             insecurity and the subjective fear of being  found  either  by
             their families or former traffickers.  Some  women  will  have
             the capacity  to  negotiate  these  challenges  without  undue
             hardship. There will however be victims  of  trafficking  with
             characteristics,  such  as  mental  illness  or  psychological
             scarring, for whom living alone in these  circumstances  would
             not be reasonable.  Whether a particular appellant falls  into
             that category will call for a careful assessment  of  all  the
             circumstances.


         g)   Re-trafficking is a reality. Whether that risk exists  for  an
             individual claimant will turn in part on the factors that  led
             to the initial trafficking, and on her personal circumstances,
             including her background, age, and her willingness and ability
             to seek help from the authorities. For a proportion of victims
             of trafficking,  their  situations  may  mean  that  they  are
             especially vulnerable to re-trafficking, or being forced  into
             other exploitative situations.

         h)   Trafficked women  from  Albania  may  well  be  members  of  a
             particular social group on that account  alone.  Whether  they
             are at risk of persecution on account of such  membership  and
             whether they will be able to access sufficiency of  protection
             from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual
             circumstances including but not limited to the following:


                      1) The social status and  economic  standing  of  her
                         family
                      2)  The  level  of  education  of   the   victim   of
                         trafficking or her family
                      3) The  victim  of  trafficking's  state  of  health,
                         particularly her mental health
                      4) The presence of an illegitimate child
                      5) The area of origin
                      6) Age
                      7) What support network will be available.

6.   It was the Appellant's case that she had been  born  in  Kukes  in  the
    North of Albania to a family who abided  by  strict  moral  and  social
    standards. It was also her case that she had been groomed by a man  who
    she had thought to be her boyfriend and trafficked within  Albania  and
    to Italy and back to Albania for the purpose of sexual exploitation.

7.   When she arrived in the United Kingdom, she was pregnant and said  that
    the father of her  child  was  one  of  the  men  who  used  her  as  a
    prostitute. Therefore, she submitted that she  would  be  returning  to
    Albania with an illegitimate child.

8.   The Respondent had accepted that she was an Albanian national  who  had
    been born in Kukes. It was also not disputed that she was pregnant when
    she applied for asylum in the United  Kingdom.  However,  to  correctly
    apply TD & AD First-tier Tribunal Judge had to reach findings as to the
    other  characteristics  which  may  render  the  Appellant  liable   to
    persecution if removed to Albania.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn did
    not consider whether the Appellant had been deceived by  her  boyfriend
    and then prostituted. He made no findings about her  father's  attitude
    to a daughter who may have  transgressed  the  strict  code  of  honour
    practiced in Northern Albania.

9.   In addition, he did not make any findings about her potentially  having
    been trafficked internally within Albania and to and from Italy.

10.  Instead First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  concentrated  on  aspects  of  her
    journey to the United Kingdom and the events leading up to her claiming
    asylum and certain aspects of her account of  her  time  when  she  was
    being sexually exploited.

11.  For example, in paragraph  40  of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Quinn found that the Appellant had not  claimed  asylum  until  4
    November 2015. This was despite the fact that  at  both  her  screening
    interview and her substantive asylum  interview  the  Appellant  stated
    that she had arrived in the United Kingdom on 11 October  2018  and  at
    the hearing the Respondent had not  challenged  the  assertion  that  a
    solicitor had contacted the Home Office on her  behalf  on  12  October
    2018. It was also the Respondent's own account that the  Appellant  had
    first arrived at the Asylum Intake Unit in Croydon on 22  October  2015
    and had been given an  appointment  for  a  screening  interview  on  4
    November 2015. As a consequence, this finding  was  not  in  accordance
    with the totality of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.



12.  In paragraph 41 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn  found
    that she was not kept within a lorry for the whole of  her  journey  to
    the United Kingdom because she would have needed to use the toilet  and
    obtain food. In  reply  to  question  207  in  her  substantive  asylum
    interview she said that she was given a small amount of food during the
    journey. The record of proceeding compiled by counsel for the Appellant
    at the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn also stated  that
    the Appellant had stated during cross-examination  that  she  had  been
    provided with a bucket to use during the journey.

13.  In addition, First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn  disbelieved  her  account
    of her journey on the basis that she could have asked  to  alight  from
    the lorry during  the  journey  across  Europe.  There  is  nothing  to
    indicate that  this  point  was  ever  put  to  the  Appellant  by  the
    Respondent or by the Judge  There was also no evidence to suggest  that
    a member of a smuggling  gang would take the risk of  being  discovered
    letting a person out of a  lorry  or  that  a  driver  would  have  the
    authority to let a person leave part way through the journey.

14.  Furthermore, when considering whether there would be a  sufficiency  of
    protection or the possibility of  internal  flight  for  the  Appellant
    within Albania, the Judge failed to apply either the  country  guidance
    case or take into account the contents of the expert evidence. The role
    of both of these was to provide guidance as to the  general  background
    conditions in Albania and it was not the case of one being preferred to
    the other unless the contents of the expert report cast  doubt  on  the
    previous country guidance, which it did not appear to do.

15.  It would have been appropriate to doubt her account if it  was  clearly
    unsustainable or incredible. However,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    should not have been seeking  corroborative  evidence,  as  he  did  in
    paragraphs 51 and 52 of his decision.

16.  It was also  a  further  potential  error  to  take  into  account  the
    findings of the NRM  without  the  Judge  reminding  himself  that  the
    standard of proof applied during the NRM was higher  than  that  to  be
    applied during an asylum appeal. (See ES (s82NIA  2002)  Negative  NRM)
    [2018] UKUT 335)

17.  In addition, at paragraph 59 of his decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Quinn merely noted that the Appellant appeared to be vulnerable due  to
    her past experiences but noted that there was no report to say that she
    was suffering from any severe mental condition.  However,  her  medical
    notes indicated that she had been on  Sertraline,  an  anti-depressant,
    since 2015 and that she only stopped taking this medication for a short
    period in 2016 and was still on this medication. The reply to  the  IAC
    Notice of Hearing, dated 9 August 2018, also indicated that she  was  a
    vulnerable witness In addition, the record of proceedings indicate that
    she had said that she  was  suffering  from  depression  and  had  been
    referred to a psychiatrist. In the light of this  evidence,  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Quinn  should  have  applied  the  Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No  2  of  2010:  Child,vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant guidance, as found by the Court of Appel in AM  (Afghanistan)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 112.

18.  For all of these  reasons  there  were  errors  of  law  in  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Quinn's decision.

DECISION
(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Quinn or Foudy.

Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 26 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

