
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal: PA/09129/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 21 March 2019                     |on 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                             & UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMAD [U]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr I Halliday, of McGill & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  against  the  determination  of  FtT  Judge  Clough,
    promulgated on 15 June 2018, following a hearing on  29  January  2018.
    The decision should have included an explanation for a  delay  of  that
    length, but none is provided.

 2. In a letter dated 20 March 2019 the respondent suggests that the  judge
    failed to make clear findings, and that the case should be remitted  to
    the FtT.  However, we advised Mr Halliday (prior to the case coming  on
    for hearing) that we were not inclined to  agree,  and  that  we  would
    require to hear from him on the merits of the grounds.

 3. Having  considered  the  grounds  and  Mr  Halliday's  submissions,  we
    indicated that the decision did not fall to be set aside.

 4. Even  on  generally  favourable  credibility  findings,  there  was  no
    evidence before the FtT by which the claim on protection grounds  might
    rationally have been allowed.  There was nothing  to  show  that  there
    would be insufficiency of protection from the alleged risk.  Even  more
    obviously,  there  was  nothing  to  substantiate  that   the   alleged
    persecutors, the appellant's children in  Bangladesh,  would  have  the
    interest or ability to trace him on  his  return  to  such  a  populous
    country, or that it would be unduly harsh for him, as a man of 75, with
    only minor medical problems, and a source of income, to relocate.

 5. The case in the FtT naturally focused around the state of health of the
    appellant's wife, and on the situation if the spouses  were  to  return
    together. It is sadly the case that the appellant's wife  died  between
    the date of the hearing  and  the  date  of  the  determination.   This
    information was communicated to the FtT, as the judge  notes  at  [19],
    but no application was made for a supplementary hearing.  Sensibly,  in
    light of absence  of  such  application,  Mr  Halliday  refrained  from
    submitting that this is one of  those  exceptional  cases  where  delay
    amounted to error of law.

 6. There was nothing before the FtT by which the appeal  might  have  been
    allowed on article 8 grounds either; and if  that  matter  were  to  be
    revisited, there was no evidential basis for  finding  difficulty  over
    the appellant's integration in Bangladesh.

 7. The SSHD has  not  been  asked  to  consider  the  appellant's  current
    position, which is very different from when  his  wife  was  alive,  in
    terms of article 8.   Mr Govan indicated  that  consent  would  not  be
    given under section 85 of the 2002 Act for the matter to be  considered
    for the first time by a tribunal. If the UT or the FtT  were  to  reach
    the stage of making a fresh decision, that would be an  artificial  and
    pointless exercise.

 8. The appellant cannot advance through the present proceedings,  for  all
    or any of these reasons:

    (i)    the  FtT's  findings  are  sufficiently  clear  to  support  its
    conclusions, so no error of law was made; or

    (ii)   if the findings are insufficiently clear, there was no  evidence
    before the FtT by  which  the  appeal  might  have  been  allowed,  and
    therefore no basis for setting its decision aside; or

    (iii)  if the decision were to be  set  aside,  the  new  matter  which
    should be at the heart of the case cannot be  considered,  and  in  its
    absence the appeal is again bound to fail.

 9. We are not in a position to  resolve  the  case  according  to  current
    circumstances, but we have thought it worth recording  that  these  are
    very different.  The appellant would now return as a widower,  with  no
    issue of arranging for the care of his wife.  Time has passed,  perhaps
    increasing his links in the UK, including his bond with  his  daughter,
    which may be his strongest remaining tie.  His wife's  grave  is  here.
    We understand that he is likely to  make  further  submissions  to  the
    respondent  in  the  very  near  future.   We  do  not  say  that  such
    submissions are likely to succeed, as that must firstly be  decided  by
    the respondent on fully updated evidence, but we  would  not  rule  out
    success, and we would be  extremely  surprised  if  the  SSHD  did  not
    recognise matters as at least amounting to a fresh claim.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    [pic]


    8 April 2019
    UT Judge Macleman


