
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09807/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2018                           |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                              Sroosh Mohammadi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Sroosh Mohammadi, was born on 21 March  1996  and  is  a
    male citizen  of  Iran.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  dated  6  September   2016   refusing   him   international
    protection.  The First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Chohan)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 February 2018, dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Chohan has provided reasons why the appellant was not  a  genuine
    supporter of the KDPI but why his account of past events  in  Iran  was
    not credible.  Those findings have not been challenged by the appellant
    on appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The appellant challenges the  judge's
    assessment of his sur place activities in the United  Kingdom  (see  BA
    (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return)  Iran  CG  [2011]  UKUT  36
    (IAC)):

         "1   Given the large numbers of those who demonstrate here and  the
             publicity  which  demonstrators  receive,   for   example   on
             Facebook,  combined  with  the  inability   of   the   Iranian
             Government to monitor all returnees who have been involved  in
             demonstrations here, regard  must  be  had  to  the  level  of
             involvement of the individual here as well  as  any  political
             activity which the individual might have been involved in Iran
             before seeking asylum in Britain.


         2    (a) Iranians returning to Iran are  screened  on  arrival.   A
                  returnee who meets the  profile  of  an  activist  may  be
                  detained  while  searches  of  documentation   are   made.
                  Students, particularly  those  who  have  known  political
                  profiles are likely to be questioned as well as those  who
                  have exited illegally.


             (b)  There is not a real risk of  persecution  for  those  who
                  have exited Iran illegally or are  merely  returning  from
                  Britain. The conclusions of the Tribunal  in  the  country
                  guidance case of SB (risk on return -illegal exit) Iran CG
                  [2009] UKAIT 00053 are followed and endorsed.


             (c)  There is no evidence of the  use  of  facial  recognition
                  technology at the Imam Khomeini International airport, but
                  there are a  number  of  officials  who  may  be  able  to
                  recognize up to 200 faces at any one time. The  procedures
                  used by security at  the  airport  are  haphazard.  It  is
                  therefore possible that those whom the regime  might  wish
                  to question would not come to the attention of the  regime
                  on arrival. If, however, information is known about  their
                  activities abroad,  they  might  well  be  picked  up  for
                  questioning and/or transferred to a special court near the
                  airport in Tehran after they have returned home.


         3    It is important to consider the level of political involvement
             before considering the likelihood of the individual coming  to
             the attention of the authorities and  the  priority  that  the
             Iranian regime would give to tracing him.  It  is  only  after
             considering those factors that the issue  of  whether  or  not
             there is a real risk of his facing persecution on  return  can
             be assessed.


         4    The following are  relevant  factors  to  be  considered  when
             assessing  risk  on  return  having  regard   to   sur   place
             activities:


             (i)  Nature of sur place activity


                . Theme of demonstrations - what do the  demonstrators  want
                  (e.g.  reform  of  the  regime  through  to  its   violent
                  overthrow); how will they be characterised by the regime?


                . Role in demonstrations and political  profile  -  can  the
                  person  be  described  as  a   leader;   mobiliser   (e.g.
                  addressing  the  crowd),  organiser  (e.g.   leading   the
                  chanting); or simply a member of the crowd; if the  latter
                  is he active or passive (e.g. does  he  carry  a  banner);
                  what is his motive, and is this relevant to the profile he
                  will have in the eyes of the regime>


                . Extent of participation - has the person attended  one  or
                  two demonstrations or is he a regular participant?


                . Publicity attracted - has a demonstration attracted  media
                  coverage in the United Kingdom or the home country; nature
                  of  that  publicity  (quality  of  images;  outlets  where
                  stories appear etc)?


             (ii) Identification risk


                . Surveillance of demonstrators - assuming the  regime  aims
                  to identify demonstrators against it how does  it  do  so,
                  through, filming them, having agents  who  mingle  in  the
                  crowd, reviewing images/recordings of demonstrations etc?


                . Regime's capacity  to  identify  individuals  -  does  the
                  regime  have  advanced   technology   (e.g.   for   facial
                  recognition); does it  allocate  human  resources  to  fit
                  names to faces in the crowd?


             (iii)    Factors triggering inquiry/action on return


                . Profile - is the person known as a committed  opponent  or
                  someone with a significant political profile; does he fall
                  within a category which the regime regards  as  especially
                  objectionable?


                . Immigration history - how did the person leave the country
                  (illegally; type of visa); where has the person been  when
                  abroad; is the timing and method of return more likely  to
                  lead to inquiry and/or being  detained  for  more  than  a
                  short period and ill-treated (overstayer; forced return)?


             (iv) Consequences of identification


                . Is there differentiation between  demonstrators  depending
                  on the level of their political  profile  adverse  to  the
                  regime?


             (v)  Identification risk on return


                . Matching  identification  to  person  -  if  a  person  is
                  identified is that information systematically  stored  and
                  used; are border posts geared to the task?"


 3. At [17], the First-tier Tribunal judge  wrote:  "I  do  find  that  the
    appellant was attending the demonstrations  in  order  to  enhance  his
    protection claim and nothing more.  As such, I find the appellant's sur
    place activities are of a very low level which would not put him at any
    risk on return to Iran." There are two findings here: first,  that  the
    appellant's motives for demonstrating were not "genuine" and, secondly,
    that the appellant has such a low  profile  within  the  demonstrations
    that he would not be at risk.  The judge granting permission  correctly
    observed that genuineness of motive was irrelevant; all that matters is
    whether the appellant's activities would expose him to risk on  return.
    I do not consider that the judge's  error  is  material.   The  judge's
    conclusion  that  the  appellant  has   such   low   profile   in   the
    demonstrations (not being an activist or member of the KDPI) and  would
    not be identified as a participant in the demonstrations on  return  to
    Iran was plainly open to him. I agree with Mr McVeety's submission that
    there  is  no  evidence  that  the  Iranian  authorities  have   facial
    recognition  technology  which  would  enable  them  to  recognise  the
    appellant from photographs.  Even if they were able to do so, there  is
    no  evidence  that  such  information  would  be  available  to   those
    interrogating returnees in Tehran Airport.  There is also  no  evidence
    that  the  appellant  would  be  asked   specifically   to   tell   his
    interrogators whether he had  attended  demonstrations  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Although the judge had not referred  specifically  to  BA,  I
    find that the facts, as  he  found  them,  do  not  indicate  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return to Iran both by  reference  to  BA
    and also background material which was before the Tribunal.

 4. It is also pleaded by the appellant that he would be at risk on  return
    to Iran merely on account of being Kurdish.  The judge deals with  that
    aspect of the claim at [18].  I cannot find that he has  erred  in  law
    either as asserted in the grounds or at all.  I find that  the  judge's
    conclusion ("there is nothing to suggest that the appellant has been or
    is  a  man  of  profile  within  the  KDPI.   The  appellant  was   one
    demonstrator amongst many.")  effectively disposed of  that  aspect  of
    the appeal.

Notice of Decision

 5. This appeal is dismissed.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

