
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09785/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|teams)                               |On 15 June 2021                      |
|On 28 May 2021                       |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    MJNNM
                       (Anonymity direction made made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Mughal of AMB Advocates & Accountants Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety Senior Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Kudhail ('the Judge') promulgated on 27 January  2001,
       in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal who found it to be arguable that  the  Judge  erred  in  (a)
       failing to follow and apply the Presidential guidance  on  vulnerable
       witnesses, (b) failure to consider the appellant's  PTSD,  depression
       and anxiety in the credibility  assessment  and  (c)  the  article  8
       assessment outside the Immigration Rules in relation to family life.
    3. There was before the Judge a letter from Freedom of Torture, dated 20
       March 2020, and a letter from Notre  Dame  Refugee  Centre,  dated  5
       March 2020, which  it  is  said  the  Judge  did  not  consider  when
       assessing  the  appellant's  credibility,  especially   finding   the
       appellant to be "vague" in  her  evidence  when  she  has  a  medical
       condition affecting the manner in which she gives her evidence.
    4. The Presidential Guidance makes it  clear  a  Judge  is  required  to
       record whether it is  accepted  the  appellant  is  a  vulnerable  or
       sensitive witness and the effect that any vulnerability  had  on  the
       assessment of the evidence given. It is recognised that failure to do
       so and to follow the guidance may be capable  of  giving  rise  to  a
       ground of appeal.
    5. Mr McVeety accepted that  the  Judge  did  not  mention  the  medical
       condition and did not appear to have given  proper  consideration  to
       whether  the  appellant  is  a  vulnerable  witness   and   how   her
       vulnerability was factored into the assessment  of  the  evidence.  I
       find for this reason the appellant  has  established  material  legal
       error with specific reference to the guidance of the Court of  Appeal
       in AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.
    6. As the appellant has not had a proper assessment of the  weight  that
       should be given to her evidence, she has not received a fair hearing.
       I find that the only proper course is for  the  decision  to  be  set
       aside with no preserved findings and for the appeal to be remitted to
       the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be heard afresh by
       a judge other than Judge Kudhail.

Decision

    7. The Judge materially erred in law. I set  the  decision  aside.  This
       appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor
       House to be heard de novo.

Anonymity.

       The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.  I  make
       such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 1 June 2021
