
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09818/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th December 2019                         |On 11th March 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     MC
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Ostadsaffar of Counsel, instructed by
Longfellow Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. In a decision promulgated on 9 October 2019, I found an error of law in
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Richards-Clarke  promulgated
    on 28 March 2019 and set aside the decision.  A copy of  the  error  of
    law decision is contained in the annex and the history set out  therein
    will not be repeated here save as where  necessary.   The  hearing  was
    adjourned for remaking in the Upper Tribunal on the  relatively  narrow
    issue of whether the Appellant would be at risk on return  to  Zimbabwe
    as a member of the MDC who was also active in the Zimbabwe Human Rights
    Organisation (the "ZHRO").  For ease I continue to refer to the parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, with MC as  the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. In the error of law decision  and  further  directions  issued  to  the
    parties on 5 November  2019,  I  preserved  the  findings  of  fact  in
    paragraph 43 of the First-tier Tribunal decision, that the Appellant is
    a member of the MDC and active in ZHRO.

Immigration Law and Rules Relevant to the Appellant


 3. So far as relevant to this appeal, section 32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007 states that a foreign criminal is a person who is  not  a  British
    Citizen, who is convicted in the  United  Kingdom  of  an  offence  and
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12  months.   Section
    32(5) of that Act requires the Secretary of State to make a deportation
    order in respect of a foreign criminal unless one of the exceptions  in
    section 33 applies.  The  first  exception  is  where  removal  of  the
    foreign criminal would breach  his  or  her  rights  protected  by  the
    European Convention on Human Rights or would place the  United  Kingdom
    in breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention.

Refugee Convention

 1. It is for an Appellant to show that he is a refugee.  By Article  1A(2)
    of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person  who  is  out  of  the
    country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a well-founded fear
    of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality or membership
    of a particular  social  group  or  political  opinion,  is  unable  or
    unwilling to avail him or herself of the protection of the  country  of
    origin.

 2. The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to asylum is decided  on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities.   This  was  expressed  as  a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That  basis  of  probability
    not only applies to the history of the matter and to the  situation  at
    the date of decision, but also to the question of  persecution  in  the
    future if the Appellant were to be returned.

 3. Under the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006, a person  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
    refugee if they fall within the definition set out in Article 1A of the
    Refugee Convention (see above) and are not excluded by Articles 1D,  1E
    or 1F of the Refugee Convention  (Regulation  7  of  the  Qualification
    Regulations).

Country Guidance

 4. The current country guidance in relation to Zimbabwe is contained in CM
    (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059  (IAC),
    from which neither party sought any departure.  So far as  relevant  to
    this appeal, the guidance is as follows:

         1) As a general matter, there  is  significantly  less  politically
            motivated violence in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the  situation
            considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the  evidence  does
            not show that, as a general  matter,  the  return  of  a  failed
            asylum seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC
            profile, would result in a person facing a real risk of  him  to
            demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU PF.

         2)  The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of
            a person without ZANU PF connections, returning from the  United
            Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area of Zimbabwe,
            other than Matabeleland North or  Matabeleland  South.   Such  a
            person may well find it difficult to  avoid  adverse  attention,
            amounting to  serious  ill-treatment,  from  ZANU  PF  authority
            figures and those they control.  The adverse attention may  well
            involve a requirement to demonstrate loyalty to  ZANU  PF,  with
            the prospect of serious harm in the event of  failure.   Persons
            who have shown themselves not to be favourably disposed to  ZANU
            PF are entitled to international protection, whether or not they
            could and would do whatever might be  necessary  to  demonstrate
            such loyalty (RT (Zimbabwe).

         3) The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural areas and
            there may be reasons why a particular  individual,  although  at
            first sight appearing to fall within the category  described  in
            the preceding  paragraph,  in  reality  does  not  do  so.   For
            example, the evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,
            ZANU PF power structures or other means of coercion are weak  or
            absent.

         4) In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
            Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly  unlikely  to
            face significant difficulty from ZANU PF elements, including the
            security forces, even  if  the  returnee  is  a  MDC  member  or
            supporter.  A person may, however, be able to show that  his  or
            her village or area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of
            a ZANU PF chief, or the like.

         5) A returnee  to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
            difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density  area.
            Whilst the socio-economic situation  in  high-density  areas  is
            more  challenging,  in  general  a  person   without   ZANU   PF
            connections will not face significant problems there  (including
            a "loyalty test"), unless  he  or  she  has  a  significant  MDC
            profile, which might cause him or her to feature on  a  list  of
            those targeted for harassment,  or  would  otherwise  engage  in
            political activities likely to attract the adverse attention  of
            ZANU PF, or  would  be  reasonably  likely  to  engage  in  such
            activities, but for  fear  of  thereby  coming  to  the  adverse
            attention of ZANU PF.

         6) A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not  suffer  the  adverse
            attention of ZANU PF, including the security forces, even if  he
            or she has a significant MDC profile.

         7) ...

         8) Internal relocation from a rural area to Harare or  (subject  to
            what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in general, more realistic;
            but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in  which  persons  are
            reasonably likely to find themselves will need to be considered,
            in order to determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly
            harsh to expect them to relocate.

         9) The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly improved since  the  period
            considered in RN.  The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by
            the US dollar and the South African rand has  ended  the  recent
            hyperinflation.  The availability of food  and  other  goods  in
            shops is likewise improved, as has the availability of utilities
            in Harare.  Although these improvements are not  being  felt  by
            everyone, with 15% of the population still requiring  food  aid,
            there has not been any deterioration and humanitarian  situation
            since late 2008.  Zimbabwe has a large informal economy, ranging
            from street ages to a home-based enterprises,  which  (depending
            on the circumstances) returnees may be expected to enter.

        10) ...

        11) In certain cases, persons  found  to  be  seriously  lacking  in
            credibility may properly be found as result to  have  failed  to
            show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not,  in  fact,
            be regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU PF and/or (B)  that
            they would be returning to  a  socio-economic  milieu  in  which
            problems with ZANU PF will  arise.   This  important  point  was
            identified in RN ... and remains valid.

The Appellant's Immigration and criminal history

 5. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on 20 December 1973,  who
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in  April  2004,  claiming
    asylum on 27 April 2004, which was  refused  on  4  June  2004  by  the
    Respondent.  In April 2005, the Appellant was deemed to be an absconder
    for failing to comply with temporary admission restrictions.

 6. On 7 December 2005,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  the  first  of
    numerous driving offences, the detail of which is not necessary to  set
    out in this decision.  In light of the Appellant's convictions, he  was
    served with a liability to deport notice on 12  October  2010,  with  a
    further liability to deport notice on 23 November 2010  and  finally  a
    notice of decision to deport on  20  December  2010.   The  Appellant's
    appeal against deportation was dismissed on 25 May 2011 and his  appeal
    rights were exhausted on 21 July 2011.

 7. The Appellant made further representations on 29 July 2011  which  were
    refused under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules  on  19  September
    2011.  Further representations followed on a number of occasions up  to
    and including 15 February 2013.  These were refused on  11  March  2014
    with no right of appeal and a signed Deportation Order was then made on
    8 April 2014.

 8. The Appellant made further protection and human rights  representations
    on 17 November 2015, 9 February 2016 and 4 March 2016.   The  Appellant
    was convicted of further motoring offences on  15  December  2015,  for
    which he was sentenced to 16 weeks imprisonment and  disqualified  from
    driving.

Explanation for refusal

 9. Upon consideration of the latest further  submissions,  the  Respondent
    accepted that a fresh  claim  had  been  raised  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules but refused the  protection  and
    human rights claims.  The Appellant's asylum claim was based on a  risk
    of return to Zimbabwe on the grounds of political  opinion  as  an  MDC
    supporter who had  engaged  in  sur  place  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He also claimed a fear return of his father who was a  senior
    official in Zanu PF, and of his uncle.  The Respondent referred back to
    the  adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  the  Tribunal  when  the
    Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  in  2011  and  referred   to   the
    Appellant's use of multiple identities  and  previous  documents  being
    relied upon, including birth certificates, which were not genuine.

10. Overall the Respondent considered that the Appellant had no significant
    political profile United Kingdom, that he had only undertaken sur place
    activities to attempt to bolster his  claim  and  that  he  was  not  a
    genuine activist.  In any event, the Appellant could relocate to an MDC
    stronghold in Zimbabwe and there would be no risk on return  to  there.
    Essentially  for  the  same  reasons,  there  would  be  no  need   for
    humanitarian protection and no breach  of  Articles  2  and  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

11. The Appellant's claimed mental health problems were taken into  account
    but the Respondent concluded that treatment was available on return  to
    Zimbabwe.  The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  the
    Appellant had provided no evidence of the same and there was  no  claim
    that he had any dependent children in the United Kingdom  either.   The
    private life exceptions to deportation were not met and there  were  no
    very compelling circumstances to outweigh the public  interest  in  the
    Appellant's deportation.  Finally, the Respondent refused to revoke the
    Deportation Order pursuant to paragraph 390 the Immigration Rules.

The Appellant's claim

12. In his first written statement for the purposes of the  present  appeal
    proceedings, signed and dated 10 May 2017, the Appellant describes  his
    family in Zimbabwe,  including  his  daughters  (at  the  date  of  the
    statement aged 15 and 17).  The statement reiterates, in  essence,  the
    Appellant's initial claim and account that was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in 2011 for his appeal against  the  earlier  refusal  of  his
    asylum claim.  The Appellant describes being a founding member of ZHRO,
    attending demonstrations and attending meetings.  The remainder of  the
    statement responds to the reasons for refusal letter and adds that  his
    father sends people to his wife's parents to threaten them and tell his
    wife to leave him.

13. In his written statement signed and dated 1 March 2019,  the  Appellant
    states that he  attends  the  vigil  every  Wednesday  outside  of  the
    Zimbabwean embassy and he plays the  drums.   He  has  been  confronted
    about this by the CIO because of the disturbing noise and attention  of
    passers-by to the cause, such that the Appellant's name  and  face  are
    known.  The vigil is recorded live on Facebook and  some  are  also  on
    YouTube.  The Appellant has attended other demonstrations and organised
    petitions.

14. The Appellant confirms that he intends to carry on with his  activities
    if returned to Zimbabwe, but has no place to return to other  than  his
    home area.  The Appellant is worried for his daughters, particularly as
    one has a young baby and was recently widowed; the  other  is  at  home
    being cared for by a friend of the Appellant's mother and the Appellant
    is unable to provide financial support to either of his daughters.

15. In his  written  statement  signed  and  dated  5  December  2019,  the
    Appellant states that he is an active member of the MDC-T with the  MDC
    High Wycombe and Slough branch in the United Kingdom,  taking  part  in
    the party's activities at branch level,  including  attending  meetings
    and taking a lead role in demonstrations.  In addition,  the  Appellant
    supports other organisations  and  groups  working  towards  change  in
    Zimbabwe, including the  ZHRO  and  the  Restoration  of  Human  Rights
    Zimbabwe (the "ROHR").

16. The Appellant was a founding  member  of  the  ZHRO  in  2016  and  was
    selected to be in the Executive Committee as Human Resources team.  The
    Appellant recruited over 300 members.  He attends vigils (beating drums
    outside the embassy), demonstrations and an annual walk  from  Brighton
    to London to raise funds and awareness.  In addition, he  assists  with
    organising visits for those from Zimbabwe and attends  events  for  MDC
    leaders when they come to the United Kingdom.  The statement includes a
    number of photographs of the Appellant at such events.   The  Appellant
    is named (using a mixture  of  his  two  other  identities)  on  flyers
    promoting the Wednesday vigil.

17. The Appellant states that he will never stop being an activist and will
    continue to work for sustainable change in Zimbabwe.

18. In 2014 the  Appellant  met  his  wife,  they  married  culturally  and
    continue to live together.

19. There are a number of letters and  documents  from  Mr  John  Burke  in
    support of the Appellant.  In a document titled  'Witness  Declaration'
    signed and dated 8 May 2017, Mr Burke states  that  he  has  known  the
    Appellant since 2012 and is prepared to act as a witness for him.   The
    document sets out generic material about  the  dangers  of  protest  in
    Zimbabwe but contains no information about the Appellant  specifically.
    There is a separate 'Activity  Record'  about  the  Appellant  dated  7
    February 2017 signed by Mr Burke on ZHRO headed paper.

20. In a letter dated 5 December 2019, Mr Burke describes the Appellant  as
    one of the founder  members  of  ZHRO  with  a  substantial  attendance
    record, including at the Wednesday  vigil  (with  over  80  attendances
    between March 2017 and  December  2019);  at  two  London  ZHRO  branch
    meetings (in October 2017 and June 2018)  and  one  national  executive
    meeting (in January  2018).   The  letter  then  includes  details  and
    photographs of the Appellant's involvement at  a  number  of  what  are
    described as high-profile demonstrations, including the presentation of
    a petition to 10 Downing Street in January 2019 (although the Appellant
    did not attend the actual presentation of the petition as he failed  to
    obtain the necessary  security  clearance  to  do  so  because  of  his
    criminal convictions), a remembrance event in  February  2019,  an  MDC
    politician visit in June 2019  and  a  protest  in  October  2019.   An
    appendix to  the  letter  contains  extracts  of  news  articles  about
    conditions in Zimbabwe.

21. The bundles contain two statements from FM, the Appellant's  wife.   In
    her signed statement dated 3 May 2017, she states that  she  first  met
    the Appellant in 2012 and they underwent a traditional marriage  before
    living together. FM states that she is afraid to go  back  to  Zimbabwe
    because of threats from the Appellant's father.

22. In her unsigned statement dated 1 March 2019, FM  states  that  she  is
    traditionally married to the Appellant and at the date of the statement
    was four months pregnant.  She was granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    at the end of 2015 and works as an adult registered nurse.   FM  refers
    to the  Appellant's  political  activities,  his  current  health,  his
    concern for his two daughters and states that the Appellant's father is
    always threatening both her and the Appellant.

23. FM did not attend the hearing, nor was there  any  further  or  updated
    evidence from her prior to the hearing before me.

24. The Appellant's bundle  also  contains  various  letters,  minutes  and
    activity records primarily from the ZHRO and MDC, photographs, as  well
    as newspaper articles and background country evidence  about  Zimbabwe.
    It is not necessary  to  refer  to  each  piece  of  evidence  in  this
    decision, but I have taken it all into account even if it  is  not  all
    expressly referred to herein.

The hearing

25. The Appellant attended the oral  hearing,  confirmed  his  details  and
    adopted his written statements dated 10 May 2017, 1 March  2019  and  5
    December 2019.

26. The Appellant confirmed that he was a member of the  Slough  branch  of
    the MDC in the United Kingdom and as a  member  he  attended  meetings,
    demonstrations and generally  promoted  the  MDC.   Meetings  are  held
    monthly in the first week, demonstrations were irregularly and reactive
    to events in Zimbabwe.

27. The Appellant met Mr Burke at the vigil outside the Zimbabwean  embassy
    in  2014  and  co-founded  the  ZHRO  with  him  in  October  2016,  an
    organisation for the restoration of human rights following on from  the
    ROHR group which has suffered from corruption.  The Appellant  sees  Mr
    Burke on weekly basis at a vigil.  There was  trouble  at  one  of  the
    vigils in January 2019 when the President's picture was taken  and  put
    upside down, following which questions were asked by the CIO.

28. The Appellant's wife did not attend the oral hearing to  give  evidence
    as she had just completed a night shift.  The Appellant confirmed  that
    he lives with her and continues to be in a relationship with her.

29. In cross-examination, the Appellant was asked about further details  on
    his latest written  statement  which  were  not  contained  in  earlier
    statements.  The Appellant suggested in relation to his claimed role in
    the ZHRO as the Executive Committee Human Rights team that he had meant
    to put it in earlier statements and he could not give a reason  why  he
    had previously failed to mention having recruited  300  people  to  the
    ZHRO.

30. Mr Kotas asked the Appellant about different MDC factions in  Zimbabwe.
    The Appellant stated that he was just a member of  the  MDC  and  could
    name two different factions,  with  a  split  after  the  elections  in
    2008/2009 and a further division in the last five or six years  but  he
    could not recall the date.  He named a number of factions.

31. The Appellant  started  attending  vigils  outside  of  the  Zimbabwean
    embassy as soon as  he  was  released  from  detention  in  2012.   The
    Wednesday vigil started in March 2017  and  before  that  there  was  a
    Saturday vigil mixed with the Zimbabwe vigil run by Rose Brandon.   The
    Appellant was a member of the Slough branch of the MDC because  he  had
    attended before and it is an active branch, although he could not  give
    further details, for example about the journey to  such  meetings  from
    his home in Gravesend.

32. In relation to the ZHRO, the Appellant did not initially know how  many
    people founded the organisation, but accepted that the number  was  26.
    On the front desk he handed out pamphlets and  signed  a  register  for
    people.  The Appellant took part in  London  branch  meetings  and  had
    attended more than two.   He  could  not  explain  why  only  two  were
    referred to in the letter he relied on in evidence.

33. The Appellant was asked about Mugabe's deposition from power, which  he
    said was in 2017 or 2018 but  could  not  remember  exactly  when  even
    though it was a significant event.  When referred to the minutes of the
    ZHRO meeting after this event, the Appellant could not  identify  where
    the issue was discussed and stated that he thought that  it  would  not
    have been discussed at the time because it didn't have any value.   The
    meetings are about matters in the United Kingdom and wasn't relevant to
    mention.

34. It was suggested to the Appellant that he was not a genuine activist or
    supporter and had joined the ZHRO purely to bolster his  asylum  claim.
    In response he stated that he is a  powerful  activist,  attending  the
    vigil every Wednesday and that  the  organisation  has  more  important
    matters to discuss than Mugabe being ousted.  The Appellant stated that
    on return to Zimbabwe he  would  continue  to  be  politically  active,
    having been a member of the MDC in Zimbabwe and in the United Kingdom.

35. Mr John Burke attended the oral  hearing,  confirmed  his  details  and
    adopted his written statements dated 7 February 2017, 8 May 2017 and  5
    December 2019; with one correction that  he  had  known  the  Appellant
    since 2014 and not 2012.  Mr Burke had become involved in the  Zimbabwe
    vigil in late 2013.  He sees  the  Appellant  normally  weekly  at  the
    vigil, probably three times a month.

36. In cross-examination,  Mr  Burke  stated  that  he  became  politically
    involved in 2014 because of the injustice in Zimbabwe and having  found
    out about the problems there.  He has  given  evidence  in  support  of
    asylum appeals before the Tribunal for five or  six  other  people,  to
    attest to their political activities.  Mr Burke believed all of them to
    be true activists and would not comment on whether he had any suspicion
    of people bolstering their claim as it was a matter for their belief.

37. The ZHRO has a signed-up membership of about 350, including  50  to  75
    core activists.  All of them are asylum seekers in the United  Kingdom,
    with some having been granted asylum.  Mr Burke was  questioned  as  to
    whether all of these people were genuine asylum seekers or  whether  he
    questioned whether they may have other  motives.   His  view  was  that
    everyone was fleeing from  persecution  and  suffering  and  he  didn't
    question their motives at all.  He thought all of these asylum  seekers
    were genuine and if he had  the  choice  he  would  give  leave  'carte
    blanche' to them all from Zimbabwe.  Mr Burke found it  insulting  when
    it was suggested that he may not have made an objective  assessment  of
    the situation.

38. In relation to the Appellant, Mr Burke stated that he was  an  activist
    who had handed in petitions to government and had  made  complaints  to
    the embassy.   The  Appellant  was  well  aware  of  the  situation  in
    Zimbabwe, receiving information from  friends  and  family  about  life
    there.  Mr Burke asserted that the Appellant was aware that Mugabe  had
    been deposed on 17 November 2017 and when asked if  it  was  surprising
    that he did not, stated that  the  Tribunal  was  an  intimidating  and
    stressful environment, such that he would understand if  the  Appellant
    was weird on dates or times.

39. Mr Burke considered that the Appellant would be at risk  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe because of his profile as part of the organisation, which  had
    a huge media presence including four websites, five Facebook pages  and
    two Facebook groups.  The  Appellant  attended  vigils,  has  submitted
    petitions to other embassies, complained to the BBC about sanctions and
    there was an activity record  of  his  involvement.   This  included  a
    record of the Appellant's attendance at vigil since 2012, a date  which
    Mr Burke did not stand by as he had not checked the details and  relied
    upon records kept by Rose Benton who keeps zimvigil registers.

40. As to branch meetings, Mr Burke attends only occasionally as he doesn't
    like meetings and hasn't been to  any  recently.   He  did  attend  the
    branch meeting in December 2017 but did not recall Mugabe being deposed
    being discussed at the meeting.  When asked why not,  Mr  Burke  stated
    that this was a fledgling organisation run by volunteers and  amateurs.
    He made a similar  comment  about  the  minutes  taken  and  repetition
    between them, he was not concerned by a bit of copying and pasting.  Mr
    Burke was  asked  about  another  significant  event,  the  anniversary
    demonstration which was not referred to  in  the  next  branch  meeting
    minutes, about which he  said  it  wasn't  surprising  that  it  wasn't
    discussed, it was a congratulation of fundraising only and  he  was  at
    the meeting.  He confirmed that meetings did take place, opposite where
    the vigil is held that he doesn't remember the name  of  the  building.
    When prompted that it was the Royal Festival Hall, he stated it was  in
    the green room on the fourth floor.

41. Mr Kotas suggested that either the ZRHO was not a genuine organisation,
    or if it was it was irrelevant in  that  it  didn't  deal  with  actual
    issues going on in Zimbabwe.  Mr Burke stated that it was all  genuine,
    it was a voluntary organisation but not irrelevant.

42. I asked Mr Burke further about the organisation and planned events.  He
    stated that the anniversary demonstration  was  not  organised  through
    branch meetings but on a spur of the moment basis to avoid  information
    being leaked in advance.  There was no plan to burn a portrait  at  the
    event but someone bought one  along.   He  described  the  ZHRO  as  an
    amateur organisation, but one which had a successful event  which  must
    have been publicised as lots of  people  attended.   New  members  were
    recruited to the organisation  through  attendance  at  the  vigil  and
    filling out membership forms.  Members are actively  recruited  through
    word-of-mouth.  As to the Appellant's role in recruitment, Mr Burke was
    sure that he had bought a  few  members  along.   When  told  that  the
    Appellant had claimed to have recruited  over  300  members,  Mr  Burke
    stated that this was an  exaggeration  which  he  described  as  poetic
    licence.

43. Mr Burke was asked if the Appellant had a formal role within the  ZHRO,
    to which he stated that he didn't like titles and there was no hard and
    fast organisation or roles as he did not see them  as  beneficial.   To
    the extent that particular roles did  exist,  the  Appellant  would  be
    described by default as recruitment officer as he sent a few membership
    forms on.  When asked if this could be described as  a  member  of  the
    Human Resource team, Mr Burke said 'sort of, yeah'.  The Appellant is a
    member of the confidential platform, a Facebook page and Whatsapp group
    in relation to marketing and that is the form through  which  decisions
    are made, such as on planning demonstrations.

44. I asked Mr Burke if he considered that all Zimbabweans are at risk.  He
    stated that they were not because there was a  divided  diaspora  which
    included Zanu PF infiltrators and members who have been  granted  leave
    and citizenship as a matter of underhand tactics.  Mr  Burke  confirmed
    that he did not vet any members  of  the  ZHRO  and  it  was  always  a
    possibility that Zanu PF members had sought to join.

45. In re-examination, Mr Burke  stated  that  he  used  several  different
    Whatsapp groups  to  communicate  with  members,  which  was  the  most
    effective way to communicate  with  people  spread  around  the  United
    Kingdom.  There were only two or three people involved in ZHRO who have
    any experience of running  an  organisation  and  Mr  Burke  encourages
    independence amongst members as the organisation  grows  and  develops.
    He would be involved in the allocation of titles  and  responsibilities
    to some extent but also wanted to develop ownership and  a  culture  of
    delegation to smaller groups.

Closing submissions

46. In closing on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Kotas  submitted  that  this
    appeal had, in light of the evidence given, become one in  which  there
    was a significant issue  of  credibility  and  extensive  findings  and
    background  evidence  were  not  in  the  circumstances  likely  to  be
    required.  It was accepted that extant country guidance probably  still
    applies since 2013, Zanu PF remain in power in Zimbabwe, albeit with  a
    different leader, with the same political structures and  tensions  and
    same desire for consolidation of power.

47. The issue is whether the Appellant has a  significant  MDC  profile  or
    whether he would be at risk on return as a political agitator perceived
    as anti-Zanu PF and a threat to  the  regime.   There  is  a  preserved
    finding that the Appellant did not leave Zimbabwe for  the  reasons  he
    claimed, he was not previously a member  of  the  MDC  and  could  have
    internally relocated.  The First-tier Tribunal found in  2011  that  he
    had no  significant  MDC  profile  and  no  real  risk  of  needing  to
    demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF.  The Appellant must therefore  rely  on
    sur place activities.  It  is  not  necessarily  the  case  that  those
    protesting outside of the Zimbabwean embassy are at risk,  but  a  fact
    sensitive  assessment  is  required.   The  Appellant   has   gradually
    exaggerated his involvement in various organisations and there needs to
    be a quantitative assessment of his role.

48. In May 2017, the Appellant stated in his written statement that he  was
    a member of and attending meetings of the MDC in April 2017, but  there
    was little other evidence of what he did.  Only in his statement  dated
    5 December 2019 as  any  detail  of  the  Appellant's  activities,  for
    example that he had recruited 300 people to  the  ZHRO,  which  was  in
    direct contradiction with the  evidence  of  Mr  Burke.   It  was  also
    suggested that it was astonishing that the Appellant did  not  know  of
    Mugabe being deposed there is nothing to suggest  that  this  Appellant
    has any memory or mental impairment.  The Appellant was  not  aware  of
    different splinter groups of the MDC which  have  existed  since  2014,
    which is highly relevant given that he has been protesting and  stating
    that he has been a political activist since 2012, but does not know the
    background to his own party or recent party information.  The Appellant
    did not know about the founding members of ZHRO despite claiming to  be
    one of them.

49. Although Mr Kotas did not go so far  as  submitting  that  the  meeting
    minutes for the ZHRO were fabricated, what  they  did  shows  that  the
    organisation itself is  totally  irrelevant  and/or  incompetent.   The
    meeting minutes contain no discussion of any significant events such as
    Mugabe being deposed or what may happen next and it is no answer for Mr
    Burke to simply say that this is an amateur organisation and it is  not
    credible to simply say that the deposition of Mugabe, for  example,  is
    not relevant.

50. Mr Kotas invited me place little weight on the  evidence  of  Mr  Burke
    given that he was unsure in his evidence on key issues, he did not  vet
    or undertake any checks on members of ZHRO and stated that most members
    were seeking asylum.  Mr Burke was unaware of the  Appellant's  claimed
    role  within  his  own  organisation.   He  also  undermined  his   own
    credibility in seeking to criticise the Respondent and claim  that  all
    of those like the Appellant are at risk.  He  is  not  a  dispassionate
    activist for Zimbabwe and the true picture is that his organisation  is
    an ad hoc rather than a formal one.  It cannot be perceived as anything
    other than self-serving given the contents of the ZHRO meeting  minutes
    which were loosely drafted and irrelevant.

51. Although it can be the case that a fabricated asylum  claim  can  still
    place a person at risk on return to their home country,  this  was  not
    the case in Zimbabwe, where a significant MDC profile is required which
    this Appellant simply does not have.  The  latest  country  information
    contained  in  the  Country  Policy  and  Information  note   Zimbabwe:
    opposition to the government, February 2019 (the  "CPIN"),  notes  that
    violence often flares around election time and that smaller  opposition
    parties are less likely to be of adverse interest to the authorities.

52. Mr Kotas submitted that there was no need to descend into the detail of
    the situation in the Appellant's home area or as to  whether  he  could
    safely relocate to Harare  given  that  he  has  not  been  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities in the past and would not now be  perceived
    as having  any  significant  MDC  or  anti-Zanu  PF  profile.   If  the
    Appellant was interviewed on return, he could give the honest  response
    that he attended protests in London for the purposes of an asylum claim
    only.

53. In closing on behalf of the Appellant, Ms  Ostadsaffer  submitted  that
    the Appellant was nervous and this was  a  stressful  environment  such
    that the credibility issues that the Respondent had picked on in  terms
    of  missing  information,  was  not  significant.   The  Appellant  had
    answered questions put to him which were not specific as to  dates  and
    information.  In relation to the absence of discussion of key issues in
    branch meeting minutes, Mr Burke's evidence was that there  were  other
    forms of communication used, including Whatsapp groups.

54. The Appellant has accepted that he is only a member of the MDC  and  it
    was not suggested that he has or  had  a  prominent  role  within  that
    organisation, but he does have a significant role in the  ZHRO.   There
    are pictures of him at the vigil and he is linked to an MDC  member  as
    part of his profile opposing the regime.  There is  online  information
    about the  Appellant  containing  his  photograph,  his  attendance  at
    vigils, and his role within the ZHRO.  It was accepted however that the
    information  that  is  available  online  only  shows  the  Appellant's
    attendance at vigils.

55. On the Appellant's account, he plays the  drums  outside  the  Zimbabwe
    Embassy which has led to friction with the CIO and him being approached
    on numerous occasions.  The Appellant is known to them as  an  opponent
    and this is likely to be communicated to the Zimbabwean authorities  on
    return which itself places the  Appellant  at  risk.   The  Appellant's
    claim is also that he is likely to  continue  to  engage  in  political
    activity on return to Zimbabwe and will continue to be an activist.

56. In relation to the CPIN, it was submitted that this contained  evidence
    of violence against  MDC  activists  and  discrimination  against  both
    senior and low-level party members, who are subject  to  harassment  by
    the current regime.  The Appellant has attended vigils and is known  to
    CIOs in the embassy, which has raised his  profile  and  the  level  of
    discrimination, threats and violence he would face on return.  He is  a
    prominent opponent and activist.

57. Counsel for the  Appellant  accepted  that  there  is  nothing  in  the
    background country information about the ZHRO, only general information
    in the CPIN about opposition activists, with a focus  on  organisations
    within   Zimbabwe.    Other   background   evidence   does   point   to
    discrimination against members of the opposition, for example the  lack
    of food distribution to  such  people.   It  was  also  suggested  that
    violence and human rights violations were not just linked  to  election
    periods, but were ongoing and around the time of fuel protests.   Other
    evidence  from  newspapers  showed  continuing  attacks  on  opposition
    supporters not just at election time.

58. The  Appellant  is  of  Shona  ethnicity,  a  matter  accepted  by  the
    Respondent, and would not therefore be able to internally  relocate  to
    Bulawayo or Matabeleland, and would be unable to  return  to  his  home
    area.  It was submitted that there would also be an issue  of  internal
    relocation to Harare because of the high density of Zanu PF  there  and
    it would also be unduly harsh and unreasonable because of his activism.
     It was submitted that the Appellant would be at risk on return at  the
    airport and in Harare.  The Appellant  has  no  family  connections  in
    Zimbabwe, no property and would be unlikely to  receive  any  food  aid
    distribution.  The current health, food and economic crisis will affect
    the Appellant on return and with no assistance to reintegrate he  would
    face destitution.

Findings and reasons

 4. In accordance with the error of law decision and subsequent directions,
    the re-hearing of this appeal is  confined  to  the  relatively  narrow
    issue of whether the Appellant, as a member of the MDC  and  active  in
    ZHRO, would be at real risk of persecution on return to Zimbabwe.  Over
    the course of the Appellant's appeal and prior immigration history,  he
    has relied on a number of different matters both  in  relation  to  his
    protection and human rights claims, including being at risk  on  return
    due to his father's involvement in Zanu PF and that his  removal  would
    be a breach of Articles 3 and/or 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights because of his medical conditions, private and  family  life  in
    the  United  Kingdom.   A  number  of  these  matters,  including   the
    Appellant's claimed previous involvement  with  the  MDC  in  Zimbabwe,
    arrest and detention there, continued to  be  raised  in  the  skeleton
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal.  However, at the oral  hearing
    before me, the previous skeleton argument was not expressly relied upon
    and the hearing proceeded for both parties solely on the  narrow  issue
    identified previously in the Upper Tribunal.  In these circumstances, I
    make no further findings in relation to the wider protection  or  human
    rights claims previously made and the appeal remains, as it was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, dismissed on human rights grounds.

 5. In accordance with the principles in Devaseelan, the starting point  in
    this case is the previous findings of fact of Immigration Judge  Kebede
    and Mrs  J  Holt  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  25  May  2011.
    Further  to  detailed  reasons  being  given  for  significant  adverse
    credibility findings, the conclusions of the First-tier  Tribunal  were
    as follows:

         "59. In light of the above, we do not consider that  the  appellant
         has presented a genuine account of his involvement with the MDC and
         his experiences in Zimbabwe.  We do not accept that he was anything
         more than a supporter of the MDC and we do not accept that he  ever
         held the role of ward co-ordinator.  We do not accept that  he  was
         abducted, detained and tortured by the Zanu-PF and we do not accept
         that he left Zimbabwe in the  circumstances  and  for  the  reasons
         claimed.  We do not accept that he was  a  friend  of,  and  worked
         together with Francis Chinozvinya.  However, even  if  he  was  his
         friend, we do not accept that the death of Francis Chinozvinya  was
         connected to the appellant in any way or that any interest  in  him
         arose out of the friendship.

         60. We consider that such concerns also lead us to doubt  that  the
         appellant's involvement with the MDC in the UK  is  anything  other
         than as a supporter of the party.  We  place  no  weight  upon  the
         letter produced at page 22 of the appellant's bundle and find merit
         in Mr Archie's submission that the reference to  the  appellant  as
         "her" suggests that the letter has been cut and pasted and does not
         in fact come from  the  organisation  itself.   We  also  note  the
         inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence as to the position held
         by the author of the letter within the MDC branch and  we  conclude
         that the letter does not amount to reliable evidence of involvement
         with the party in the UK."

 6. There is nothing in the Appellant's claim before me which provides  any
    basis for departure from these findings and although he still maintains
    that he was an active member in the MDC  and  fled  Zimbabwe  for  that
    reason, he does not seek to depart from the findings in  2011,  relying
    only on his sur place activities in the United Kingdom with the MDC and
    ZHRO.    The findings of the First-tier Tribunal remain relevant to the
    assessment of the remaining narrow issue  of  risk  on  return  on  the
    latter basis because of the significant  adverse  credibility  findings
    previously made, in  particular,  that  the  Appellant  had  sought  to
    embellish a sur place claim.

 7. In addition to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal in  2011,  there
    are also preserved findings of fact from  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Richards-Clarke promulgated on 28 March 2019,  that  the
    Appellant is a member of the MDC and active in ZHRO.

 8. There are also a number of matters not in dispute between the  parties.
    These include that the Appellant is of Shona ethnicity whose home  area
    is in Mashonaland, where, in accordance with the country guidance in CM
    he could face a risk of being required to demonstrate loyalty  to  Zanu
    PF and because of his ethnicity, it would be unreasonable  for  him  to
    internally relocate to Bulawayo.  It is also not in  dispute  that  the
    Appellant has in the past used two or three different  identities  (the
    third being a mixture of the other two) and has produced two  different
    birth certificates.  Further, his criminal history is not in dispute.

 9. In accordance with the country guidance in CM, as a general matter, the
    return of a failed asylum seeker from the  United  Kingdom,  having  no
    significant MDC profile, would not  face  a  real  risk  of  having  to
    demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF.  The Appellant has not claimed to  have
    any significant MDC profile, nor is  there  any  evidence  of  anything
    beyond membership and a very basic level  of  participation  in  branch
    activities.  It was clear from the Appellant's oral evidence before  me
    that he does not keep up to  date  with  the  details  of  developments
    within the MDC in Zimbabwe and his limited involvement  in  the  United
    Kingdom  is  on  a  more  practical  basis   (for   example   attending
    demonstrations and the vigil) rather than being  particularly  involved
    in the underlying politics in Zimbabwe or party politics within the MDC
    and its various factions/groups.

10. Further, in the context of the  previous  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the Appellant was not a member of the  MDC  in  Zimbabwe,
    nor that he had any political profile there at all and was, in 2011  at
    its highest only a supporter of the MDC  who  had  manufactured  a  sur
    place claim for the purposes of asylum; there is nothing in  this  part
    of the claim to suggest that the Appellant would be at risk  on  return
    from his membership of the MDC,  nor  that  he  would  be  required  to
    demonstrate loyalty to Zanu PF on return to Harare in  accordance  with
    the general guidance in CM.

11. The key issue in this appeal is the Appellant's involvement in ZHRO and
    whether this, alone or in combination with his membership of  the  MDC,
    would place him at real risk on return to Zimbabwe.  It is necessary to
    make more specific findings about  the  organisation,  the  Appellant's
    involvement in it and as to the background country evidence about  such
    organisations.

12. The ZHRO was founded in 2016 by John Burke and  others,  including  the
    Appellant.  The  ZHRO's  objectives,  as  recorded  in  branch  meeting
    minutes, letters and the website, are first to  support  those  in  the
    diaspora in the United Kingdom  (including  with  education,  financial
    hardship, employment, legal advice, supporting applications for  asylum
    and appeals) and then assist those in Zimbabwe (including  through  the
    monitoring of human  rights  abuses,  obtaining  redress  for  victims,
    research, education, awareness and public support of human rights).

13. Although the ZHRO is said  to  be  a  politically  active  organisation
    campaigning for improvements and change in Zimbabwe, such  that  it  is
    opposed to Zanu PF, the evidence before me of the organisation contains
    very little of substance in relation to  Zimbabwean  politics  at  all.
    For example, there is little or no reference at all to very significant
    developments in Zimbabwe, such as Mugabe being deposed from power,  let
    alone any formal response  or  statement  about  such  events  or  even
    discussion about the possible  impact  of  such  a  significant  event.
    Although there is reference to fundraising and attendance at the  vigil
    in meeting minutes, there is very little evidence of  any  detailed  or
    direct political campaigns or strategy.  Further, there is reference to
    petitions and the like to  Downing  Street  and  other  embassies,  but
    little evidence on the planning for this, the content or follow up.

14. Mr Burke's evidence was that there were other forums of  communication,
    primarily through Whatsapp groups, but no  evidence  of  the  same  was
    provided and in any event these are private groups with no  information
    publicly available or  connected  with  ZHRO,  nor  connection  to  the
    Appellant specifically.  In addition, when asked questions  on  matters
    of actual political activity, Mr Burke reiterated in oral evidence that
    the ZHRO was an amateur volunteer association and implied that as such,
    exacting standards should not be applied to  it.   Overall  however,  I
    find that the ZHRO is, at its highest,  a  small  organisation  in  the
    United Kingdom (with only 50-75  active  members)  which  makes  little
    substantive political contribution to campaigning against  Zanu  PF  or
    regime change in Zimbabwe beyond what is already in place through,  for
    example, zimvigil.  There is nothing  to  suggest  any  scope  or  even
    awareness of ZHRO outside of the United Kingdom.

15. There was no evidence before me from either party  as  to  whether  the
    authorities in Zimbabwe have any awareness of, let  alone  any  adverse
    interest in the ZHRO as an organisation  or  adverse  interest  in  its
    members as opponents of Zanu PF.  Other than the  country  guidance  in
    CM, the main other source of background information available (at least
    in terms of assessing risk) was in the  CPIN.   This  only  deals  with
    political organisations, NGOs and  the  like  within  Zimbabwe  and  is
    silent as to organisations outside of the country.  Although  the  CPIN
    documents some examples of incidents to low level members  of  the  MDC
    and other smaller political parties; when read as  a  whole,  there  is
    little to show any real risk to members of  smaller  political  parties
    and organisations which are not  considered  to  pose  any  significant
    challenge to Zanu PF and the focus remains on those at senior levels in
    the largest MDC faction.  At its highest, ZHRO would only be comparable
    with one of the very small political parties or organisations and I  do
    not find would by its nature therefore  be  considered  as  posing  any
    challenge to Zanu PF and thereby its members would not be  at  risk  on
    return.

16.  As  to  the  Appellant's  role  within  ZHRO,  I  find  that  he   has
    significantly exaggerated this in his latest written and oral evidence,
    which was not supported by the evidence of Mr  Burke.   In  particular,
    the Appellant claimed to have been selected  to  be  in  the  Executive
    Committee of ZHRO as 'Human Resources Team', a title and position  that
    Mr Burke had no knowledge of at all and specifically  did  not  confirm
    that the Appellant had any specific title or role in the  organisation,
    at best, by default he could be a recruitment officer.  Further, in his
    latest written statement, the Appellant stated that he  had  personally
    recruited over 300 members to ZHRO, whereas  Mr  Burke's  evidence  was
    that he had brought 'a few' members along and that the organisation  as
    a whole only had around 350 members, of  which  only  50-75  were  core
    activists.  There is nothing in the evidence before me to  depart  from
    the previous findings of the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant had
    sought to embellish a sur place claim.  I find that he has continued to
    do so.

17. Although Mr Burke strongly and passionately supported  the  Appellant's
    claim and I was in no doubt he believed that the  Appellant,  like  any
    other Zimbabwean who was not a member of Zanu PF, would be at  risk  on
    return to Zimbabwe and therefore deserving of protection and  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom; his evidence  and  support  was  of  very
    limited value to the Appellant's claim for a number of reasons.   First
    and most importantly, it was not wholly consistent with the claims made
    by the Appellant as to his role and importance within ZHRO.

18. Secondly, if anything, Mr Burke played  down  the  importance  of  ZHRO
    itself as an organisation, stressing that it was a  small  or  fledging
    organisation and a relatively informal association  run  by  volunteers
    and amateurs.

19. Thirdly, Mr  Burke  did  not  undertake  any  objective  assessment  of
    potential or actual members of ZHRO as to their political objectives or
    motives.  His evidence was  that  all  members  are  (or  were)  asylum
    seekers, for whom he had personally given evidence in support of 5 or 6
    in the  course  of  their  protection  appeals  and  that  he  had  not
    questioned or considered the motives of any of them for being  involved
    in or with ZHRO.  The point was emphasised by his acceptance  that  the
    organisation could include by Zanu PF members as no  checks  are  made.
    In  the  absence  of  any  assessment  at  all  of  individuals  and  a
    presumption that all were genuinely fleeing persecution in Zimbabwe, Mr
    Burke had prevented himself from making  any  objective  assessment  of
    members, including of the Appellant.  Mr Burkes seemingly unconditional
    support of the Appellant in the course of this  appeal  therefore  adds
    little weight to the Appellant's claim and credibility.

20. Fourthly, although  Mr  Burke  claimed  that  ZHRO  had  a  huge  media
    presence, including 4 websites, five Facebook pages and  five  Facebook
    groups; not all of this was in evidence  before  the  Tribunal  and  in
    submissions on behalf of  the  Appellant,  it  was  accepted  that  his
    personal media profile as part of ZHRO or otherwise  extended  only  to
    his attendance at vigils.

21. I find that the Appellant's activities for ZHRO most likely  bring  him
    within the 50-75  core  activists  in  the  organisation  and  that  he
    participates in the vigil (including by playing  the  drum),  attending
    meetings and has had some involvement in  the  petitions  organised  by
    ZHRO, albeit these are fairly limited and there is nothing to  indicate
    that the Appellant had a key  organisational  role  in  such  petitions
    beyond collecting some  of  the  signatures.   Although  the  Appellant
    claims that he has been identified as the person who plays the drums at
    the vigil, I do not  find  that  this  of  itself  places  him  in  any
    different position to those attending the vigil  and  participating  in
    the protest and  singing.   I  find  overall  that  the  Appellant  has
    exaggerated his role and media presence as part of  ZHRO  and  although
    most likely a core activist, he  does  not  have  prominent  or  public
    leadership role.  As such, this, taken alone or cumulatively  with  his
    MDC membership would not be such as  to  lead  him  to  be  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities on return to Zimbabwe or at  real  risk  of
    persecution there.  The Appellant falls within the general position  in
    the country guidance in CM.

22. In any event, even if the Appellant did have such a significant role in
    ZHRO as claimed, given my findings about the relatively small nature of
    the organisation and the lack of interest in  such  small  groups  even
    within Zimbabwe, this would not affect my overall findings on  risk  on
    return.

23. It is accepted that the Appellant can not return to his home  area  and
    would be returned to Harare.  In accordance  with  CM,  a  returnee  to
    Harare will in general face no significant difficulties, if going to  a
    low-density or medium-density area.  The  socio-economic  situation  in
    high-density areas is more challenging but in general, a person without
    Zanu PF connections will not face significant problems there unless  he
    or she has a significant MDC profile (which the Appellant does not)  or
    would otherwise engage in political activities likely  to  attract  the
    adverse  attention  of  Zanu  PF.   Neither  party  made  any   express
    submissions on where in Harare the Appellant would return  and  whether
    this would be a low/medium-density area or a  high-density  area.   For
    the purposes of this part of the decision, I take the Appellant's claim
    at its highest that he would return to a high-density areas and  assess
    the risk on return in the worst-case scenario.

24. Although the Appellant  has  stated  that  will  never  stop  being  an
    activist and will continue in his activities on return to  Zimbabwe,  I
    do not find that to be credible given the adverse credibility  findings
    from the previous First-tier Tribunal and those that I have made in the
    course of this decision.  The Appellant has  been  found  not  to  have
    presented a genuine account of his involvement with  the  MDC  and  his
    experiences in  Zimbabwe  or  why  he  left  and  has  exaggerated  his
    involvement with both the MDC (originally as a member and  being  found
    only to be a supporter) and more recently his role within the ZHRO.   I
    find that he has embellished his sur place claim for  the  purposes  of
    his protection appeal rather than involvement in organisations here for
    genuine political reasons.  I do not find that the Appellant  would  be
    likely to undertake any, or at least any significant political activism
    on return to Zimbabwe or behave in any way differently to what  he  did
    when he was last in Zimbabwe.  If asked about his activities on  return
    to Harare airport, the Appellant could give a truthful answer about his
    limited activities in the United Kingdom motivated by his asylum claim.

25. For these reasons, I find that the Appellant would not face a real risk
    of persecution on return to Harare and that he could safely  internally
    relocate there.  For essentially the same reasons, I do not  find  that
    the Appellant would be at risk on return to the airport as he would not
    be of any adverse interest to the authorities.

26. The final question is whether it would be unreasonable or unduly  harsh
    for the Appellant  to  internally  relocate  to  Harare.   The  country
    guidance in CM is that there needs to be a consideration of the  socio-
    economic circumstances of the  individual  and  reference  is  made  to
    continuing difficult conditions but a marked improvement in the economy
    since the previous country guidance and an end to hyperinflation.

27.  On  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  submissions  in   relation   to   the
    reasonableness of internal relocation were  limited  to  the  assertion
    that return to Harare would be unduly harsh and unreasonable because of
    the high density of Zanu  PF  there  and  because  of  the  Appellant's
    activism.  There was no evidence before me as to the density of Zanu PF
    supporters in Harare nor that there should be any  departure  from  the
    country guidance in CM as to the general position on return  there.   I
    have also found that the Appellant would not undertake any  significant
    activism, if any at all, on return to Zimbabwe so that is not a  reason
    as to why internal relocation to Harare would be unreasonable or unduly
    harsh.

28. It was further stated that the Appellant had no family  connections  in
    Zimbabwe, no property and would be unlikely to be entitled to food aid;
    such that he would face destitution on  return.   This  is  however  at
    least in part contrary to the Appellant's own  evidence  (and  to  some
    extent that of his wife's written evidence) that he  does  have  family
    and connections in Zimbabwe including his father (albeit the  Appellant
    has previously claimed to be at risk from him) ,his two daughters  (one
    of whom lives with a friend of his  mother)  and  his  wife's  parents;
    albeit he did not disclose where in Zimbabwe any of these  people  were
    living or whether any of them could  or  would  provide  him  with  any
    support on return.  In 2004 the Appellant also had an aunt and  cousin-
    sister in Zimbabwe who he claimed assisted  him  leaving  the  country,
    although there is no further reference to whether they are still  there
    now.

29. The Appellant stated on arrival to the United Kingdom in 2004  that  he
    had run two businesses in Zimbabwe and between him and his family, they
    had sufficient resources to pay $15 million (Zimbabwean dollars) to  an
    agent  to  leave  the  country.   Even  though  the  claim  as  to  the
    Appellant's activities in Zimbabwe and reason for him leaving  has  not
    been accepted, he was at the time he left supporting his family  and/or
    being supported by his own family with sufficient  resources  to  leave
    and had experience of running his own businesses. In the United Kingdom
    the Appellant has stated that he was a motor mechanic by profession but
    had been unable to continue to work because of his  immigration  status
    and/or  criminal  convictions.   When  not  working,  the   Appellant's
    evidence in 2011 before the First-tier Tribunal was that he was  living
    with his friend, cousin or girlfriend and was financially supported  by
    them.  There was no further specific  evidence  before  me  as  to  the
    Appellant's financial or other  circumstances  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 2011, save that he has in more recent years been living with  his
    wife.

30. There is little dispute  that  the  socio  and  economic  situation  in
    Zimbabwe is poor and the Appellant relies on recent newspaper  articles
    to support this and the lack of access to food and medical  facilities.
     There was however no submission that there should be a departure  from
    the country guidance in CM or  the  recognition  that  there  had  been
    improvements in the economy.

31. I find that it would not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant to internally relocate to Harare,  taking  into  account  the
    following factors.  First, the Appellant has family in Zimbabwe  and  a
    friend who is  accommodating  and  supporting  one  of  his  daughters.
    Secondly, the Appellant has a wife in the United Kingdom  (although  he
    did not specifically rely on this relationship before me, nor  did  she
    attend   the   appeal   hearing   to   support   the   Appellant)   and
    friends/supporters here and that he has been financially supported  and
    accommodated by such persons in the United  Kingdom  over  an  extended
    period of time when he has not been working.  It has not been suggested
    that such persons would no  longer  support  the  Appellant,  at  least
    initially, on return to Zimbabwe.  Thirdly, the Appellant  has  a  work
    history in Zimbabwe having owned two businesses and a  trade  and  work
    history in the United Kingdom as a mechanic.  Fourthly,  the  Appellant
    speaks a language spoken in Zimbabwe.  Fifthly, although the  Appellant
    has in the past relied on poor health, there was no up to date evidence
    before me of any diagnosis or treatment  and  this  was  not  a  factor
    relied upon in evidence  or  oral  submissions  such  that  it  can  be
    inferred that the Appellant is currently in at least reasonable  health
    without any treatment  needs  which  could  not  be  met  in  Zimbabwe.
    Finally, it is for an individual to show that they would  be  destitute
    on return and overall, the Appellant has not, despite the  acknowledged
    difficult economic conditions in Zimbabwe, established that there would
    be a real risk of this based on all  of  his  known  circumstances  and
    experience.

32. For all of these reasons, I do not find that the Appellant would be  at
    real risk on return to Harare and his appeal is therefore dismissed  on
    asylum grounds.  As above, there was no distinct  claim  before  me  on
    humanitarian protection,  Article  2  or  Article  3  grounds  and  the
    Appellant's human rights claims have already been dismissed.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in the attached error of law  decision,  the  making
of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and  as  such  it  was  necessary  to  set  aside  the
decision.

The decision is remade as follows:

The appeal is dismissed on protection grounds.
The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]             Date     9th March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

                                    ANNEX

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09818/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 September 2019                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     MC
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Officer presenting officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Ostadsaffer of Counsel, instructed by
Longfellow Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Richards-Clarke promulgated on 28 March 2019,
    in which MC's appeal against the decision to refuse his protection  and
    human rights claims, in the context of  deportation,  dated  31  August
    2016 was allowed.  For ease I continue to refer to the parties as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal, with MC as the Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on 20 December 1973,  who
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in  April  2004,  claiming
    asylum on 27 April 2004 which  was  refused  on  4  June  2004  by  the
    Respondent.  In April 2005, the Appellant was deemed to be an absconder
    for failing to comply the temporary admission restrictions.

 3. On 7 December 2005,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  the  first  of
    numerous driving offences, the detail of which is not necessary to  set
    out in this decision.  In light of the Appellant's convictions, he  was
    served with a liability to deport notice on 12  October  2010,  with  a
    further liability to deport notice on 23 November 2010  and  finally  a
    notice of decision to deport on  20  December  2010.   The  Appellant's
    appeal against deportation was dismissed on 25 May 2011 and his  appeal
    rights were exhausted on 21 July 2011.

 4. The Appellant made further representations on 29 July 2011  which  were
    refused under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules  on  19  September
    2011.  Further representations  followed  number  of  occasions  to  15
    February 2013.  These were refused on 11 March 2014 with  no  right  of
    appeal and a signed Deportation Order was then made on 8 April 2014.

 5. The Appellant made further protection and human rights  representations
    on 17 November 2015, 9 February 2016 and 4 March 2016.   The  Appellant
    was convicted of further motoring offences on  15  December  2015,  for
    which he was sentenced to 16 weeks imprisonment and  disqualified  from
    driving.

 6. Upon consideration of the further submissions, the Respondent  accepted
    that a fresh claim had been raised for the purposes of paragraph 353 of
    the Immigration Rules but  refused  the  protection  and  human  rights
    claims.  The Appellant's asylum claim was based on a risk of return  to
    Zimbabwe on the grounds of political opinion as an  MDC  supporter  who
    had engaged in sur place activities in the  United  Kingdom.   He  also
    claimed a fear return of his father who was a senior official  in  Zanu
    PF, and of his uncle.  The Respondent  referred  back  to  the  adverse
    credibility findings made by the Tribunal when the  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed in 2011 and referred to the Appellant's use  of  multiple
    identities and previous documents being relied  upon,  including  birth
    certificates, which were not genuine.

 7. Overall the Respondent considered that the Appellant had no significant
    political profile United Kingdom, that he had only  undertaken  surplus
    activities to attempt to bolster his  claim  and  that  he  was  not  a
    genuine activist.  In any event, the Appellant could relocate to an MDC
    stronghold in Zimbabwe and there would be no risk on return  to  there.
    Essentially  for  the  same  reasons,  there  would  be  no  need   for
    humanitarian protection and no breach  of  Articles  2  and  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 8. The Appellant's claimed mental health problems were taken into  account
    but the Respondent concluded that treatment was available on return  to
    Zimbabwe.  The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  the
    Appellant has provided no evidence of the same and there was  no  claim
    that he had any dependent children in the United Kingdom  either.   The
    private life exceptions to deportation were not met and there  were  no
    very compelling circumstances to outweigh the public  interest  in  the
    Appellant's deportation.  Finally, the Respondent refused to revoke the
    Deportation Order pursuant to paragraph 390 the Immigration Rules.

 9. The Appellant's appeal was initially  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Herbert in a decision promulgated on 31 July 2017,  in  which  an
    error of law was found  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  appeal  was
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

10. Judge Richards-Clarke allowed the Appellant's appeal  all  grounds  and
    revoked the Deportation Order in a decision promulgated 28 March  2019.
    The findings in the previous appeal in 2011  were  considered,  but  on
    this  occasion  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  that  there  was
    credible evidence of sur place activities for ZHRO and  the  MDC  which
    gave rise to a well-founded fear of persecution on return to  Zimbabwe.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not  find  that  there  was  any  available
    option to internally relocate to Harare or Bulawayo (the latter because
    of  the  Appellant's  Shona   ethnicity).    There   was   no   express
    consideration of the Appellant's Article 8 claim.

The appeal

11. The Respondent appeals on four grounds as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to give clear or adequate  reasons  why  the
    Appellant has such  a  significant  political  profile  in  the  United
    Kingdom that he would come to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  in
    Zimbabwe.  His involvement in the MDC is not of itself  sufficient,  so
    reliance must be based on his activities for the ZHRO.   Secondly,  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the possibility of bias  in  the
    evidence from the ZHRO, particularly when considered in the context  of
    the previous adverse credibility findings made against  the  Appellant.
    Thirdly, the only evidence that the Appellant was more than a member of
    the ZHRO is contained in a letter, but no oral evidence  was  given  by
    the author before the First-tier Tribunal.  Finally, the Country Policy
    and Information Note "Zimbabwe: Opposition  to  the  government"  dated
    February 2019 (version 4) (the "CPIN") was available  and  should  have
    been taken into account by the First-tier Tribunal rather than  version
    3 of the same dated April 2018, given that it does not indicate  anyone
    connected with the ZHRO to be of adverse interest to the authorities in
    Zimbabwe.  Overall, the Respondent's position was that  a  person  with
    the Appellant's profile was not  at  risk  on  return  to  Zimbabwe  in
    accordance with the country guidance case of CM (EM  Country  Guidance:
    disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059.

12. At the oral hearing, Mr Kandola relied on the written grounds of appeal
    and the grant of permission to the Upper Tribunal.  He emphasised  that
    the previous appeal determination in  2011  was  the  correct  starting
    point in accordance with Devaseelan and  that  this  contained  a  very
    damning adverse credibility assessment of the Appellant, with  findings
    that his claim to  have  been  a  member  of  the  MDC  was  an  entire
    fabrication.  Seven years on, the Appellant  has  made  a  further  sur
    place claim in  relation  to  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    although Mr Kandola did not say that a later genuine  sur  place  claim
    could not be accepted, it would be difficult to   establish  a  genuine
    claim.  It was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  placing
    significant weight on the  evidence  from  the  ZHRO  in  paragraph  31
    onwards of the decision, given that the author of the  letter  did  not
    attend the hearing, although it was accepted a different individual did
    attend and give evidence on this point.

13. In the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, there is repeated reference
    to evidence relied upon by the Appellant not being  challenged  by  the
    Respondent, which although inconsistent with the records from the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer available to Mr Kandola; was accepted not  to
    be a point raised in the  grounds  of  appeal  and  therefore  was  not
    pursued further.

14. The main issue relied upon by the Respondent  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to deal with the evidence in the  CPIN  which  did  not
    indicate that the ZHRO had any significant role in opposition  to  Zanu
    PF, nor that any of its supporters would be at  risk  on  return  as  a
    result.  It was accepted that the CPIN focused primarily on  activities
    of the MDC, but it was submitted that there would have  been  reference
    to ZHRO if activities of that organisation cause significant effect  of
    concern.  It was submitted that the burden was on the Appellant to show
    that he had a profile which would give rise to a risk  on  return,  but
    his claim is founded on activism  for  an  organisation  which  is  not
    listed in any objective material is of interest to the  authorities  in
    Zimbabwe.

15. On behalf of the Appellant, Ms Ostadsaffer submitted  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal considers  in  detail  the  evidence  before  it  of  the
    Appellant's involvement with the MDC and  the  ZHRO  in  paragraphs  31
    onwards of the decision.  In paragraph 53 of the decision,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied that in the intervening  years  since
    the previous appeal determination in 2011, the evidence now shows  that
    the Appellant is an activist rather than a supporter who would come  to
    the adverse attention of the authorities on return to  Zimbabwe.   That
    conclusion has not been challenged on the evidence, which included  the
    Appellant's specific role within ZHRO and that he has  been  identified
    and approached by the CIO at the Zimbabwean Embassy about his  role  in
    protests  outside  of  it.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made   positive
    credability findings in relation to the evidence of the  co-founder  of
    ZHRO who attended the hearing and gave oral evidence to the effect that
    the Appellant was a founding member of the organisation.

16. In relation to the CPIN, Ms Ostadsaffer submitted  that  this  document
    dealt only with organisations based in Zimbabwe and not  those  in  the
    United Kingdom, nor did  it  offer  any  view  on  other  organisations
    outside of Zimbabwe.  In any  event,  it  outlined  potential  risk  to
    opposition party members and organisaters who play a  greater  role  in
    organising demonstrations, rather than just participating in them.  The
    CPIN shows that party members can be at risk, and in this case  it  was
    found that the Appellant was more  than  just  a  member  but  also  an
    activist who has  been  critical  of  and  involved  in  demonstrations
    against the government; which clearly establishes a risk on  return  to
    Zimbabwe to him.  Overall, it was open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    find that the  more  recent  evidence  outweighs  the  earlier  adverse
    credibility findings in 2011.

Findings and reasons

17. It is necessary to set out in more detail the structure  and  parts  of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal when assessing the  grounds  of
    appeal, in particular the first ground of appeal that there was a  lack
    of  adequate  reasons  for  the  conclusion  of  risk  on  return.   In
    paragraphs 9 to 13 of the decision, there is a very  brief  summary  of
    the documents before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  three  people,
    including the Appellant, who gave evidence.  The decision  itself  does
    not set out in any detail the evidence given by each of the  witnesses,
    referring only to this being set out in the record of proceedings.   In
    paragraphs 14  and  15,  the  parties'  submissions  were  respectively
    summarised.

18. In paragraphs 26 to 29, reference is  made  to  the  previous  Tribunal
    determination promulgated on 25 May  2011,  in  which  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed and reference is made  to  this  as  the  starting
    point in accordance with Devaseelan.  It  is  further  noted  that  the
    Appellant did not seek  to  challenge  any  of  the  previous  Tribunal
    findings but founded his appeal on activities  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since then.  In paragraphs 31 to 42 of the decision, there  is  then  a
    further summary of  the  documentary  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and a number of references to  such  pieces  of  evidence  not
    being challenged by the Respondent.  The First-tier  Tribunal  attached
    at least some weight to most  of  these  documents  as  supporting  the
    Appellant's claimed involvement with the MDC and  ZHRO  in  the  United
    Kingdom,  including  attending  branch   meetings   and   engaging   in
    activities, such as walks and protests.

19. In particular, the activity record of the Appellant in relation to ZHRO
    and the evidence of Mr J Burke, a co-founder of that  organisation,  is
    dealt with in paragraphs 39 and 40.  Mr Burke was found to be "somewhat
    passionate in his evidence and I do not consider that he  would  attend
    the Tribunal to give evidence on behalf of someone that had  not  taken
    part in the activities claimed and/or  did  not  actively  support  the
    cause that Mr Burke fervently believes in".  For this reason, the Judge
    attaches significant weight to Mr Burke's evidence  and  from  this  is
    satisfied of his involvement in the ZHRO.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal then sets out in paragraphs  43
    to 46 its findings as to  the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities  and
    credibility findings, as follows:

    "43. ...  For the reasons that I have set out above I am satisfied that
    in  the  United  Kingdom  the  Appellant  has  engaged  in   activities
    demonstrating  against  the  Zanu-PF  Government  in  Zimbabwe.   I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant is a member of the MDC and active in ZHRO,
    a human rights  organisation  that  is  critical  of  and  demonstrates
    against the current Government in Zimbabwe. The Appellant relies on the
    online evidence of his activities and his profile  and  recognition  as
    the drummer at demonstrations outside the Zimbabwean Embassy.

    44.  In reaching  this  finding  I  have  had  regard  to  the  adverse
    credibility findings made  against  the  Appellant  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in 2011.  The findings related to the Appellant's  involvement
    with the MDC and his experiences in Zimbabwe before his arrival in  the
    United Kingdom in or around 2004.  At this time the Tribunal found that
    the Appellant was no more than a supporter of the MDC while in Zimbabwe
    and during his time in the United Kingdom and that he had attempted  to
    embellish his account to pursue his asylum claim.  In this respect I do
    not depart from the findings of the First-tier Tribunal in 2011.

    45.  That said, I am reminded that a person may still  be  at  risk  of
    persecution  even  if  the  past  persecution  has  been  rejected   as
    unbelievable ... Notwithstanding the findings that  the  Appellant  did
    not present a genuine account of his involvement with the MDC  and  his
    experiences in Zimbabwe; fabricated his account of  being  activist  of
    being abducted, detained and tortured by Zanu-PF  in  Zimbabwe  and  to
    have  produced  contradictory  birth  certificates  together  with   an
    unreliable letter of his involvement in the MDC in the  United  Kingdom
    in the attempt to embellish his claim I do not consider that it follows
    that the Appellants "sur place" activities are not  genuine.   In  this
    respect I reminded that  in  AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian
    crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) the Tribunal
    held that in assessing the effect of an Appellant's  lies  (weather  to
    the Secretary of State or a judicial fact-finding), it  is  unnecessary
    to construct a prescribed set of  steps  from  the  judgements  of  the
    Supreme Court in MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, particular if they  might
    lead  to  a  "mechanistic"  rather  than  a  holistic  approach.    The
    significance or "negative pull" of the lie  will  possibly  depend  not
    only the strength of the background evidence  but  whether  the  lie  -
    looked at in its own terms - is about an issue that is central  to  the
    disposition of the appeal.  Where a  person  tells  lies  about  issues
    which that person thinks are important to the claim but which,  because
    of the passage of time or  otherwise,  are  not,  it  is  open  to  the
    Tribunal, given the earlier lies, to approach with caution the  persons
    evidence regarding matters that are central to the current claim.

    46.  Here, the Appellant has been found to have told  significant  lies
    in the past about his activities in Zimbabwe.  These lies  are  central
    to the appeal in 2011 and do have a "negative pull" in my assessment of
    the Appellant's credibility now.  I have considered the totality of the
    evidence and while I do place significant weight on the adverse ability
    findings of the panel of Immigration Judge Kebede and Mrs J Holt  (Non-
    Legal Member), I find that on balance, the positive  findings  set  out
    above outweigh the challenge to the Appellant's credibility in relation
    to his activities in the  United  Kingdom.   I  say  so  in  particular
    reliance on the documentary evidence from the MDC and that  from  ZHRO,
    the photographic evidence of the Appellant at  demonstrations  and  the
    oral evidence of Mr Burke."

21. The First-tier Tribunal deals with whether there is a risk on return to
    Zimbabwe for this Appellant from paragraph 52 to 57  of  the  decision.
    It is necessary to set out some of those findings in detail, which  are
    as follows:

    "53.  First, I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  discharged  the
    burden of proof to the lower civil standard  that  substantial  grounds
    been shown that there  is  a  real  risk  of  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood of him suffering prosecution  for  a  Convention  reason  or
    serious harm is defined in the immigration rules in her  [sic]  country
    of return.  I say so because I am satisfied that the objective evidence
    before me demonstrates that the situation in Zimbabwe continues  to  be
    such that the Appellant would be at risk on return.  I say this because
    I am satisfied that in  the  intervening  years  since  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision in 2011 the evidence before me is that the  Appellant
    is now an activist rather than  a  supporter  and  would  come  to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities on return.  At  the  time  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal panel hearing in 2011 the current country  guidance
    EM and others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC).   This  was
    before the judgements in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and  the  changes
    necessary to be made to EM ... When  the  Upper  Tribunal  revised  the
    country guidance in CM ... found that "(3) The only change  to  the  EM
    Country Guidance that it is necessary to make as regards  the  position
    as at the end  of  January  2011  arises  from  the  judgements  in  RT
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38.  The EM Country Guidance is, accordingly, re-
    stated as follows (with the change underlined in paragraph (5)  below):
    ... (5) A returnee to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
    difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density area.  Whilst
    the socio-economic situation in high-density areas is more challenging,
    in  general  a  person  without  Zanu-PF  connections  will  not   face
    significant problems there (including a "loyalty test"), unless  he  or
    she has a significant MDC profile, which might  cause  him  or  her  to
    feature a list of those targeted for  harassment,  or  would  otherwise
    engage in political activities likely to attract the adverse  attention
    of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely to engage in such activities,
    but for fear of thereby coming to the adverse attention of ZANU-PF."

    54.  I am satisfied that the Appellant now  falls  within  the  Country
    Guidance case of CM ... As a returnee that "would otherwise  engage  in
    political activities likely to attract the adverse attention  of  ZANU-
    PF, or would be reasonably likely to engage in such activities, but for
    a fear of thereby coming to the adverse attention  of  ZANU-PF".   This
    adverse attention may well involve a requirement to demonstrate loyalty
    to Zanu-PF, with the prospect of serious harm in the event  of  failure
    and the persons who have shown themselves not to be favourably disposed
    to Zanu-PF are entitled to international  protection,  whether  or  not
    they could and would do whatever might be necessary to demonstrate such
    loyalty  (RT  (Zimbabwe)).   Further,  the  Appellant's  fear   is   of
    persecution or serious harm is from the state or proxies of  the  state
    and so he would not be able to avail himself of the protection  of  the
    authorities."

22. The first ground of appeal is that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    give clear reasons why the Appellant has  such  a  significant  profile
    that he would come to the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities  in
    Zimbabwe, particularly in light of the country guidance in CM  that  in
    general  a  failed  asylum  seeker  returning  to  Zimbabwe,  with   no
    significant MDC profile, would not  face  a  real  risk  of  having  to
    demonstrate loyalty to Zanu-PF other than a person with  a  significant
    absence returning to a rural area of Zimbabwe (with some exceptions).

23. In paragraph 43 of the decision, there is a finding that the  Appellant
    is a member of the MDC and active in ZHRO and  there  is  no  departure
    from the previous findings of the Tribunal in 2011, that at  that  time
    the Appellant was no more than a supporter of the MDC and that  he  had
    attempted to embellish his account to pursue his asylum  claim.   There
    is no express finding by the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant now
    has any significant profile within the MDC, nor  that  he  is  anything
    more than a member of the  same.   Although  the  Judge  considers  the
    Appellant's previous significant lies in the past about his  activities
    in Zimbabwe, these are considered to  be  outweighed  by  the  positive
    findings set out about the Appellant's more recent  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom.  There is however, no express consideration of  whether
    these activities or account have been embellished, as was found  to  be
    the case, including on a similar claim of sur  place  activity  by  the
    Tribunal in 2011.

24. Further to those factual findings, the Judge goes on in paragraph 53 to
    conclude that he is satisfied first, that the objective evidence before
    him demonstrates that the situation in Zimbabwe continues  to  be  such
    that the Appellant would be at risk on return; and secondly because the
    evidence now is that  the  Appellant  is  an  activist  rather  than  a
    supporter (with no distinction between  the  MDC  and  the  ZHRO  made,
    contrary to  the  earlier  finding)  and  would  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities on return.  There is however no  reference
    at all to what the objective  evidence  relied  upon  is  or  why  that
    demonstrates that the Appellant would be at risk on return to  Zimbabwe
    now, in light of the country guidance or otherwise.  In the absence  of
    any significant MDC profile, which has not been found  in  relation  to
    this Appellant, there is nothing identifiable in the objective evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal to show that he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return even as an activist for ZHRO and in  fact  the  only  background
    evidence referred to at all in the decision is the CPIN from 2018,  the
    parts quoted predominantly referring back to the guidance in CM.

25. For these reasons I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing
    to give adequate or clear reasons as to why the Appellant would  be  at
    risk on return to Zimbabwe as an activist and why for  this  reason  he
    would come to the adverse attention of the authorities on return.   The
    conclusion is simply entirely unexplained from what precedes it in  the
    decision.

26. The First-tier Tribunal further concluded  in  paragraph  54  that  the
    Appellant now falls within the country guidance of CM on the basis that
    he  would  or  would  be  reasonably  likely  to  engage  in  political
    activities on return to  attract  the  adverse  attention  of  Zanu-PF.
    There is no further explanation or reasoning at all as to the basis for
    this finding, within the decision or apparent from the evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant's written evidence only goes so
    far as stating that he intends to carry on with his activities even  if
    returned to Zimbabwe and that he has chosen to  take  a  stand  against
    repression.  There is no detail in those statements,  and no assessment
    of its likelihood by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  particularly  in  the
    context of very significant earlier adverse credibility  findings  that
    claims have been embellished.

27. I find a further error in this part of the decision for failure to give
    adequate or clear reasons as to why the Appellant would be at  risk  on
    return to Zimbabwe.  This is particularly so, given that as  is  raised
    in the fourth ground of appeal, the most up-to-date  CPIN  in  February
    2018 does not identify any specific risk on  return  for  anyone  other
    than MDC activists, except perhaps a moderate risk of violence  towards
    People First supporters, but that those involved with less  significant
    opposition parties only face a low  level  of  official  discrimination
    because they do not presently pose a significant threat to Zanu-PF.

28. On the basis of these errors, which cannot be said to be immaterial  to
    the outcome of the appeal, it is necessary to set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  It is not therefore necessary to consider  in
    any detail the further grounds of appeal relied upon by the Respondent.
     However, I would reiterate the failure by the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    consider whether the Appellant's more recent sur place activities  have
    been embellished as his similar claim  in  2011  was,  referred  to  in
    paragraph 27 above,  in  relation  to  the  lack  of  consideration  of
    possible bias in the evidence Mr Burke from the ZHRO.  In  relation  to
    the more up to date CPIN, this evidence will in any event will need  to
    be taken into account in the remaking of the decision under appeal.

29. This appeal has a relatively lengthy history, having already been heard
    in the First-tier Tribunal twice following the first decision being set
    aside for error of law by the Upper Tribunal.  In  these  circumstances
    and where, aside from the point raised in the second ground of  appeal,
    there is no substantive challenge to the main findings of fact, I am of
    the preliminary view that it  would  be  appropriate  to  preserve  the
    finding that the Appellant is a member of the MDC and active in ZHRO as
    set out in paragraph 43 of the decision.  The remaking of  this  appeal
    would therefore be on the relatively narrow issue of whether  as  such,
    the Appellant would be  at  real  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe, which can appropriately be determined in the Upper  Tribunal.
    However, the parties are at liberty to make representations  within  14
    days as to what if any  facts  are  to  be  preserved  and  the  future
    disposal of this appeal; further to which directions will be given  for
    the same.

30. Separately, although not specifically raised as a ground of appeal, the
    notice of decision given by the First-tier  Tribunal  is  on  its  face
    defective and would need to have been set  aside  in  any  event.   The
    notice of decision stated:

    "59.  The appeal is allowed for the maintenance of refugee status under
the 1951 Convention.

    60.  The Deportation Order is revoked."

31. In accordance with Part V of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, a person has a right to  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
    protection and /or human rights claim, or the revocation of a  person's
    protection status and only on the grounds set out in  section  84,  for
    present purposes, that removal of the Appellant from the United Kingdom
    would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and/or would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
    Act 1998.  The appeal should therefore be allowed or dismissed only  on
    these grounds.  The statement that the appeal should be allowed for the
    maintenance of refugee status under the  1951  Convention  goes  beyond
    this and does not make sense in circumstances where this Appellant  has
    never been granted refugee status, it is  not  and  never  has  been  a
    revocation case.  Further, the First-tier  Tribunal  has  no  power  to
    revoke a Deportation Order, that is a matter for  the  Respondent  upon
    implementation of a decision under appeal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

The  parties  are  at  liberty,  but  are  not  required,  to  make  written
submissions as to the future disposal of this appeal within 14 days  of  the
date on which this decision is promulgated.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        [pic]        Date     7th October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson



