
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09877/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th July 2017                      |On 18th July 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Tesfaye Geleso
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Hashmi of Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Wilson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 11th July 2017.

    Background

 2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Eritrea born  on  1st  November
    1987.  He applied for asylum in the UK on the grounds that he would  be
    at  risk  on  return  to  Eritrea  as  a  Pentecostal  Christian.   The
    respondent did not believe that he was a citizen of Eritrea as  claimed
    nor that any aspect of his claim to  be  a  Pentecostal  Christian  was
    credible.  The judge similarly made adverse  credibility  findings  and
    dismissed the appeal.

    The Grounds of Application

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in his approach to credibility.

 4. It was argued that the judge had erroneously found that  the  appellant
    had been inconsistent about the date of his entry to the UK,  had  made
    findings on his medical history to which he was not entitled, had erred
    in law in taking account of the appellant's demeanour and  had  wrongly
    taken a Section 8 credibility point against the appellant when this had
    not been raised by the respondent.  He had also made a mistake of  fact
    in relation to the  letter  of  support  from  the  Eritrean  Community
    Organisation, failed  to  make  proper  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's knowledge of Eritrean currency and had wrongly stated  that
    there was no evidence to support the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had
    knowledge of Tigrinya.  Finally,  he  had  not  properly  assessed  the
    evidence of the witness and had not considered  whether  the  appellant
    had been denied his Ethiopian nationality, which was an issue raised at
    the hearing and upon which he was obliged to adjudicate.

 5. Permission to appeal was initially granted on limited grounds by  Judge
    Robertson and then on all grounds by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.

 6.  On  7th  June  2017  the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

    Submissions

 7. Ms Hashmi made detailed submissions in relation to all aspects  of  her
    grounds.  Mr Diwncyz submitted that the judge's comprehensive  findings
    were open to him.

    Findings and Conclusions

 8. I am satisfied  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  this
    determination.

 9. First the appellant argues that the judge was wrong in  considering  at
    paragraph 12 of the determination that the appellant had given a number
    of inconsistent dates in relation  to  his  entry  to  the  UK.   I  am
    satisfied that this ground is in fact  made  out.   One  of  the  dates
    arises from a Home Office  error  and  another  was  corrected  at  the
    beginning of the appellant's evidence when he adopted his statement.  I
    accept that the appellant entered the UK on 12th June 2015 and this has
    always been his evidence.  Accordingly the judge was wrong to highlight
    an inconsistency when there was none.  However, in the context of  this
    well-reasoned and detailed determination, the error is immaterial.

10. So far as the medical evidence was concerned, it was open to the  judge
    to comment that the appellant's evidence lacked clarity and that  there
    was no supporting evidence to support his claim that he suffered from a
    lack of sleep and depression.  The mention of epilepsy at  the  hearing
    had never been raised before.  The judge was entitled to conclude  that
    the  appellant's  erratic  evidence  cast  doubt   upon   his   general
    truthfulness.

11. This, however, is of peripheral importance. None of the  points  raised
    by the judge in relation  to  the  appellant's  lack  of  knowledge  of
    Pentecostal Christianity and his inability to name the church at  which
    he claimed regular attendance were mentioned in the  grounds.  Moreover
    the judge recorded  that  the  appellant  had  provided  a  conflicting
    account in relation to his practice of religion in Eritrea when he  was
    interviewed.   He  also  noted  a   number   of   examples   of   other
    inconsistencies which go to the core of the  appellant's  account,  for
    example in relation to when the police had arrested him and whether  he
    had preached his religion in Eritrea.

12. The third ground argues that the judge had erred in taking  account  of
    the appellant's demeanour in assessing his credibility.   At  paragraph
    17 of the determination the judge records an incident  in  the  hearing
    when the appellant apologised for his behaviour  in  appearing  not  to
    take the proceedings seriously.  The judge said that  he  informed  the
    appellant that he would note his behaviour but made it  clear  that  it
    was not determinative either of the credibility of his claim or of  his
    general credibility.  That is entirely the  correct  approach.   It  is
    quite clear from the determination as  a  whole  that  the  appellant's
    claim was properly analysed and not dismissed merely on account of  the
    judge's perception of the appellant's behaviour in court.

13. Next, it is argued that the judge was wrong to take a Section  8  point
    against the appellant when it was not relied upon in submissions and he
    had claimed asylum very shortly after his arrival in  the  UK.  However
    Section 8 was plainly relied upon in the reasons for refusal letter. It
    is manifestly relevant given that the appellant spent over two years in
    Italy when he was fingerprinted twice and apparently gave  a  different
    name and a different date of birth.  He claimed  asylum  shortly  after
    arrival in the UK, having been arrested upon embarkation from the lorry
    which brought him here.  The judge's comment that he only claimed after
    arrest is merely a statement of fact.

14. So far as the banknote is concerned, at paragraph 20 the judge recorded
    that the appellant had given differing accounts of the  colour  of  the
    note, at one point saying that it was orange and at another  grey.   He
    was quite entitled to highlight the discrepancy and was not obliged  to
    make any finding upon the actual colour of the note concerned.

15. The grounds also criticise the judge's  treatment  of  the  appellant's
    claim that he speaks Tigrinya.   The  judge  said  that  there  was  no
    evidence whatsoever to support the appellant's claim that he  spoke  or
    understood Tigrinya.  The grounds argue that the judge failed  to  take
    into account the appellant's own evidence on the issue and  the  letter
    from the Eritrean Community which he produced stating  that  he  had  a
    restricted knowledge of the language.

16. The wording in paragraph 32 is possibly a little loose but at paragraph
    34 the judge made it clear that he considered that  there  was  not  "a
    shred of credible evidence" that he could speak the language.  He  gave
    wholly sustainable reasons for that conclusion.

17. At his initial interview he had said that he had no other language than
    Amharic. On the appellant's account he had lived in  Eritrea  from  the
    age of 12 until he  was  20.   The  judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to
    conclude that in  the  absence  of  any  credible  explanation  to  the
    contrary anyone living and working in his  claimed  country  of  origin
    during his formative years would be likely  to  acquire  the  language.
    There were significant discrepancies in  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to whether his father and mother spoke  Tigrinya  to  him  and
    what his level of competency in the language was.

18. So far as the letter from the Eritrean Community is  concerned,  whilst
    the judge may have erred in considering that it was not produced  until
    11th January, when it appears that it was served on 16th December,  the
    timing is immaterial.  The judge analysed the contents of the letter in
    great detail from paragraphs 26 to 29 of the determination.   He  found
    that  there  was  no  reasonable  explanation  for  the  delay  in  the
    production of the letter for some sixteen months after the  appellant's
    first visit but in any event the organisation was extremely vague about
    how it had been able  to  satisfy  itself  that  the  appellant  was  a
    national of Eritrea and was unspecific in relation to crucial  matters.
    It made no reference to the names of any individuals who had  made  the
    nationality assessment and had not specified the process by which  they
    had done so.  There were no witness statements from  anybody  connected
    with the organisation.   Moreover,  there  was  a  clear  inconsistency
    between the letter which said that the appellant was raised and grew up
    in Ethiopia when on his own account he had been deported at the age  of
    12.

19. In relation to the evidence of the witness, the judge was  entitled  to
    give it little weight.  He was not expected at the hearing and had  not
    produced a witness statement.  No checks had  been  made  on  his  bona
    fides.  He produced no supporting evidence of the  appellant's  claimed
    church attendance and provided no information about how  he  knew  that
    the appellant was a member of the Pentecostal  church  other  than  his
    assertion that he had attended there.  Moreover,  the  witness  himself
    gave  discrepant  and  surprising  evidence  in  relation  to  his  own
    position.  He had apparently been granted asylum on the basis of  being
    a Pentecostal Christian and yet said that he had been to Eritrea  since
    coming to the UK before denying that he had ever been back.

20. So far as the question  of  Ethiopian  nationality  is  concerned,  the
    respondent's representative apparently  had  a  copy  of  the  passport
    application in the appellant's name for an Ethiopian  passport.   There
    was absolutely no evidence that  he  has  ever  been  denied  Ethiopian
    nationality. The  judge  gave  detailed  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant had never attended the Ethiopian  Embassy
    in London as claimed from paragraphs 35 to 37 of the determination.

21. The grounds establish that there are minor errors in this determination
    in relation to the appellant's arrival  date  and  the  filing  of  the
    letter from the Eritrean Community in Lambeth. However in  the  context
    of an exceptionally thoughtful and  well-reasoned  determination  these
    are immaterial.  The judge gave clear  and  comprehensive  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant's oral  evidence  was  contradictory  and
    implausible, many of which are not challenged  in  the  grounds,  which
    highlight minor matters having no impact upon the sustainability of the
    judge's conclusions.

    Decision

22. The original judge did not err  in  law.   The  appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed[pic]                             Date  18 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


