
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/09837/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 October 2017                         | On 18 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                             Sheshil Kumar Kakar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal on the part of Mr Kakar, a  national  of  Afghanistan
    born on 1 January 1984.  He arrived in the United Kingdom  and  claimed
    asylum on 16 March 2016.  The basis of his claim is  that  he  and  his
    family are Hindus, as a  result  of  which  they  had  difficulties  in
    Afghanistan in that they were blackmailed on  two  or  three  occasions
    during the two years prior to coming to  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    Appellant then suffered abuse from Muslims who wished him to convert to
    Islam and he fled, fearing that he would be killed or forced to convert
    to Islam if he remained in Afghanistan.

 2. The Appellant's asylum application was refused in a  decision  dated  6
    September 2016.  He appealed against this decision and his appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lucas for hearing on  28  April
    2017.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 12 May 2017, the  judge
    dismissed  his  appeal,  finding  that  a  number   of   aspects   were
    inconceivable and that the Appellant would not be at risk on return  to
    Afghanistan or Kabul in particular.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made in time to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds dated 9 July  2017  asserted  firstly  that  the
    judge failed to make adequate findings of primary fact,  secondly  that
    he misdirected himself in law in relation to  internal  relocation  and
    thirdly failed to consider material  matters  in  respect  of  internal
    relocation, fourthly misdirected himself  as  to  the  ability  of  the
    Appellant to have travelled to and remained in India  and  fifthly,  in
    materially failing to consider the background evidence in  relation  to
    the ability of the Afghan authorities to protect  the  Appellant  as  a
    Hindu in  light  of  the  decision  in  TG  and  others  (Afghan  Sikhs
    persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKIAT 119 (IAC).

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey  on  15
    August 2017 in the following terms:

         "I consider it arguable that the judge wrongly failed to treat  the
         evidence that the Appellant's father had been the target of threats
         relating to extortion as relevant to the question  of  whether  the
         Appellant would be the target of similar threats whether locally or
         in Kabul.  Linked to this, it is arguable that the judge  erred  in
         appearing to  treat  the  Appellant's  ability  to  survive  whilst
         travelling in Europe and living in the  UK  as  probative  that  he
         could seek internal protection  from  the  Afghanistan  authorities
         against harassment/threat of extortion there.  It is also  arguable
         that the judge was wrong at 52 to state that the Appellant could go
         and live in another country if that was to be  his  wish,  although
         whether that statement had any material link with the  reasons  the
         judge gave for concluding that the Appellant would not be  at  risk
         in Afghanistan will need further examination."

 5. The Respondent submitted a Rule 24 response on 30 August 2017, opposing
    the Appellant's appeal.

 6. However, at the hearing before me Mr Kotas on behalf of the  Respondent
    accepted that there was merit in the Appellant's  application  and  the
    grounds of appeal.  He accepted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did
    not make findings  of  fact  as  to  the  Appellant's  credibility  and
    therefore it was difficult to ascertain whether, taken at its  highest,
    the Appellant's case should not succeed.  He accepted  that  the  judge
    did not engage with the country guidance  decision  of  TG  and  others
    (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKIAT 119 (IAC).

 7. In light of Mr Kotas' acceptance that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    made a material error of law and bearing in mind paragraph 43A  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014, I find material errors of law in the  decision  of
    the FtTJ, with the effect that the appeal is remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo at  Taylor  House  before  a  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  for  a  hearing  de
novo before the FtT.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 16 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



