
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09575/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 December 2018                      |On 16 January 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     EE
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Tobin, instructed by Polpitiya & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt born on 8 September 1980. She is
    appealing against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Greasley promulgated on 21 September 2018 to dismiss her appeal against
    the decision of the respondent to refuse her protection and human
    rights claim.



Background

 2. The appellant entered the UK as a student in 2013 and remained
    unlawfully following the expiry of her visa.

 3. The appellant is a Sunni Muslim, who claims to be from a
    traditional/religious family.

 4. In September 2016 the appellant commenced a relationship with ZH, who
    is a Shia Muslim, and in May 2017 they began cohabiting. ZH was
    mentally and physically abusive to the appellant and the relationship
    ended in September 2017 as a consequence.

 5. The appellant claims to be at risk of serious harm if returned to Egypt
    because her father and brother have threatened to kill her. She claims
    that the reason for this is that ZH informed her father that he is a
    Shia and that he had been living with her.

 6. The respondent accepted that the appellant had been the victim of
    domestic abuse from ZH, but not that she is at risk of being killed by
    her father and brother if returned to Egypt.

 7. To support her claim that ZH had told her father they had been
    cohabiting, the appellant, inter alia, submitted screen shots of
    electronic communications between her and ZH, covering a period at the
    end of September 2017. It is apparent from these messages that ZH was
    upset with the appellant and trying to get her to come home. For
    example, in a text on 23 September 2017, he stated:

         "I can't sleep can you come home pls I'm sorry for what I said I
         just gt little angry and you know I didn't mean what I say".

    In one of the messages (a message sent on 21 September 2017) ZH
    referred to a conversation with the appellant's father. He stated:

         "only when I spoke to your dad I found out ur ok".

 8. The appellant also submitted screen shots of electronic communications
    with her mother. Although in Arabic, at the top of the screen, in
    English, it says "Mama". The translation states:

         "I do not know what to do with your father, he refuses to hear
         anything good about you. It's all [ZH]'s fault, he made your dad
         hate you.... He considers that you tarnished his honour and swore
         to kill you when you come back so as to restore his honour. I fear
         for your safety from your dad...I must delete the messages, fearing
         that they might be seen by your dad or Ahmed which would be a
         disaster."

 9. The appellant also submitted a report from Camden Safety Services dated
    25 October 2017 which referred to ZH telling the appellant's family in
    Egypt about their cohabitation and that he is a Shia Muslim.

10. The appellant also submitted expert evidence concerning the treatment
    of women in Egypt and the prevalence of crimes of honour.

11. The judge accepted the unchallenged evidence that ZH abused the
    appellant both physically and verbally. However, the judge did not
    accept the appellant's account of being at risk from her family or that
    ZH had contacted them.

12. The judge gave a number of reasons for not finding the appellant's
    account credible. Amongst the reasons were the following:

      a. At paragraph 63 of the decision, the judge stated that the
         electronic (WhatsApp messages) communications between ZH and the
         appellant "do not specifically state or allege that [ZH] had been
         in contact with the appellant's family..."

      b. In paragraph 63 the judge also stated that:

             "It is relevant, to my mind, that there is no credible or
             identifiable communication sent to the appellant from either
             the mother or father which I find to be surprisingly given the
             allegations made by the appellant. Although the appellant has
             provided translated text messages, appearing at pages 64 and
             65 of the appellant's bundle, that she claims is from the
             mother... I find that I cannot verify the identity of the
             individual who sent the messages and therefore I am unable to
             make any clear finding that the author was in fact the
             appellant's mother stop the messages failed to identify either
             the sender or the receiver of these messages - they could have
             been sent or received by anyone."

Analysis

13. Three main arguments are made in the grounds of appeal and were
    advanced by Ms Tobin.

      a. Firstly, it is argued that the judge made a factual error when
         stating that the electronic communications between the appellant
         and ZH did not state that there had been contact between ZH and the
         appellant's family.

      b. Secondly, the grounds contend that the judge erred by failing to
         have regard to the electronic communication from the appellant's
         mother concerning the threat posed by the appellant's father.

      c. Thirdly, it is argued that the judge erred by not having regard to
         the Camden safety services report (referred to above at paragraph
         9).

14. Ms Aboni, on behalf of the respondent, argued that the judge adequately
    considered the evidence of electronic communications and was entitled
    to conclude that they were unclear. With respect to the Camden safety
    services report, she argued that this merely summarised the appellant's
    account and as such was not independent evidence that could properly
    further her claim.

15. In my view, the judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility is
    undermined by three material errors.

16. The first error concerns the evidence of ZH speaking to the appellant's
    father at the time he separated from the appellant. The judge stated in
    clear terms at paragraph 63 of the decision that the screenshots of
    messages between the appellant and ZH do not show that ZH had been in
    contact with the appellant's family. However, in a message dated 21
    September 2017 (quoted above at paragraph 7) ZH stated that he had
    spoken to the appellant's father. In finding that the messages do not
    show contact between ZH and the appellant's family, the judge has made
    a clear error. The error is material because evidence that ZH spoke to
    the appellant's father at a time when their relationship was breaking
    down (and when, as can be seen from the other message quoted above at
    paragraph 7, ZH was angry with, and felt the need to apologise to, the
    appellant) tends to support the appellant's account. If the judge had
    appreciated that the contemporaneous documentary evidence indicates
    that ZH telephoned the appellant's father at the same time that he
    admitted to being angry with the appellant, he may have reached a
    different view on whether ZH disclosed the information as claimed by
    the appellant.

17. The second error concerns the judge finding that there was no credible
    or identifiable communication from the appellant's mother when the
    bundle of evidence included a screenshot of a communication from the
    appellant's mother. In my view, the judge's reasoning for rejecting
    this evidence does not withstand scrutiny. The screenshot clearly
    identifies that the communication is from "Mama" and it is clear from
    the context (where the message refers to "your dad or Ahmed [the
    appellant's brother]" that the message is likely from the appellant's
    mother.

18. The third error of law concerns the failure to have regard to the
    Camden Safety Services report. Whilst Ms Aboni is correct that this
    document merely repeats what the appellant has said, the significance
    of it is that it was written several months prior to the claim for
    asylum. It is, in my view, material that at around the same time the
    appellant was escaping from her violent partner (ie at a time of
    significant vulnerability) she gave an account concerning her family in
    Egypt to Camden Safety Services which is broadly consistent with the
    account she gave when claiming asylum several months later.

19. In light of the errors described above, the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal cannot stand.

20. Although I reserved my decision at the hearing, both parties argued
    that if I were to find an error of law the appeal should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal. I agree. The appellant's account and
    credibility will need to be considered afresh. The likely extent of
    further fact-finding that will be required is such that, in accordance
    with Section 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements of the Immigration and
    Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

A    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
    law and is set aside.

B    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered
    afresh by a different judge.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 8 January 2019                |


