
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09967/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 April 2019                    |On 17 April 2019                      |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                ALIFKHAN [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford of Counsel instructed by Central
                  England Law Centre
For the Respondent:  Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  E
    M M Smith promulgated on  11  January  2019  dismissing  on  protection
    grounds the appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated  28  July
    2018.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as 1 January 2000.


3.   The primary issue before the Upper Tribunal is in respect of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's apparent failure to have any regard to an  expert
    report filed by the Appellant in support of his appeal.


4.   The report,  dated  2  September  2018,  was  prepared  by  Dr  Antonio
    Giustozzi (Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, pages  5-
    46).    Dr Giustozzi has been acknowledged as an expert in  many  cases
    before the Tribunal, perhaps most recently and notably as a witness  in
    the country guidance case of AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  (Afghanistan)  CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118.  Whilst not every aspect of his evidence and opinion
    was accepted by the Tribunal in AS  (Afghanistan),  nonetheless  it  is
    evident from the detailed consideration of his evidence there  that  he
    was considered to be an individual whose evidence carried a  degree  of
    significant weight.


5.   Dr Giustozzi's report in the instant case speaks to  something  of  the
    country situation relevant to the particular account of the  Appellant,
    and also offers an evaluation of, and an opinion on, the  risk  to  the
    Appellant in the event of return to Afghanistan.


6.   The basis of the Appellant's case is helpfully set out at paragraphs  8
    and 9 of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal in these terms:-

         "8.  A year before the appellant left Afghanistan the appellant was
             taking his animals to an area he had not been to  before  some
             30 minutes from his home.  There he noticed a cave and when he
             entered the cave  he  saw  a  number  of  firearms.   When  he
             returned home his father was not  in  so  he  spoke  with  the
             village elder and explained to him  what  he  had  seen.   The
             elder informed the authorities and the following day  the  ANA
             came to the appellant's home and told him to take them to  the
             cave.  As they were heading towards the cave and were some  10
             minutes away, the  Taliban  began  firing  on  the  ANA.   The
             appellant ran home leaving the fighting to continue  for  over
             two hours.


         9.   The appellant was then accused by the ANA of leading them into
             an ambush and later the Taliban accused him of  informing  the
             ANA of the whereabouts of the cave.  The following  night  the
             Taliban came to the home.  They were told by  the  appellant's
             mother that he was not at home so they  took  the  appellant's
             father.  Two nights later his body was left lying outside  the
             village.  The appellant had gone to stay with his  sister  and
             was then  told  by  his  brother-in-law  that  he  must  leave
             Afghanistan."


7.   I pause to note that the reference to "the village  elder"  appears  to
    be in error.  The Appellant's narrative account refers to him  speaking
    to an elder of the village without it specifically being indicated that
    he was in some way 'the village elder', or head  of  the  village.   It
    should also be noted that the suggestion that the Appellant  had  taken
    his animals to an area that he had not been to before did not initially
    emerge  in  his  initial  witness  statement  (dated  28  April   2017,
    Respondent's bundle, Annex B), but emerged subsequently when  asked  at
    interview why he had not seen  the  cave  previously  in  circumstances
    where he had been grazing his animals in  the  same  area  for  several
    years (interview record at q.45 - Respondent's bundle, C13).


8.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  narrative
    account, essentially for the following reasons:

         (i) The Judge did not accept that  the  Appellant  would  not  have
         known  of  the  cave  previously:  "Whilst  possible  I   find   it
         implausible that this appellant had not examined every area that he
         was returning to every day with his animals and his  claim  he  had
         not seen this cave before all was  unaware  of  it  is  improbable"
         (paragraph  23).  (The  words  'possible'  and  'implausible'   are
         uncomfortably juxtaposed; 'improbable' does not obviously echo  the
         applicable standard of proof; however such matters are not  at  the
         core of the challenge herein, and are ultimately peripheral.)


         (ii) There was no evidence that the attack by the Taliban  on  the
         ANA was related to the cache of weapons.  In this context the Judge
         observed that the attack had taken place approximately  20  minutes
         into a 30 minute journey and inferred that it would not  have  been
         apparent where the army and the Appellant  were  headed.   In  this
         context  the  Judge  also  noted  that  the  Appellant's   evidence
         suggested that  fighting  between  the  Taliban  and  the  ANA  was
         frequent in the area. "I do  not  accept  that  the  appellant  has
         established that the ambush had anything to do with the cave. I  do
         not accept the Taliban knew the ANA were heading for  the  cave  if
         they were still 10 minutes away. This  may  simply  have  been  the
         usual fighting between the Taliban and the ANA unconnected  to  the
         appellant's claim that he had found a  cave  with  an  arms  cache"
         (paragraph 23).


         (iii) The Judge thought that there was no basis for the Taliban to
         believe that the Appellant was an  informer.  In  part  because  it
         would not have been clear that the ANA was headed for the cave  (as
         per (ii) above), and in part because it was the elder to  whom  the
         Appellant had spoken who had contacted the ANA, not the  Appellant.
         (See paragraph 24.)


         (iv) The Judge did not consider it credible  that  the  ANA  would
         have targeted the Appellant without also targeting  the  elder  who
         had been the conduit of information between the Appellant  and  the
         ANA: "... it would make no  sense  not  to  accuse  the  elder  who
         carried the information to them but instead he has not been  sought
         by either the Taliban or the ANA" (paragraph 25).


         (v) The Judge suggests that the Appellant does not complain of any
         threats from the ANA: "I accept that it is possible that  if  these
         events did occur that the ANA may have thought  the  appellant  had
         led them into a trap, however, he makes no  complaint  of  the  ANA
         making any threats towards him or his family prior to  him  leaving
         so it is highly unlikely that the ANA had believed him responsible"
         (paragraph 25).


         (vi) The Appellant was not seemingly pursued by either the Taliban
         or the ANA, notwithstanding that he spent a period of about 9  days
         at his sister's home - a location close to the  family  home.   The
         Judge effectively  considered  that  had  the  Appellant  been  the
         subject of serious interest on the part of either  the  Taliban  or
         the  ANA  his  whereabouts  could  have  been  traced  without  any
         difficulty. "In that time he...  was  unaware  of  any  attempt  by
         either the Taliban or  the  ANA  to  trace  him....  The  appellant
         confirmed that his sister lived some 45 minute walk  from  his  own
         home and her house was in the same village. I am satisfied that  if
         the Taliban or the ANA wanted to trace this appellant  they  could"
         (paragraph 27).


         (vii) The Judge also found  that  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants et cetera) Act 2004 applied  in
         respect of the Appellant's failure to pursue an asylum claim  prior
         to entering the UK notwithstanding a considerable period of time in
         Europe including having come into contact with the  authorities  in
         France and having made an asylum claim there - the outcome of which
         he did not await. (See paragraph 22.)


9.   In my judgement, looked at in isolation, there is  no  real  basis  for
    criticism of the Judge's reasoning summarised  at  sub-paragraphs  (i),
    (ii), (vi) and (vii) above. Further, irrespective of any  other  issues
    regarding the narrative account, sub-paragraph (vi) cannot be  seen  as
    anything other than of significant adverse weight.


10.  In the context of sub-paragraph (i)  I  note  that  some  criticism  is
    advanced in the Appellant's grounds that comments of  Dr  Giustozzi  at
    paragraph 5 of his report that wee 'on point' had been disregarded.  At
    paragraph 4 of the report Dr  Giustozzi  refers  to  the  existence  of
    numerous caches of weapons and their discovery from  time  to  time  by
    Government forces.  At paragraph 5 Dr Giustozzi states  in  respect  of
    the Appellant's claimed discovery of a cache -  "The  cave  might  have
    been covered normally hence the Appellant would  not  have  noticed  it
    until for some reason the cover was removed".  It seems to me that that
    observation  is  not  something  that  falls  particularly  within   Dr
    Giustozzi's expertise; accordingly, for the Judge not to have expressly
    addressed that single sentence does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  of  any
    material concern.


11.  I also note that the Judge's analysis under section 8 of the  2004  Act
    is criticised on the grounds that the Appellant was only 16  years  old
    when in France and under the control of an agent.  However,  the  Judge
    clearly took into account the Appellant's age in this context  - "I  am
    satisfied  that  despite  his  age...",  and  "Despite  his  age  I  am
    satisfied..." (paragraph 22). The Judge also noted that  the  Appellant
    was not under the control of the agent when he was  in  direct  contact
    with the authorities in France and made  his  claim  for  asylum  (also
    paragraph  22).  There  is  no  error  of  law  raised  here   -   only
    disagreement.


12.  Be that as it may, it seems to me  that  there  are  matters  that  are
    problematic in respect of the  Judge's  reasoning  summarised  at  sub-
    paragraphs (iii), (iv), and (v).


13.  The Appellant pleads that irrespective of what the Taliban  might  have
    thought about where he was headed with the  army,  he  was  nonetheless
    seen by the Taliban to be with the army, and that would  be  sufficient
    to put him at risk as a perceived  collaborator.   I  accept  that  the
    Judge does not  in  terms  consider  this  possible  circumstance  when
    evaluating credibility.


14.  Ms Cunha frankly and properly acknowledges that there is  a  difficulty
    with the logic of the Judge's reasoning  in  respect  of  sub-paragraph
    (iv). On the Appellant's account, irrespective of the actual  (unknown)
    details  of  the  elder's  discussion  with  the  authorities,  or  his
    motivations, it was plainly the case that the elder had told them  that
    the information about the cave and the cache had  originated  with  the
    Appellant because it was to the Appellant they came to be guided to the
    cave. In such circumstances I cannot follow the logic of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's reasoning - "it would make no sense not to accuse  the
    elder".


15.  In respect of point (v), it is inherent in the Appellant's  claim  that
    he considered the ANA's visit to the family home  after  the  firefight
    constituted  a  threat  towards  him.  For  example,  see  his  witness
    statement of 28 April  2017  at  paragraph  12  -  "Shortly  after  the
    fighting had stopped the ANA fighters came to my house. ...  They  were
    asking for me. ... The ANA were very angry. They told my mother that  I
    must have been a spy as I had lured them to a place where  the  Taliban
    would attack them. They believed I had done this on purpose and I was a
    liar" (Respondent's bundle, B2); and paragraph 21 -  "I  am  scared  of
    both the authorities and the Taliban.... They both blame  me  for  what
    happened. ... If I am returned to Kabul I would be definitely  arrested
    straightaway by the authorities..." (B3).


16.  It is against this background  that  I  consider  the  materiality,  or
    otherwise, of the failure of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to refer  to
    Dr Giustozzi's report - or any aspect of it - in the course of  setting
    out his reasons in the decision.


17.  In this context Ms Cunha is again properly frank in  acknowledging  the
    absence of any reference at all to the expert evidence  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's  Decision.  She  is  also  open  in  acknowledging  the
    potential difficulty that  such  omission  presents  in  resisting  the
    challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Nonetheless, she
    argues  that  looked  at  in  the  round  the  omission  is  ultimately
    immaterial.


18.  However, it seems to me that in  substance  Ms  Cunha's  submission  is
    that the outcome in the appeal would have been the  same  even  if  the
    Judge  had  articulated  reasons  displaying  a  consideration  of   Dr
    Giustozzi's report. In particular in this regard  she  emphasises  that
    even if the  Appellant's  account  were  to  be  accepted  the  country
    guidance is such that he would not be able to succeed  in  establishing
    that he could not safely be returned to Kabul where the risk  from  the
    Taliban would not reach the threshold to entitle him  to  international
    surrogate protection.


19.  The first difficulty with  such  a  submission  is  that  it  does  not
    address the potential risk from the  ANA.   In  Dr  Giustozzi's  report
    evidence and opinion is offered to the effect that if the Appellant was
    indeed identified by the ANA as a person of interest there may well  be
    a risk to him on return, even if  that  return  is  to  Kabul:  see  in
    particular at paragraphs 50, 58 and 60.


20.  The second difficulty is that 'materiality' is not to  be  measured  by
    the simple metric of whether the outcome would inevitably be  the  same
    or different.


21.  Moreover, there is a problem in respect of  procedural  fairness  here.
    The Appellant  presented  in  support  of  his  claim  significant  and
    relevant evidence from an acknowledged expert; he was entitled to  have
    such evidence  considered  and  taken  into  account  by  the  judicial
    decision-maker;  necessarily,  in  my  judgement,  as  part   of   that
    entitlement he was also entitled to some form of reasoned consideration
    so that he could  understand  what  approach  had  been  taken  to  his
    supporting evidence.  There is no such reasoned  consideration  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


22.  In all such circumstances - and notwithstanding  the  weight  that  the
    reasoning summarised in my sub-paragraph (vi) must inevitably carry - I
    am persuaded that there is a material error of law that  requires  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge be set aside.


23.  The consequence of the error of law is that the Appellant has  not  had
    a full and fair hearing in  respect  of  credibility.  Accordingly  the
    appropriate remedy is that he should have a further hearing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal with all issues at large.


24.  No specific direction are sought by either party;  standard  directions
    will suffice.


Notice of Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
    error of law and is set aside.


26.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge E M M  Smith
    with all issues at large.


27.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 13 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


