
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09576/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 23 January 2019                     |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                  WAQAR [A]
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Javed, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  5  April  1993.  He
      appeals against  a  decision  of  judge  of  the  first-tier  Tribunal
      Hembrough sitting at Hatton Cross on 3 September  2018  in  which  the
      judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent dated 20  July  2018.  That  decision  was  to  refuse  the
      appellant's application for international protection.


   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 30 August 2011 with  leave
      as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant valid  until  26  January  2013.
      This was extended until 7 June 2014, but his leave was curtailed on 23
      January 2014 as his college was removed from the sponsorship register.
      On 17 April 2014 the appellant was granted  further  leave  to  remain
      under Tier 4 until 31 July 2015 but on 24 December 2014 his leave  was
      again curtailed and again it was because his college was removed  from
      the sponsorship register. Thereafter the  appellant  remained  in  the
      United Kingdom unlawfully. On 25 January 2018 he  claimed  asylum  and
      was interviewed substantively on 9 July 2018. It was the  respondent's
      decision to refuse that application for asylum on 20  July  2018  that
      has given rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

   3. The appellant claimed to  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
      because of his sexual orientation as a gay man. He came to realise  he
      was gay when he was 9 years old when he had sex with  a  schoolfriend,
      S. The relationship was conducted in secret but when he was  about  14
      years old his older brother walked in  on  the  couple  as  they  were
      having  sex  at  the  family  home.  Both  boys  were  beaten  by  the
      appellant's older brother and the appellant was  also  beaten  by  his
      father. However, he continued his relationship with S in secret  until
      about 2009 when S was forced to marry.


   4. When the appellant was 15 he was raped by a  neighbour  called  Imran.
      After the appellant finished his secondary schooling in  Pakistan  his
      parents pressured him to get  married.  To  avoid  this  pressure  the
      appellant decided to come to the United Kingdom to study. He  did  not
      claim asylum on arrival as he did not know anything  about  it.  Since
      being in the United Kingdom he had had a relationship with a Pakistani
      man which ended when the man returned Pakistan to marry.  He  had  not
      had any other relationship since. He lost contact with his  family  in
      October 2017 when they pressed him to return to Pakistan and  he  told
      them he would not do that because he was gay. His brother  called  the
      appellant and told him he would kill the appellant if he  returned  to
      Pakistan. The appellant wished to live openly as a  gay  man,  but  he
      could not do this in Pakistan.

The Decision at First Instance

   5. The judge began his findings at [31] of the  determination  indicating
      his familiarity with the respondent's revised operational guidance  in
      relation  to  sexual  orientation  in   asylum   claims.   The   judge
      acknowledged  that  the  determination  of   an   appellant's   sexual
      orientation was by no means an easy task. At [37] the judge noted that
      there were a number of significant inconsistencies between the account
      the appellant gave at the asylum interview and that given in a witness
      statement which caused the judge to doubt the appellant's credibility.
      The incidents which the appellant recounted in  his  asylum  interview
      were in the appellant's view at least  the  keystones  of  his  asylum
      claim upon which he had no doubt reflected prior to making  his  claim
      at a time  of  his  choosing.  The  judge  found  the  inconsistencies
      difficult to reconcile in those circumstances. The appellant had  been
      unable to explain the discrepancies when asked  about  them  in  cross
      examination.


   6. The judge did not find it credible that the appellant would  muster  a
      gang of older boys to attack Imran (see [44]). The  appellant's  claim
      to be subject to round-the-clock surveillance from his brothers  after
      the relationship with S  was  discovered  was  inconsistent  with  the
      assertion that the  appellant  and  S  were  able  to  maintain  their
      relationship by meeting in fields. The appellant's  claim  to  have  a
      relationship with a man in the United Kingdom contained discrepancies.
      He had referred to the man as Al Haider in interview and  Ali  in  his
      witness statement. No one had come forward to confirm the relationship
      even though the appellant said they had lived openly as a  gay  couple
      for 3 years. There were no photographs showing the appellant  and  his
      claimed partner together. The judge rejected the explanation that they
      had been stored on an old phone which the appellant  had  now  changed
      given the ease with which data could be transferred between phones.

   7. On the one hand the appellant had said in interview that  he  had  not
      had any further relationships in the United Kingdom but on  the  other
      hand his witness  statement  said  he  had  had  a  number  of  casual
      encounters with men.  The  judge  rejected  supporting  evidence  from
      witnesses who made statements, at [49] to  [53].  At  [53]  the  judge
      wrote: "Taken at its highest the evidence of all of the witnesses  was
      that the appellant has been attending LGBT events and gay clubs  since
      2017. In doing so I consider that there is a high possibility that  he
      has been laying the trail with  a  view  to  making  an  opportunistic
      asylum claim based on sexual orientation". The appellant's failure  to
      claim asylum until after 7  years  from  his  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom further undermined his credibility. Article 8 was not  pursued
      with any degree of vigour. The judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

   8. The appellant appealed against  this  decision  arguing  that  despite
      being aware of the guidelines on international protection claims based
      on sexual orientation the judge had  highlighted  various  credibility
      issues and inconsistencies between the appellant's  witness  statement
      and asylum interview. The judge had not considered the  clarifications
      and further details presented in the appellant's evidence.  There  was
      no consideration of the  sensitive  issue  of  rape  which  was  being
      discussed or the fears and  traumas  that  the  appellant  would  have
      faced. The judge had not considered the entirety  of  the  appellant's
      evidence.


   9. It was irrational to question the appellant's  evidence  just  because
      despite his personal preferences he was engaged in sport that  he  did
      not generally like. This was a reference to [38] in  which  the  judge
      had noted that the appellant's witness statement  said  the  appellant
      had always preferred to engage in girls play and did not  like  sports
      but had then gone on to say that his first sexual encounter with S was
      after they had played cricket. The 2nd ground  argued  the  judge  had
      failed to take into account material evidence and there was a  factual
      misunderstanding infecting the credibility assessment.  The  appellant
      had referred to his partner in the UK as  Ali  Haider  in  the  asylum
      interview.

  10. The 3rd ground took  issue  with  the  rejection  of  the  appellant's
      supporting witnesses. The appellant had relied on  evidence  from  the
      specialist LGBT charity called Apanjon which campaigned  for  equality
      and justice for the LGBT community. The judge had made no  credibility
      findings against the supporting  witnesses  but  had  failed  to  give
      appropriate weight to their evidence. There was a statement  from  the
      founder of Apanjon that the appellant  had  been  not  only  attending
      events but mixing intimately with other men and  availing  himself  of
      the organisation's counselling services. Another witness had confirmed
      in cross examination that he knew the appellant to  be  gay  not  only
      because he had witnessed the appellant being intimate with  other  gay
      men but because some  of  those  men  were  also  his,  the  witness',
      personal friends. The witness evidence was not entirely  derived  from
      what the appellant told them as the judge had  claimed.  The  evidence
      from  these  witnesses,  the  photographs  demonstrating   sur   place
      activities  and  the  appellant's  own  detailed   witness   statement
      satisfied the standard of proof.

  11. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      judge of the first-tier  tribunal  Lambert  on  21  October  2018.  In
      refusing permission to appeal she wrote that  the  decision  disclosed
      adequate evidence-based reasons for concluding  that  the  appellant's
      evidence as to homosexuality was not credible and that  the  appellant
      would not be at risk on return to  Pakistan  and  there  would  be  no
      breach of article 8. The grounds had taken  issue  with  the  findings
      made by the judge but in effect amount to no more than a  disagreement
      and an attempt to reargue the case.

  12. The appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal to  the
      upper tribunal on the same grounds as submitted to the first-tier. The
      renewed application came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Shaerf  on
      13 December 2018. In granting permission to appeal he wrote  that  the
      grounds challenged  in  some  detail  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
      evidence and his failure to  make  specific  credibility  findings  in
      relation to the witnesses for the appellant. The judge's  findings  at
      [38] to [42] and [44] to [45] arguably  did  not  fairly  reflect  the
      documentary evidence. The inconsistency referred to  at  [46]  (Al  or
      Ali) was arguably not a discrepancy, absent any other reason and there
      appeared not to be one. [53] referring to  "a  high  possibility"  was
      arguably speculative (see paragraph 7 above).

The Hearing Before Me

  13. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me to
      determine in the first place whether there was a material error of law
      such that the determination fell to  be  set  aside,  and  the  appeal
      reheard. If there was not, then the decision at first  instance  would
      stand.


  14.  For  the  appellant  his  solicitor  argued  that  the  crux  of  the
      appellant's application was that the evidence had not been  considered
      by the judge in a holistic fashion. The supporting witnesses' evidence
      had not been looked at in the round. Although the judge  had  referred
      to the guidelines on the treatment  of  evidence  they  had  not  been
      applied. There was no reference to  any  alternative  explanations  in
      [44] where the judge stated that if the appellant had mustered a  gang
      of older boys to attack Imran he must have had  to  put  forward  some
      reason for the attack which was likely to have involved the  appellant
      disclosing the fact of the rape. A supporting witness had given  dates
      when he had seen the appellant. The witness gave evidence of  what  he
      saw himself. For the judge  to  say  that  the  witness  evidence  was
      generic was an error of law.

  15. In reply the Presenting Officer said that the first ground in relation
      to non-application of  the  guidance  had  no  merit.  The  judge  had
      reminded himself of the guidelines and recognised the cultural  issues
      at [35] when he acknowledged that it was  not  always  appropriate  to
      invoke delay as the  basis  for  undermining  the  credibility  of  an
      appellant's claim because for cultural reasons  some  appellants  were
      likely to be reluctant to discuss their sexual  orientation.  At  [43]
      the judge appreciated  that  witnesses  sometimes  had  problems  with
      recall and the sequence of events.  The  judge's  conclusions  overall
      were sound.

  16. There were difficulties with the appellant's account which  the  judge
      highlighted. The inconsistencies  were  difficult  to  reconcile.  The
      guidelines did not mean that one ignored credibility issues. The judge
      had not disagreed with the witnesses just because their  evidence  was
      generic. At [52] he had said that none of the  witnesses  demonstrated
      any real knowledge of the appellant who appeared  to  have  parachuted
      into their lives sometime in 2017. Although  the  witnesses  variously
      made reference to  the  appellant  "flirting,  making  out  and  being
      intimate" with other gay men no specifics were given. The judge had to
      make an assessment in the round of all the evidence.  A  determination
      could always be criticised for insufficient detail.

  17. In conclusion the appellant's solicitor referred to the last  line  of
      [52] where the judge had said: "I have not found [the appellant] to be
      credible as regards his background". The witnesses had been  recording
      aspects of the appellant's behaviour which they themselves had seen.

Findings

  18. The challenge in this case to the judge's findings  is  essentially  a
      reasons-based challenge, that the judge gave  inadequate  reasons  for
      his findings and/or placed insufficient weight on other evidence given
      by supporting witnesses. It is apparent from a  fair  reading  of  the
      determination  that  the  judge  self-directed  appropriately  in  the
      approach to cases such as this. It did not follow that the appellant's
      evidence had to be accepted just because he claimed to be a vulnerable
      witness. The  judge  factored  in  the  claim  for  vulnerability  but
      nevertheless found the appellant  to  lack  credibility.  The  overall
      credibility finding was that he did  not  accept  that  the  appellant
      could show to the lower standard that the appellant was in  fact  gay.
      The first question HJ Iran was answered in the negative and,  assuming
      that answer was correct, the case  stopped  there.  The  question  was
      whether the judge gave legally adequate reasons for  his  conclusions,
      in particular that  the  appellant  was  not  gay  and  that  the  ill
      treatment the appellant described had not occurred.


  19. The appellant by way of support for his account, in  addition  to  his
      own evidence called a number of witnesses, four in all, whose evidence
      was briefly summarised at  [29]  of  the  determination.  The  grounds
      disagreed with the weight that the  judge  placed  on  that  evidence.
      Their evidence was that they moved in the same social  circle  as  the
      appellant and regularly saw him at various gay  clubs  and  events  as
      demonstrated by photographs submitted. The judge's concern about  this
      evidence was  expressed  at  [52]  which  I  have  quoted  above,  see
      paragraph 16. What the judge was  concerned  about  was  the  lack  of
      specifics.  If  the  witnesses  had  seen   the   appellant   in   the
      circumstances they described it was reasonable to have  expected  them
      to be able to be more specific about what they did or did not see.

  20. According to the grounds, one at least of the witnesses, Mr  Amir  had
      seen the appellant being intimate with other gay men.  The  difficulty
      with that was that it contradicted what the appellant himself had said
      in interview, which the judge referred to at [47]. The  appellant  had
      not had any further relationships in the United  Kingdom  "not  having
      found anybody nice". The appellant's witness  statement  was  in  line
      with the witness statements of the persons called on  his  behalf  but
      the inconsistency between the interview and the witness statement  was
      not adequately explained by the appellant. In those  circumstances  it
      was open to the judge to form  an  adverse  view  of  the  appellant's
      credibility.

  21. I do  not  agree  that  the  judge  formed  a  negative  view  of  the
      appellant's credibility and  then  as  an  afterthought  rejected  the
      appellant's  supporting  witnesses.   Rather   the   judge   carefully
      considered those witnesses and found them unreliable  because  of  the
      lack of detail which could readily have been expected they would  give
      and their lack of knowledge of the appellant and his life before  they
      were "parachuted" into the appellant's life (as the judge put it). The
      judge was entitled to indicate as he did that little weight  could  be
      placed on the evidence of the supporting  witnesses.  The  appellant's
      inconsistency  between  his  interview   and   his   statement   about
      relationships was not adequately addressed by the appellant.

  22. The 2nd ground points out that the judge was wrong  to  conclude  that
      two different names had been given for the partner that the  appellant
      lived with. That may be correct, but it is difficult to  see  how  far
      such an error takes this case when the most important  point  was  the
      lack of supporting evidence to indicate that this relationship with  a
      partner had ever existed. The appellant did not say that  this  was  a
      casual relationship with Mr Ali Haider which  might  possibly  explain
      the lack of supporting material, rather he said that they lived as  an
      openly gay  couple  for  three  years  yet  none  of  the  appellant's
      witnesses were able to talk about this  relationship.  There  were  no
      photographs or other evidence showing that the relationship  had  ever
      existed. The judge rejected the appellant's explanation for  the  lack
      of supporting evidence. Whilst supporting evidence is not  necessarily
      a requirement for asylum appeals, the absence of it  in  circumstances
      where that evidence could reasonably have been obtained  but  is  not,
      can found the basis for an  adverse  credibility  conclusion,  see  TK
      Burundi.

  23. At [53] the judge was concerned that the appellant was  fabricating  a
      case by being seen at gay clubs and events since 2017 in order to  lay
      a trail for a further asylum appeal. That was criticised in the  grant
      of permission as being arguably speculative but the appellant had been
      in United Kingdom for six years before these activities began  and  in
      those circumstances it was open to the judge to consider  whether  the
      motive for the appellant's sur place activities might be to  fabricate
      a claim rather than demonstrate that he was in fact gay.  It  was  not
      being suggested that one could only enter gay clubs or  take  part  in
      events if one was gay,  and  the  mere  fact  therefore  of  attending
      premises would not of itself advance the appellant's case.

  24. The appellant relied on his witnesses, but they were not believed  for
      the cogent reasons which the judge gave which I have  outlined  above.
      The supporting witnesses were unimpressive. It is  incorrect  for  the
      grounds to assert that the judge made no adverse credibility  findings
      against the witnesses. At [52] the judge commented that the witnesses'
      evidence was based on the incredible evidence of the  appellant,  thus
      finding the witnesses incredible in their assertions.

  25. There were a number of difficulties with the appellant's account,  the
      judge drew attention to those difficulties in several  paragraphs  but
      in particular at [43] and noted that the appellant had been unable  to
      explain the  discrepancies  between  his  interview  and  his  witness
      statement when cross-examined about the discrepancies at the  hearing.
      That was in a situation where the appellant  had  had  ample  time  to
      prepare for the hearing of his asylum appeal and yet he still  had  no
      valid explanation for the serious discrepancies in  his  account.  The
      judge appears to have been in no doubt that the account the  appellant
      gave had changed  from  the  time  when  he  was  interviewed  by  the
      respondent to  the  time  the  appellant  came  to  make  his  witness
      statement. There was no adequate explanation why  the  account  should
      have changed and it was open to the judge to draw an adverse inference
      from such a change.

  26. Overall the grounds of onward appeal in this matter are no more than a
      disagreement with the decision. I  do  not  find  that  there  is  any
      material error of law in this determination  I  dismissed  the  onward
      appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 15 February 2019


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 15 February 2019


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
