
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09838/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                           |On 27 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                      Gm (democratic republic of congo)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Hossain, Solicitor, Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 24 April 2018 whereby Judge Brunnen dismissed her appeal
    against the refusal of her protection and human rights claims in  which
    she contended that she faced a  real  risk  of  persecution  on  return
    because of her familial association with her father, who had  become  a
    high profile supporter of the Bundu dia  Kongo  ("BDK")  movement,  and
    also because she had made enquiries about the whereabouts of her father
    and mother following their arrest at a  BDK  meeting  on  20  September
    2016.

 2. Judge Brunnen did not accept that the  authorities  in  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo ("DRC") would wish to  do  the  appellant  harm  just
    because her father was involved in the political side of the  BDK,  and
    he also did not accept that a single threatening phone call to  her  in
    April 2017 from an unknown source, not  necessarily  connected  to  the
    authorities in the DRC, was sufficient to give rise to a real risk that
    she would be targeted  on  account  of  inquiring  about  her  parents'
    whereabouts; and there was even less reason to think that she would  be
    at risk if her parents were now dead, as she and her  sister  evidently
    believed.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 3. On 17 May 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         The grounds assert the First-tier Judge erred in finding  that  the
         appellant would not be at risk no return to the DRC in  failing  to
         have regard to evidence that sent various emails that would put her
         at risk.

         The grounds are arguable.  It is arguable  that  having  found  the
         appellant to have given a credible account (paragraph 24) the Judge
         failed to have regard to emails in the respondent's bundle from the
         appellant to various human rights organisations and to the Ministry
         of Justice and failed to consider the threatening  phone  call  she
         received against  this  background  (paragraph  8  of  her  witness
         statement).

Relevant Background

 4. The appellant is a national of the DRC, whose date of birth is  29  May
    1992.  While she was studying in Australia,  she  successfully  applied
    for a 6-month visit visa to enable her to  visit  her  sister  who  was
    settled in the UK.  The visa was issued to her on 26 October 2016,  and
    she arrived in the UK on 28 November 2016.  The visa expired on  7  May
    2017, and the appellant claimed asylum on 3 May 2017.

 5. In her screening interview,  she  was  asked  to  briefly  explain  the
    reasons why she could not return to her home country.   She  said  that
    her father had been arrested as he was part  of  a  political/religious
    sect called BDK, which was in opposition to the Government of the  DRC.
    He was trying to stop Joseph  Kabila  from  returning  to  power.   Her
    father had been advising the group on strategies to take  Kabila  down.
    He had been arrested at a religious meeting of the BDK.

 6. She had since been trying to find out  why  the  DRC  did  not  respect
    freedom. She had spoken to Teo Ngombo, the President of the UDPS in the
    UK.

 7. On 29 April 2017 she had received telephone call from an unknown person
    who spoke to her in Lingala. He told her to stop, or they would  arrest
    her like her father or kill her.  She reported the call to the Edmonton
    Police, and she had been told to change her  telephone  number  and  to
    contact Amnesty International.

 8. She was asked whether she had any documents relevant to her claim  that
    she wanted to submit in support of her application.  She said she could
    supply emails which she had sent to the Ministry of Justice  and  other
    people in the Congo, and that her uncle in the DRC  would  be  able  to
    send newspaper articles confirming the arrest of her parents.

 9. The appellant subsequently  provided  the  following  documents,  which
    appear in section E of the Home  Office  bundle:  (a)  an  undated  and
    untranslated article in French apparently published in a DRC  newspaper
    which referred to the arrest of the appellant's father and  two  others
    (who did not include the appellant's mother) by the  Congolese  Police,
    their transfer to an ANR prison at a specified location, and  the  fact
    that no one, including family members, was  being  permitted  to  visit
    them at this prison; (b) an email from the appellant to [ ~ ]@gmail.com
    on 23 December 2016, in which the recipient was addressed as  "Ministre
    de Justice" (i.e. Minister of  Justice)  and  in  which  the  appellant
    informed the recipient  that  she  was  writing  to  him/her  to  raise
    awareness about the arrest of her mum and dad on 20 September  2016  by
    the National Police, that it had  been  over  three  months  since  her
    parents had been  arrested  "and  there  is  no  whereabouts  of  their
    existence", and asking for advice on legal actions that she could take;
    (c) an email sent by the appellant at 15.42 on 27 April 2017  to  Human
    Rights  Watch  with  similar  content  to  that  of  the  first  email,
    expressing the hope that "solutions can be found and more enlightenment
    can be made towards this matter"; (d) an email sent on 29 April 2017 to
    Amnesty International in almost identical terms to the  email  sent  to
    Human Rights Watch; and (e) an email from Amnesty  International  on  5
    May 2017, advising the  appellant  that  she  needed  to  redirect  her
    enquiry from Amnesty UK to Amnesty's  International  Secretariat  where
    Amnesty's research on worldwide human rights abuses was conducted.

10. The respondent gave her reasons for refusing the appellant's protection
    claim in a decision letter dated 11 September 2017.  She had failed  to
    substantiate why she would be on the radar of the DRC  authorities,  as
    by her own admission she  had  never  been  politically  active.   With
    regard to the anonymous phone call to her mobile  telephone  around  29
    April, she had failed to provide a reasonable explanation as to how the
    authorities in the DRC would be in possession of her private  telephone
    number, and how they had become aware  that  she  had  been  trying  to
    obtain details regarding her parents.  Added to this, she had a  sister
    who lived in the UK and an uncle and cousin who lived in the  DRC,  and
    none of them had received any such calls or threats.  She had failed to
    provide a  reasonable  explanation  for  the  authorities'  motives  in
    contacting her or in having an active interest in  her  and  what  they
    would gain from this.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Brunnen sitting at  Manchester
    on 12 April 2018.  Both parties were legally  represented.   The  Judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant, who  was  cross-examined  by
    the Presenting Officer.

12. In her skeleton argument on behalf of the appellant, Ms Patel said that
    the appellant  was  claiming  asylum  on  the  basis  of  her  fear  of
    persecution based upon imputed political opinion.  She was in Australia
    at the time she heard from her sister that the authorities had come  to
    their parents' house looking for her father,  and  that  he  was  later
    detained at his place of worship.  She had struggled to deal with  this
    news by herself, and therefore she came  to  the  UK  to  be  with  her
    sister.  She and her sister had contacted the UDPS; they  had  attended
    Bundu religious gatherings; and they had also  contacted  Human  Rights
    Watch, all with a view to obtaining information about  the  whereabouts
    of their parents.  After making  these  enquiries,  the  appellant  had
    received a threatening phone call from someone who spoke Lingala.   Her
    father had provided  the  BDK  with  financial  support  and  he  would
    regularly hold meetings at his house.  This was how he  had  reached  a
    prominent position within the BDK.  As  her  father  held  a  prominent
    position in the BDK, and as the appellant had made enquiries about  her
    parents' whereabouts, the  DRC  authorities  would  seek  to  harm  the
    appellant.

13. The appeal bundle contained a translation of the undated article  which
    the appellant had provided as  evidence  of  her  father's  arrest  and
    detention.

14. In his subsequent decision, Judge  Brunnen  addressed  the  appellant's
    account of how events had unfolded between January 2016, when she first
    learned that her father had become a supporter of the BDK  movement  in
    2015, and her arrival in the UK on 28 November 2016 as a visitor.

15. At paragraph [24], he  held  that  the  appellant  had  given  what  he
    considered to be a consistent, coherent and  credible  account  of  the
    core circumstances which had led to her claim of asylum in the UK.   He
    found that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that the core of
    her account was the truth, and he accepted it.

16. The Judge then turned to consider whether the  appellant  would  be  at
    real risk if she were to return to the  DRC.   She  asserted  that  she
    would be at risk because she was her father's daughter and she bore the
    same surname.  She said that the authorities knew that the family  home
    was associated with the BDK, not least because her father used to  host
    BDK meetings there. The Judge did not accept what  the  appellant  said
    about BDK meetings being held at the family home.   This  was  a  claim
    which had appeared for the first time  in  her  appeal  statement.   He
    found it significant that the appellant had  not  mentioned  this  when
    asked about her father's BDK activities during her interview.

17. Another reason given by the Judge for rejecting future  risk  was  that
    the background evidence did not show that the authorities  in  the  DRC
    had an adverse interest in all BDK members, nor in the families of  BDK
    members.   There had certainly been arrests, but  the  evidence  showed
    that these had been of BDK leaders or supporters who had been  involved
    in civil unrest.  The appellant had never had any involvement  at  all.
    She said that this was irrelevant because her mother, who also  had  no
    involvement, was arrested.  However, her mother  was  involved  in  the
    religious side of the BDK and was arrested at the BDK  church  meeting.
    The appellant had said (AIR Q&A 74) that  her  understanding  was  that
    when the authorities raided a meeting, they took anyone who was  there.
    Her  mother's  arrest  was  explicable  in  this  way.    Whereas   the
    appellant's mother was involved  in  the  religious  side  of  the  BDK
    movement, the appellant had no involvement with the BDK of any kind.

18. The Judge continued in paragraph [29]:

         The appellant relies on the threatening phone call  that  she  says
         that she received in April  2017  as  an  additional  risk  factor.
         There is no justification for assuming that the further  calls  she
         received with no caller ID were from the same person.  Most  people
         with mobile phones receive such calls.  I  do  not  accept  that  a
         single  threatening  phone  call  from  an  unknown   source,   not
         necessarily connected to the authorities in the DRC, is  sufficient
         to give rise to a real risk that the appellant  would  be  targeted
         and harmed if she were to return to the DRC.  If  her  parents  are
         indeed dead, as she and her  sister  evidently  believe,  there  is
         still less reason to think that she would be at risk.

19. The Judge added in paragraph [30] that he fully understood that, having
    been outside the DRC since 2005, and "believing that she has  lost  her
    parents and being close to her sister", the appellant was desperate  to
    be allowed to stay in the UK.  However, he could not find that she  had
    established a well-founded fear of persecution in the DRC, or that upon
    return there she  would  be  at  real  risk  of  suffering  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

20. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, I noted the translation of the article and I also noted  from  the
    Record  of  Proceedings  that  the  appellant  had   been   extensively
    questioned about its contents when giving evidence. I drew Mr Hossain's
    attention to the fact that, on the face of it,  news  of  the  father's
    arrest, detention and whereabouts was a matter of public  knowledge  in
    the DRC and that his plight had been highlighted in the DRC media by  a
    human rights defender organisation called  the  ACAJ  (the  Association
    Congolese for Access to Justice).

21. Mr Hossain agreed that it was open to the Judge to find that  causation
    had not been established, but he submitted that the Judge had failed to
    give reasons as to why there was no causative  connection  between  the
    emails sent by the appellant - in particular the email to the  Minister
    of Justice on 23 December 2016 - and  the  threatening  phone  call  in
    April 2017.  He submitted that the appellant was of adverse interest to
    the authorities as she was someone who could  cause  trouble.   It  was
    easier for the  authorities  to  target  the  appellant,  who  was  low
    profile, than it was for them  to  target  the  ACAJ,  which  was  high
    profile.

22. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tan questioned the materiality  of  the
    emails in light of the fact that the Presenting Officer's case  in  her
    closing submissions was that it was the appellant's  investigations  in
    the UK that had exposed her to risk.  There was no independent evidence
    that the email sent on 23 December  2016  to  what  appeared  to  be  a
    private email address had actually gone to the Minister of  Justice  in
    the DRC, and it was inherently  unlikely  that  the  appellant's  other
    emails had come to the attention of the authorities in the DRC.

23. In reply, Mr Hossain relied on the fact that  it  was  the  appellant's
    specific evidence that the email of 23 December 2016 had been  sent  to
    the Minister of Justice in the DRC, and the Judge had  not  found  this
    claim to be untrue.

Discussion

24. In South Bucks District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33 Lord  Brown
    said at [26]:

         The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and  they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues  falling  for  decision  (my  emphasis).   The
         reasoning must not give rise to a substantial doubt as  to  whether
         the decision maker erred in law, for example,  by  misunderstanding
         some relevant policy or some other important matter or  by  failing
         to reach a rational decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse
         inference will not readily be drawn.  The reasons need  only  refer
         to  the  main  issues  in  the  dispute,  not  to  every   material
         consideration (my emphasis).

25. It is apparent from reviewing the material that was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the appellant relied on two related propositions  in
    support of her claim that she would be at real risk of  persecution  on
    return to DRC.  The first  was  that  her  father  was  a  particularly
    prominent and important member of the DK,  so  she  would  be  at  risk
    merely by association with him, whereas her uncle and cousin in the DRC
    were not at risk because they did not  share  the  same  surname.   The
    second proposition was that, as a result of making enquiries about  her
    father - both orally and by  email  -  the  appellant  had  received  a
    threatening telephone call from the authorities in the DRC at  the  end
    of April 2017, so this represented an additional risk factor for her on
    her return to the DRC.

26. Accordingly, the error of law challenge is a narrow one, as it  is  not
    suggested that the Judge did not give adequate reasons for holding that
    the appellant would not be at risk per se on account  of  her  father's
    activities for the BDK and the fact that she was his daughter  and  she
    shared the same surname as him.

27. It is also not suggested that the Judge erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    engage with the possibility that the appellant had come to the  adverse
    attention of the authorities in the DRC  through  her  and  her  sister
    making enquiries about their parents at a UDPS meeting  in  the  UK  in
    January 2017, or through any other oral enquiry in the UK.

28. The error  of  law  challenge  is  further  narrowed  by  Mr  Hossain's
    acknowledgement that the telephone call that  the  appellant  says  she
    received at the end of April 2017 cannot reasonably be  linked  to  her
    unacknowledged email to Human Rights Watch on 25 April 2017, and  still
    less can it be linked to her email to Amnesty  International  UK.   For
    her evidence is that she  contacted  Amnesty  after  she  received  the
    threatening phone call, not beforehand. Moreover, as Mr Hossain  agreed
    in oral argument, it is not credible that Human Rights Watch or Amnesty
    would have tipped off the authorities in the DRC about being  contacted
    by the appellant. The proposition is so absurd that the Judge  did  not
    err in law in not specifically addressing it.

29. Accordingly, the error of law challenge rests solely on the email  sent
    four months earlier to a person whom the appellant says is the Minister
    of Justice in the DRC, but in respect of whom she did not bring forward
    any background or independent evidence to verify that the recipient  of
    the email was indeed the Minister of Justice.

30. The Judge recorded in paragraph [13] of his decision that  it  was  the
    appellant's evidence that she had made efforts through various  avenues
    to trace her parents, including her sending an email to the Minister of
    Justice in the DRC.  The Judge did  not  make  a  finding  one  way  or
    another as to whether the addressee of the email of  23  December  2016
    was in fact the Minister of Justice.  This may be because the issue was
    not addressed in the refusal  decision.  It  was  not  addressed  there
    because the recipient of the letter was addressed in  French,  although
    the remaining text was all in English.  Similarly, the  respondent  did
    not comment on the contents of the article referring to her father,  as
    this was also in French and not  translated.  Another  reason  for  the
    Judge not making a specific finding is that it does not appear from the
    skeleton argument or the record of  proceedings  that  the  appellant's
    representatives placed any particular weight on  this  email  as  being
    causative of adverse interest in the appellant, as distinct from simply
    relying on investigations by her and her sister in  the  UK  generally,
    without focusing on the  chronology  (i.e.  when  enquiries  were  made
    relative to the timing of the phone call).

31. I do not consider that the Judge erred in  not  giving  weight  to  the
    email of 23 December 2016  as  fortifying  the  case  that  the  single
    threatening phone  call  in  April  2017  might  be  connected  to  the
    authorities  in  the  DRC,  or  in  not  giving  reasons  as  to   why,
    objectively, there was very unlikely to be a connection.

32. Firstly, as previously stated, no special weight  was  placed  on  this
    particular email as having been responsible for the  threatening  phone
    call.

33. Secondly, having provided a translation of  the  news  article  in  the
    bundle for the hearing, it was  apparent  that  by  December  2016  the
    arrest and detention of her father was a matter of public knowledge  in
    the DRC - and, moreover, that his treatment by the DRC authorities  was
    the subject of a public campaign and protest by a human rights defender
    organisation in the DRC. Against this background, the appellant's mild-
    mannered enquiry was not remotely provocative,  either  in  itself,  or
    still less by comparison with what had been published in the DRC media.

34. Thirdly, the appellant had not disclosed  any  acknowledgement  of  the
    email from  the  Minister  of  Justice.  Fourthly,  the  appellant  had
    received the threatening phone call more than four months after sending
    the email.

35. Against this background,  I  consider  that  the  Judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for his broad finding  at  paragraph  [29]  that  the  evidence
    relied upon by the appellant was not sufficient to establish that there
    was a real risk that the appellant would  be  targeted  and  harmed  on
    return to the DRC on account of the investigations  that  she  and  her
    sister had made in the UK.  Although the Judge  did  not  make  express
    reference to this aspect of the appellant's claim in paragraph [29], it
    is clear from the final sentence that he had this aspect of  her  claim
    in mind.  His reasoning was that, since the appellant  and  her  sister
    apparently believed that their parents were dead, the trigger  for  the
    threatening phone call of April 2017 no longer  existed.   The  premise
    which underlay the appellant's account of the  threatening  phone  call
    was that she was causing trouble by  continuing  to  try  to  find  her
    father who was still alive, but who the authorities were  detaining  in
    secret at an unknown location.  If her parents were now  dead,  as  she
    believed and as was reported by a pastor from the DRC in a letter dated
    5 January 2018 - see paragraph [16] of the decision - it  was  open  to
    the Judge to draw the inference that there was even less  risk  of  the
    appellant being perceived as a trouble maker as she was  not  going  to
    continue to try and establish her parents' whereabouts.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date 21 November 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

