

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09025/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Thursday 16 March 2017             |On Thursday 11 May 2017              |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    M A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Cartwright
                 King solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                  DECISION

Background

    1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He appeals  against  the
       Respondent's decision dated 18 August 2016 refusing  his  protection
       and human rights claim.


    2. His appeal against the Respondent's decision was dismissed by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge N M Paul by a decision promulgated on 14 October
       2016.  The Appellant appealed  that  decision  in  relation  to  the
       protection claim only.   The  dismissal  of  the  Appellant's  human
       rights claim in relation to his private life is not therefore  under
       challenge before me.


    3. By a decision promulgated on 4 January 2017, I found an error of law
       in the First-tier Tribunal's decision. I therefore  set  aside  that
       decision insofar as it related to the  protection  grounds  save  in
       relation to one factual finding to which I refer in my own  findings
       below. My error of law decision is annexed to this decision for ease
       of reference. The factual background is set out at [2] of  my  error
       of law decision.


      Evidence

    4. The documents before the Tribunal for consideration in  this  appeal
       are:
       (a)  The Respondent's bundle of documents including two reasons  for
       refusal letters dated 18 and 19 August 2016;
       (b)  Appellant's bundle prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing
       running to 580 pages and including the asylum interview record,  the
       Appellant's  witness  statements  dated  2  February  2015  and   12
       September 2016, a statement from [Mr A] dated 13 September  2016  as
       well as the Tribunal decision in relation to  [Mr  A]  allowing  his
       appeal on protection grounds, a number of documents said to  emanate
       from the Courts in Bangladesh, newspaper reports, a  medical  report
       of  Mr  Andrew  Mason  and  background  information  pertaining   to
       Bangladesh;
       (c)  A further bundle of documents adduced  by  the  Appellant  with
       permission for the hearing before me comprising a  video  clip  with
       still photographs extracted from that and an extract from  the  Code
       of Criminal Procedure, Bangladesh dated 22 March 1898.
       I refer below to those documents so far as relevant to my  findings.
       I confirm though that I have had regard to all  the  documents  when
       reaching my decision save that Ms Rutherford confirmed that she  did
       not ask me to view the video clip which was in DVD format  and  that
       the Appellant would deal  in  oral  evidence  with  what  the  still
       photographs are intended to show.


    5. I received oral evidence from the  Appellant  himself  and  [Mr  A].
       Both gave evidence via an interpreter.   They  and  the  interpreter
       confirmed that they understood each other.  A  full  record  of  the
       oral evidence is contained in the Record of Proceedings.  I refer to
       it below so far as relevant to my findings.  Again,  I  have  though
       had regard to all the evidence when reaching my decision.




    Legal Framework


    6. In order to be recognised as a refugee an appellant must  show  that
       he has a well-founded fear of persecution for one  of  five  reasons
       set out in Article 1(A)  of  the  1951  Refugee  Convention  ie  for
       reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of  a  particular
       social  group  or  political  opinion.   The  1951   Convention   is
       interpreted in European law  through  Council  Directive  2004/84/EC
       ("the Qualification Directive").   The  Qualification  Directive  is
       incorporated in UK law through The Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
       International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006  and  the
       Immigration Rules.


    7. Article 3 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights  prohibits
       torture, inhuman or degrading treatment.  It is  an  absolute  right
       from which there can be no derogation.  An appellant must show  that
       there are substantial grounds for believing that  there  is  a  real
       risk that the consequence of removal would violate his rights  under
       Article 3.


    8. The burden of proof is on the Appellant to establish his  claim  and
       that there is a real risk that he will be subjected  to  persecution
       or serious harm.  The assessment of risk must be considered  at  the
       date of the hearing before me.


    The Appellant's protection claim


    9. The Appellant claims that he is at real risk on return to Bangladesh
       due to his political opinion.  He says that he  joined  the  student
       wing of the BNP in 1999.  He says that he was a member and  attended
       meetings and demonstrations whilst in Bangladesh.


   10. Whilst in Bangladesh, the Appellant claims to have been the  subject
       of false charges laid against him in 2001, 2003 and 2004  but  those
       charges were dropped as it was accepted that he  was  not  involved.
       He was suspended from the BNP in August 2005  as  a  result  of  the
       charges in that  year  on  which  he  relies  (see  below)  but  the
       suspension was lifted once  the  party  realised  that  he  was  not
       involved.


   11. The Appellant claims to have been charged  with  a  robbery  and  an
       offence involving a violent assault in 2005.  He claims that he  was
       convicted and sentenced in January 2006 to two  years'  imprisonment
       in absentia (as he had at that time absconded).  He says that he was
       then detained in June 2006 following the issue  of  a  warrant.   He
       claims that he was ill-treated in detention.  However, he says  that
       he was then released in  December  2006  for  six  months  following
       payment  of  money  by  his  family.   Following  a   short   period
       thereafter, the Appellant left Bangladesh using a work  permit  visa
       which was issued to him in December 2006.


   12. The Appellant has produced a  number  of  documents  which  he  says
       emanate from the Courts in Bangladesh and support his claim to  have
       been charged, convicted  and  sentenced  for  these  offences.   The
       Respondent has apparently lost the originals of  the  documents  and
       therefore no point is taken about those documents being only in copy
       form.


   13. The first document in time is a First Information Report ("the FIR")
       dated 22 August 2005 made by one [IA] accusing (inter alia) a person
       by the name of "[J] s/o late [FA] [address given]" of a  robbery  of
       his brothers' shop and fight involving an assault  on  his  brothers
       which is said to have occurred at 9pm on 21  August  2005  (although
       the FIR refers to it being signed on 20 August 2005).


   14. There is then a charge sheet dated 30 August 2005 relating to  those
       offences and referring to "[AM] alias [J]" with father's and address
       details as before and noting that he was included in the charge  but
       had absconded.  The  charge  sheet  refers  to  the  offence  having
       occurred on 20 August 2005 and the  complaint  being  lodged  on  22
       August by "[IA]" but the spelling of the second  name  is  different
       from that which appears in the FIR.


   15. The Court judgment relating to the case is dated 18 January 2006 and
       again refers to the offence occurring  at  9pm  on  21  August  2005
       although the first names of the complainant's brothers are different
       in the FIR and charge sheet on the one hand and the judgment on  the
       other.  "J" is also spelt in a slightly different way in some places
       in the judgment.  The outcome of the judgment appears to be that the
       allegation  of  robbery  (or  "hijacking"  as   expressed   in   the
       translation) is dismissed, no person was convicted of  breaking  and
       entering but in relation  to  the  violence  and  assault,  although
       certain of  those  charged  were  acquitted,  "[AM]  alias  [J]"  is
       convicted.


   16. An order sheet dated 20 June 2006 confirms the arrest of "[AM] alias
       [J]".  There then appears an appeal petition dated  17  August  2006
       filed by a person named "[AM]" who is said  to  be  the  Appellant's
       brother coupled with a request to extend time for the appeal  and  a
       bail plea dated 20 August 2006 for release of the Appellant  pending
       the outcome of the appeal.  An order of the Sylhet Court of  Session
       dated 21 August 2006 lists the appeal and application for  extension
       of time for a hearing on 18 September 2006.  There is a record dated
       11 September 2006 granting bail with a bail bond of  "Tk  30,000/-".
       The appeal was dismissed by the Criminal Court, Sylhet by a judgment
       dated 25 September 2006.


   17. Finally, there is an order dated 14 December  2006  of  the  Supreme
       Court of Bangladesh releasing "[J] @ [AM]@[MAM]" on interim bail for
       a period of six months including what also appears to be a  previous
       order of a Judge in Sylhet dated 15 October 2006 refusing bail.


   18. In support of his claim to have been  detained  and  ill-treated  in
       Bangladesh, the Appellant relies on the witness evidence of [Mr  A].
       [Mr A] is a person  who  the  Appellant  claims  to  know  from  his
       membership of the BNP  in  Bangladesh.   [Mr  A]  has  been  granted
       refugee status in the UK following an allowed appeal  based  on  his
       claim to be at risk  because  of  his  activities  for  the  BNP  in
       Bangladesh and particularly in the UK where he appeared on televised
       debates openly criticising the Bangladeshi authorities.  [Mr A] says
       that he became aware of the Appellant's  arrest  in  June  2006  and
       visited him whilst he (the Appellant) was in detention.


   19. The Appellant left Bangladesh in 2006.  However, he claims  that  he
       will still be at risk on return due to his  unserved  sentence.   In
       that regard, Ms Rutherford referred to the extract from The Code  of
       Criminal Procedure 1898 which states as follows:-
           "[396(1)] When sentence is passed under this Code on an  escaped
           convict, such sentence, if of death, fine  or  whipping,  shall,
           subject to the provisions hereinbefore  contained,  take  effect
           immediately, and, if of imprisonment, or  transportation,  shall
           take effect according to the following rules, that is to say -
           (2) If the new sentence is severer in its kind than the sentence
           which such convict was  undergoing  when  he  escaped,  the  new
           sentence shall take effect immediately.
           (3) When the new sentence is not severer in its  kind  than  the
           sentence the convict was undergoing when  he  escaped,  the  new
           sentence shall take effect after he has  suffered  imprisonment,
           or transportation, as the case may  be,  for  a  further  period
           equal to that  which,  at  the  time  of  his  escape,  remained
           unexpired of his former sentence."


   20. Ms Rutherford produced this extract only at the hearing but  without
       objection from Mr Staunton.  No evidence was produced from a  lawyer
       in Bangladesh to confirm that this is and remains the law  in  these
       circumstances  or  whether  there  is  any  other   relevant   legal
       provision.


   21. The Appellant also relies on a newspaper report dated 20  June  2006
       confirming his arrest and a letter  from  a  Councillor  of  of  the
       Sylhet City Corporation (undated) which states that:-
           "My office came to know from local source  also  from  Mr  [JA].
           Who is  younger  brother  of  [MAM]  that  he  left  Bangladesh.
           However the police still looking  for  him  actively  and  quite
           often they raided  his  family  house  to  search  for  him  and
           harassed his family members,  even  though  they  knew  that  he
           doesn't live in Bangladesh any more."
       There is no written evidence from  any  of  the  Appellant's  family
       members  confirming  what  is  there  said.   Contrary  to  what  is
       suggested in the index to the bundle (and as Ms Rutherford confirmed
       at the earlier hearing before me), that letter does not confirm  the
       existing of an extant arrest warrant   nor  is  any  arrest  warrant
       produced in evidence.


   22. The Appellant claims that if he is detained, he will once  again  be
       ill-treated.  In support of  his  claim  to  have  been  ill-treated
       whilst detained in the past, the Appellant relies upon a  report  of
       Mr Andrew Mason, FRCS, FCEM who is  a  specialist  in  accident  and
       emergency medicine. That report is dated  8  July  2015.   Mr  Mason
       comments on the Appellant having two missing teeth, and a number  of
       scars on his forearms  and  lower  legs.   He  also  says  that  the
       Appellant  demonstrates  possible  signs  of  post-traumatic  stress
       disorder.


   23. The Appellant also claims that he will be at risk on return  due  to
       his activities in the UK.  He says that the  Bangladesh  authorities
       will be aware of his involvement with and support for the BNP in the
       UK.  He is not a member of the BNP in the UK.   However,  he  claims
       that the authorities will be aware of his activities, in  particular
       a speech which he gave for [Mr A] at a meeting in 2014 which is  the
       subject of the video clip before me.  He claims that the meeting was
       broadcast on Bengali TV which appears in both the UK and  Bangladesh
       and that it had also  come  to  the  attention  of  a  newspaper  in
       Bangladesh.


   24. The Appellant travelled to the UK on  11  January  2007  as  a  work
       permit holder.  He made  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  in
       December 2007 which was refused.   He  claimed  asylum  in  December
       2014.


    The Respondent's Reasons for Refusal


   25. The Respondent has issued two refusal letters in this case dated  18
       and 19 August 2016. She accepts that the  Appellant  is  Bangladeshi
       but rejects the core of his claim.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the
       Appellant was a member of the student wing of the BNP but it is  not
       accepted that he was suspended from the party as  a  result  of  the
       events which he says occurred  in  2005.   The  Respondent  did  not
       accept that charges had been brought against the Appellant either in
       2001, 2003, 2004 or 2005.  She therefore did not  believe  that  the
       Appellant would be at risk from the authorities on return.   In  his
       oral submissions, Mr Staunton also made the point that even  if  the
       Appellant's claim were true, that does not show that he is  at  risk
       now - some ten years after he left Bangladesh.


   26. The documents relied upon as supporting the core of the  Appellant's
       claim are rejected for reasons set out in the letter dated 19 August
       2016 and it is not accepted that those lend credence to  the  claim.
       Some of the documents are not accepted as genuine having  regard  to
       the background evidence which confirms the  ease  with  which  false
       documents can be procured. Others are  found  not  to  lend  further
       weight to the Appellant's account.


   27. The Respondent  also  relies  upon  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
       Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc)  Act  2004  ("section  8").
       She asserts that the Appellant's delay in claiming asylum for almost
       nine years is potentially damaging to his credibility.


    Findings of fact


   28. I have considered whether the Appellant has made a genuine effort to
       substantiate his claim and whether his account is credible, coherent
       and plausible and does not run  counter  to  available  specific  or
       general  information  relevant  to  his  case  (see  paragraph  339L
       immigration rules).


   29. I deal first with the Appellant's background as a member of  BNP  in
       Bangladesh.   Although  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Paul, I preserved his finding at [31] of the decision which
       states as follows:-
           "I am quite satisfied that the appellant has been involved with
           the BNP and also that, at some stage during that time, he was
           subjected to violence - whether it was by the RAB or fellow
           members of his own party, or indeed other parties.  It is
           unclear.  The background evidence shows that it was established,
           as in the previous decision of [Mr A], that there was a huge
           amount of violence in Bangladesh associated with political
           activities.  This violence was not limited to inter-party
           disputes, but also intra-party disputes, as demonstrated by the
           appellant's own account of his experience of being the subject
           of false charges"
       I preserved that finding as the Respondent has not disputed that the
       Appellant has been involved with the BNP.  That he was  the  subject
       of violence due to his political opinion at the time in question  is
       consistent  with  the  background  information  pertaining  to  that
       period.


  30. The Appellant says that he has been the subject of  false  charges  in
      the past.  There is nothing inherently implausible in that claim based
      on the background material as to the situation in Bangladesh  in  2001
      to 2004.  The Judge was prepared to accept the Appellant's claim  that
      those charges were brought.


   31. Whilst, based on the previous finding, I accept that  the  Appellant
       was a member of the BNP and suffered violence and false  accusations
       in 2001, 2003 and 2004 as a result of either inter-party  or  intra-
       party disputes, I find that this would not of itself give rise to  a
       real risk on return some ten  years  later.   The  Appellant  is  no
       longer a member of the BNP although he continues  to  support  them.
       The  background  evidence  in  relation  to   Bangladesh   shows   a
       significant amount of violence associated with political  activities
       at that time and false claims being brought for reasons of political
       enmity.  The Appellant's claim  is  therefore  consistent  with  the
       background evidence at that time.  However,  the  issue  for  me  is
       whether there is a real risk now.  Further, it is not clear  whether
       the violence previously suffered  was  at  the  hands  of  political
       opponents or fellow activists.  The  Appellant  claims  for  example
       that the first  of  the  false  charges  was  brought  by  a  fellow
       activist.  Those false charges were in any event dropped  and  there
       is no evidence from the Appellant to show that  he  is  still  being
       pursued in relation to those charges.


   32. I turn then to consider the core of  the  Appellant's  claim  namely
       that he remains wanted by the authorities in Bangladesh  for  having
       absconded whilst on bail in December 2006/ January 2007 following  a
       false charge brought in 2005 and a conviction in 2006.


   33.  I have accepted that the Appellant was the subject of false charges
       in 2001, 2003 and 2004.  It  is  therefore  plausible  that  further
       false charges might be brought in 2005.  That  claim  is  consistent
       with background evidence as to the situation at that time.


   34. The Appellant has produced a number of documents which he says  have
       been obtained from Bangladesh relating  to  the  Court  proceedings.
       Those documents are broadly consistent with the  chronology  in  the
       Appellant's evidence.  They show a charge being  brought  in  August
       2005 leading to a judgment in January 2006 in  the  absence  of  the
       person named as "J", detention of  that  person  in  June  2006  and
       release by the Supreme Court on bail for a period of six  months  in
       December 2006.


   35. I have set out the detail of those documents at [13] to  [17]  above
       and I have there noted some minor inconsistencies between dates  and
       names.  However, I am conscious that some of those  may  be  due  to
       errors by the issuing authorities, those recording the  evidence  or
       even the Judges when giving judgments.  They may also be  errors  in
       translation.  They are not of such magnitude as to cause me to doubt
       the genuineness of the documents.


   36. I do not have the originals of those documents but that  is  due  to
       the Respondent losing those originals.  Although  I  have  not  been
       provided with evidence as to the form of police or  Court  documents
       in Bangladesh, on the face of it, the documents have the  appearance
       of official documents and bear stamps consistent with issue  by  the
       relevant authorities and consistent with the production of certified
       copies of the documents. However, I have a number of concerns  about
       the documents which lead me  to  conclude  that  I  can  give  those
       documents only limited weight.


   37. First, there is an inconsistency between the document which  records
       the order of the Sylhet Court when dealing with the appeal lodged by
       the Appellant's brother and the Appellant's evidence.  The  fact  of
       that appeal  and  the  dismissal  of  it  by  the  Sylhet  Court  is
       consistent with the Appellant's case.   He  said  in  evidence  when
       dealing with  his  release  in  December  2006,  that  he  had  been
       previously refused bail by the Sylhet  Court.   That  is  consistent
       with the order of the Sylhet Court refusing bail  in  October  2006.
       However, he failed to mention that, as is indicated by the  document
       at [AB/235-237], his release on bail was ordered during the currency
       of his earlier  appeal  in  September  2006.   I  accept  that  this
       inconsistency may be explained by the  Appellant  being  unaware  of
       what was happening in his appeal at the time if he was detained  and
       was not in fact released then. There is no document confirming  that
       he was in fact released at that time.  On its own that inconsistency
       would not cause me not to accept the documents as genuine.


   38. However, I also give limited weight to the documents  because  I  do
       not find plausible that a Court dealing with something as serious as
       a conviction and sentence would consistently refer to the  Appellant
       by a name which is said to be his nickname ("J"). That this nickname
       is misspelt on occasion is not something to which I give weight.  As
       I have already noted, the misspelling could be due to errors in  the
       production of the documents or even their translation. However,  the
       Appellant in his evidence does not explain  how  he  comes  by  this
       nickname or who knew him by that name. I find it implausible that  a
       police authority  and  Court  in  what  are  on  their  face  formal
       documents would continually refer to him by a nickname  rather  than
       his full name particularly given the seriousness of the  allegations
       and implication of those documents. That implausibility coupled with
       the inconsistency to which I refer above gives  me  cause  to  doubt
       that the documents are authentic.


   39. The Appellant's evidence about how these  documents  came  into  his
       hands also causes  me  to  doubt  that  those  documents  have  been
       procured as he  says  from  official  records  in  Bangladesh.   The
       Appellant said that  his  uncle  obtained  the  documents  from  his
       brother who still lives in  Bangladesh.   He  said  that  his  uncle
       visits Bangladesh regularly and obtained the  documents  during  one
       such visit.  However, he confirmed that his uncle lived  in  the  UK
       and was in the UK at  the  date  of  the  hearing  before  me.   The
       Appellant said that his uncle  was  unable  to  attend  the  hearing
       because he worked but that failed to explain why his uncle  has  not
       provided a  witness  statement  to  confirm  that  he  obtained  the
       documents, when, how and from where.


   40. Further, the Appellant's evidence as to how his brother acquired the
       documents was confused.  He first said  that  his  brother  obtained
       them from a person who is the secretary to the solicitor who  writes
       everything down,  he  then  said  that  both  this  person  and  the
       solicitor had a copy and he then said that his brother obtained them
       from the solicitor.  There is  no  statement  from  the  Appellant's
       brother explaining how, when and from whom he obtained the documents
       nor how that person  obtained  the  documents  if  it  was  not  the
       solicitor who provided them.


   41. I note the background evidence concerning the ease with which forged
       and fraudulent documents can be obtained and the prevalence of  such
       forgeries (see [2.11] Home Office Country Information  and  Guidance
       report dated November 2014). I recognise that simply  because  false
       documents can be  easily  procured  does  not  mean  that  all  such
       documents are false.  However, for the  reasons  stated  above,  and
       applying the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00439,  I
       give limited weight to those documents.


   42. I turn then to consider the evidence of [Mr  A]  who  says  that  he
       visited the Appellant whilst the Appellant was in detention in 2006.
        I accept as credible that [Mr A] knew the Appellant because he  was
       a member of the BNP as was the Appellant.  I accept also as credible
       that he would therefore come to know of  the  Appellant's  detention
       through newspaper reports or from other associates. I note from  the
       Tribunal decision in his own case that [Mr A] was, around this time,
       of adverse interest to the authorities in Bangladesh.   Nonetheless,
       I accept as plausible that  he  might  still  decide  to  visit  the
       Appellant in detention as his friend. The evidence of [Mr A] and the
       Appellant as to the number of visits is broadly  consistent.   I  do
       not accept as damaging to the credibility  of  this  aspect  of  the
       claim that [Mr A] and the Appellant said slightly  different  things
       in answer to what [Mr A] had  taken  to  the  Appellant  during  the
       visits.  One said fruit; the other fruit juice.   That  is  a  minor
       inconsistency and does not undermine the credibility of the evidence
       of either.


   43. However, I find as damaging to  [Mr  A]'s  credibility  his  answers
       about the physical state of the Appellant during  the  visits.   The
       Appellant said in oral evidence that he had been "hit a lot" by  the
       RAB, that he could not feed himself at the time and that "one of his
       legs had gone" and that he was in a wheelchair.  [Mr  A]  was  asked
       whether he noticed anything unusual about the Appellant  during  his
       visits.  He replied that "he was not like a normal person.  His face
       was big.  His hand was swollen.  He had bruises.  It was  like  when
       you see someone who is ill".  Mr Staunton  then  asked  whether  the
       Appellant had bruises on his legs.  [Mr A] answered that he did  not
       know; he could not see as the Appellant was wearing trousers.   When
       asked if there was anything else, [Mr A] again  confirmed  that  the
       Appellant had injuries to his head and hands.  It was  only  at  the
       point when Mr Staunton asked who had come into the room first  that,
       having initially said that he Appellant was "standing behind  bars",
       [Mr A] gave evidence that the Appellant was in a wheelchair.


   44. I do not find as plausible that [Mr A] would remember injuries  such
       as bruising before something as fundamental as him being confined to
       a wheelchair.  I reject the submission made by Ms  Rutherford  that,
       just because [Mr A] was found credible in relation to his own claim,
       he must also be telling the truth about the Appellant's  case.   [Mr
       A] was found to be in need of  protection  principally  due  to  his
       activities in the UK which were well documented.  That does not mean
       that he must be believed in relation to everything he says.  For the
       foregoing reason, I do not accept [Mr A]'s evidence as reliable.


   45.  The Appellant also relies upon Mr Mason's report.  I have  set  out
       the content of that report at [22].   Since that report comes nearly
       ten years after the injuries which  the  Appellant  claims  to  have
       suffered, Mr Mason is unable to state with any certainty what caused
       the injuries observed or when those occurred.  In  relation  to  the
       loss of teeth, Mr Mason says that this occurred more  than  nine  to
       twelve months ago and the cause of the loss cannot be discerned.  He
       says that accidental trauma or disease might have  resulted  in  the
       loss.  He goes on to say though that the absence of those  teeth  is
       consistent with the Appellant having lost them by  being  struck  in
       the mouth.


   46. In relation to the scarring, Mr Mason says that this  occurred  more
       than twelve months ago and  that  whilst  the  scars  on  the  right
       forearm are highly consistent with being caused deliberately because
       of the parallel disposition of two scars, the possibility that  they
       occurred accidentally cannot be ruled out.  In relation to the other
       scarring, Mr Mason describes those scars as non-specific  and  of  a
       type which might result from accidental contact but he says that  he
       cannot rule out deliberate infliction.


   47. Finally, Mr Mason, having noted that he is not qualified to  provide
       an expert opinion on the Appellant's psychological state, goes on to
       conclude at [6.5] of the report that the Appellant "shows  signs  of
       post-traumatic stress such as might be expected in the aftermath  of
       being tortured".


   48. As Mr Mason himself fairly recognises, the value of his evidence  as
       to the causes of  the  Appellant's  physical  injuries  is  limited,
       particularly in light of the passage of  time.   Whilst  Mr  Mason's
       terminology of the consistency of the injuries with the  Appellant's
       account may not accord precisely with the Istanbul protocol  (as  Mr
       Staunton pointed out), that is of little significance.  In the  end,
       the most that Mr Mason can say is that the physical  injuries  might
       have been caused in the way in which the Appellant describes.   Even
       if the evidence  suggests  that  they  may  have  been  deliberately
       inflicted, Mr Mason cannot add to the Appellant's own evidence as to
       who inflicted them.  As I note at [29] above, it  is  accepted  that
       the Appellant has  suffered  violence  in  the  past.  He  may  have
       suffered these injuries at that time since, as Mr Mason points  out,
       it is impossible to date the scars.


   49. Mr Mason is a specialist in accident and emergency medicine.  Whilst
       therefore he is not an expert in relation to  mental  health,  as  a
       doctor, he could be expected to  know  something  about  a  person's
       psychological state.  For that reason, I give some limited weight to
       Dr Mason's report as showing that the  Appellant  may  be  suffering
       from symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder.  However, there  is
       no other medical evidence which shows that the  Appellant  has  been
       diagnosed with or treated for  PTSD  during  the  nine  years  since
       leaving Bangladesh.  There is a form referring the Appellant to  the
       Medical Foundation but no further information from that  source  and
       no medical records showing that the  Appellant  has  seen  a  mental
       health specialist or been treated for  mental  health  problems.  He
       refers in his statement  to  having  continuing  physical  pain  and
       mental effects as a result of his detention.  He  suggests  that  he
       was unable to obtain treatment in the UK because of his status. I do
       not accept that explanation as plausible. If he were really in  need
       of medical treatment, he could seek it.


   50. For those reasons, I give limited weight to Mr Mason's report so far
       as it provides an opinion on the Appellant's mental health.  I  give
       weight to Mr Mason's opinions on the Appellant's  physical  injuries
       but for the reasons I give above,  those  opinions  provide  limited
       support for the Appellant's claim to have suffered those injuries by
       deliberate infliction at the hands of another person and, so far  as
       they do, they provide even more limited support as to who  inflicted
       the injuries or when.


   51. The major difficulty with the Appellant's account of  what  occurred
       in 2005 and 2006 is the implausibility  of  a  Court  in  Bangladesh
       releasing on bail someone who was serving a sentence  imposed  by  a
       Court following a criminal conviction.


   52. Mr Staunton cross-examined the Appellant  at  some  length  on  this
       topic. The Appellant said at first that this  was  because  RAB  had
       "hit him a lot" and he was not well.  There then followed a  lengthy
       exchange regarding the time when the Appellant said that the RAB had
       mistreated  him and been released because of the  need  for  medical
       treatment and whether that was before, during or  after  the  prison
       sentence. Mr Staunton pointed out that this still  did  not  explain
       why the Court would  have  released  the  Appellant  whilst  he  was
       serving a prison sentence of two years after he had served only  six
       months.


   53. There then followed a lengthy exchange about the Appellant's  family
       having paid money to have him released.  The Appellant said they had
       paid seven  lakhs.   However,  it  was  entirely  unclear  from  the
       Appellant's evidence whether it was his case that this was  a  bribe
       or surety for bail.  He appeared to suggest that someone within  the
       RAB had told his family that they should offer  money  to  have  him
       released and that they should not tell anyone about  it.   That  did
       not sit comfortably though with the Appellant's evidence that he had
       been refused bail by the Sylhet court and he was released  only  due
       to the intervention of a High Court Judge.  Although the Appellant's
       evidence was that his family were told not to say that they had paid
       money for his release (ie  that  it  was  a  bribe),  he  also  gave
       evidence that he was granted bail officially and  the  documents  on
       which he relies accord with that version of events.


   54. The Appellant was asked a number of questions by Mr  Staunton  about
       his bail conditions.  At first, he did not appear to understand what
       was meant by bail conditions - he continued  to  refer  to  the  RAB
       having "hit me a lot".  Once that was clarified, he  suggested  that
       he did not know what conditions had been set.  He said  he  had  not
       read them.  He was frustrated and he just wanted to get  out.   When
       asked whether the Judge had not told him what the  conditions  were,
       he suggested that the Judge had read them  out  in  English  and  he
       didn't understand.  He said that the usher had told him a  bit.   He
       said that he had a legal representative who spoke English who  "told
       me a little bit".  It was though his evidence that he  had  not  had
       the opportunity to speak to his legal representative  a  great  deal
       after the hearing because that person  needed  a  signature  from  a
       commissioner to complete the bail formalities.


   55. The  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  was  granted  bail  with  such
       formality is inconsistent with his claim that his family had paid  a
       bribe to secure his  release.   When  the  Appellant  was  asked  to
       clarify his evidence about whether this was a bribe or a payment for
       bail, he initially said that his family had been told that  if  they
       went this way he would get bail.  When he was asked to  clarify  why
       if his family had been told to tell no-one about  the  payment,  his
       release on bail had been completed via what appeared to be a  formal
       application and court hearing, he said simply "the  system  is  like
       that in Bangladesh".  He was also  asked  about  his  evidence  that
       formalities had been completed using a commissioner.   In  response,
       he could say only that if  a  person  was  released  from  a  prison
       sentence, a local commissioner had to sign in case the  person  runs
       away.  That evidence still did not explain the fundamental  question
       why the Court would have released the Appellant  on  bail  part  way
       through his sentence for no apparent reason or, if this was a bribe,
       why the Appellant would have been released in such a formal manner.


   56. A further difficulty is that, even if I accepted the Court documents
       as genuine, those show a functioning judicial system which permitted
       the Appellant to appeal his conviction and apply for bail.  However,
       the documents which the Appellant has produced on their face suggest
       that the Appellant exercised his right to appeal but that the appeal
       failed.  Nonetheless, I am asked to accept that, his route of appeal
       having failed, the Court would then, without reason, release him  on
       bail for a period of six months, part  way  through  a  legitimately
       imposed sentence (as the Courts would see it).    I  do  not  accept
       that to be plausible.


   57. Neither was the Appellant's evidence as to  how  that  release  came
       about credible.  As  I  note  above,  there  was  confusion  in  the
       Appellant's evidence as to whether his family paid a bribe  for  his
       release or had merely paid a surety for bail.   The  fact  that  the
       Appellant was released in the course of what was apparently a formal
       process  suggests  the  latter.  Indeed,  the  document  which   the
       Appellant has produced refers to a bail bond.  However,  that  again
       begs the  question  of  why  the  Courts  would  have  released  the
       Appellant.  If the payment was a bribe, it is not plausible that the
       release would have proceeded via an openly recorded, formal process.


   58. I also do not accept that the Appellant would  not  have  been  made
       aware of the conditions of his release.  If he was still subject  to
       return to detention as he contends, then it is not credible that  he
       would not have been made the subject of some form  of  reporting  to
       ensure that he did not abscond.  It is not plausible that a Judge in
       Bangladesh would give judgment in English and  not  explain  to  the
       person to be released the terms of that release.  Nor is it credible
       that those representing the Appellant would not have ensured that he
       was aware of those terms to avoid him breaching  the  terms  of  his
       bail (if release on bail it was).


   59. I also do not find plausible that  the  timing  of  the  Appellant's
       release would coincide exactly with the issue of his work permit  on
       which the Appellant travelled to the UK.   The Appellant  said  that
       he applied for his work permit in 2004/5.   He  could  not  remember
       exactly when.  He said it was only granted on appeal. He  said  that
       the appeal was in 2006 but did not say whether that was at the  time
       prior to his detention following his conviction or when he claims to
       have been in detention.  He said he could not remember exactly  when
       the appeal took place. The date of the  order  for  the  Appellant's
       release is given in the Court document as  14  December  2006.   The
       work  permit  was  granted  on  the  same  date.   I   accept   that
       coincidences do happen and, if  I  accepted  the  Appellant's  other
       evidence, I would not find this implausibility alone  sufficient  to
       cast doubt on his credibility.  However, coupled with the concerns I
       have already set out, however, I do not accept as plausible that the
       Appellant happened to be released from detention  at  precisely  the
       same time as his work permit was issued allowing him to come to  the
       UK.


   60. Mr Staunton sought to cast doubt on the Appellant's evidence also on
       account of the delay between his release and him leaving  Bangladesh
       on 11 January 2007. I accept as plausible that the Appellant may not
       have left Bangladesh immediately after his release  on  bail  if  he
       thought, as the order records, that he was being  released  for  six
       months  and  was  not  therefore  subject  to  immediate  recall  to
       detention.  However, his  reasons  for  delaying  (that  he  had  to
       collect his work permit visa and  have  his  teeth  fixed)  are  not
       sufficiently important matters to delay the departure  of  a  person
       who genuinely fears persecution  by  the  authorities  whatever  the
       Court had ordered.  The Appellant's case  rests  on  the  RAB  being
       above the law.  If that were his perception, even though  the  Court
       had ordered his release for six months, I do not  find  it  credible
       that he would delay leaving Bangladesh for that period.


   61. The Appellant also appears to have experienced no difficulty leaving
       Bangladesh on his own passport at a  time  when,  according  to  his
       evidence, he was released only temporarily on  bail.  The  Appellant
       says that the controls at the airport are sufficiently sophisticated
       to pick that up.  There is however  no  background  evidence  relied
       upon in support of that assertion.  The authorities may not have had
       cause to check given that the Appellant  was  leaving  with  a  work
       permit visa.  If this had been the  only  reason  for  doubting  the
       Appellant's account, I would not have found this a sufficient reason
       to doubt his credibility.  However, coupled with the other reasons I
       have given, it is an additional reason why  I  do  not  believe  his
       account of being detained and released  on  bail  prior  to  leaving
       Bangladesh.


   62. Even if the Appellant were charged, convicted  and  detained  as  he
       claims, Mr Staunton submitted that this did not mean that  he  would
       still be wanted by the authorities some ten years later.  The  issue
       for me is whether there is a real risk on return as at the  date  of
       the hearing before me.


   63. I have already referred at [21] above to the document on  which  the
       Appellant relies from the Councillor of the Sylhet City Corporation.
        That letter  does  not  say  how  the  Councillor  knows  that  the
       authorities have continued to visit the family other than  that  the
       Appellant's family have told him  that  the  authorities  are  still
       looking for the Appellant.  However, there is no statement from  any
       family member as to when and with  what  frequency  the  authorities
       have visited the family nor when they last contacted the family. The
       letter itself provides no detail in  that  regard.   The  letter  is
       undated and so it is not clear when the authorities were said to  be
       showing this interest.  It does not refer to there being any  extant
       arrest warrant against the Appellant in spite of his escape on  bail
       (in contradistinction to what the Appellant  himself  says  was  the
       position  when  he  had  absconded  following  sentence  before  his
       detention in June 2006).  For those reasons, I give little weight to
       the letter.


   64. The Appellant was cross-examined about  when  the  authorities  last
       contacted his family.  Initially, he said it was "in  2008,  end  of
       2007, beginning of 2008".  He said that the Court had contacted  the
       family because he (the Appellant) had come to the UK  and  his  bail
       had expired.  That would of course be some six months after his bail
       had expired but I do not disbelieve the Appellant for  that  reason.
       There may have been a delay in the authorities  realising  that  the
       Appellant had not surrendered to bail.  The Appellant then said that
       the police had come since.  He said that the  intelligence  services
       had come.  When asked when they had last come, he said  "2015.   End
       of 2015.  Before they come.  They come all the time.   The  officers
       change.  New officers will come.".  When asked to be  more  precise,
       he continued to repeat that it would be  when  officers  changed  as
       they "get worried".  He did not answer the question as to how  often
       they came.


   65. I find the Appellant's evidence in this regard vague and lacking  in
       detail.  He was  also  inconsistent  as  to  when  the  visits  last
       occurred. There is a lack of any direct evidence from his family who
       informed the Councillor of the continuing interest.   The Councillor
       does not profess to have any  direct  knowledge  of  any  continuing
       interest.


   66. Ms Rutherford says it follows from the extract of the Criminal  Code
       to which she referred, that the Appellant would be at real  risk  of
       detention and therefore ill-treatment because he absconded whilst on
       bail  some  ten  years  ago  and  part  way  through  his  sentence.
       Notwithstanding the lack of evidence from a lawyer with knowledge of
       Bangladeshi law that these legal provisions are still in  force  and
       that there is nothing else which  applies,  I  accept  as  plausible
       that, if the authorities continued to be interested in the Appellant
       because he was still wanted because he escaped bail, he is likely to
       be detained.


   67. However, I note the lack of any arrest warrant or document from  the
       Court showing that the Appellant is still wanted by them because  he
       escaped bail.  The lack of corroboration  does  not  mean  that  the
       Appellant's account is not true.  However, I do not accept that  the
       authorities are still interested in the Appellant even if the events
       of 2005 and 2006 are as  the  Appellant  claims  for  the  following
       reasons.


   68. First, I note that the Appellant  has  been  the  subject  of  false
       charges in the past which have been subsequently  dropped.   If  the
       charges brought on this occasion were similarly  false,  it  is  not
       clear why those would be pursued some ten years later.


   69. Second, even though, on the Appellant's case, the  charges  on  this
       occasion went further and led  to  a  conviction,  the  judgment  in
       relation to that conviction  shows  that  some  of  the  Appellant's
       claimed associates were acquitted.  The documents also show that the
       Appellant appealed against his conviction  and  that  the  Court  in
       Sylhet was prepared to grant bail albeit subsequently dismissing the
       appeal.  Even if the documents were in fact  genuine,  they  do  not
       show any continuing action by the authorities after the  release  on
       bail in December 2006.  I do not find it credible that  there  would
       be no documents recording that the Appellant had escaped bail or any
       warrant issued against him if in fact the authorities  continued  to
       pursue him in relation to the conviction.


   70. In the absence of any document showing that there is a  warrant  for
       the arrest of the Appellant for  escaping  whilst  on  bail  or  any
       direct evidence showing that the  authorities  continue  to  enquire
       after him and due to the lack of detail  and  inconsistency  in  the
       Appellant's  own  evidence  as  to  continuing   interest   by   the
       authorities, I do not accept that the  authorities  continue  to  be
       interested in him.  It follows  that  I  find  that  he  is  not  at
       continuing risk on  this  account  even  if  he  were  detained  and
       released as he says in 2006.


   71. In relation to the risk  which  the  Appellant  claims  due  to  his
       association with the BNP in the UK, he accepted in evidence that  he
       is no longer a member.  He said that was because he  does  not  have
       legal status here.   I do not accept that explanation.  There is  no
       background or other evidence which supports the  suggestion  that  a
       party such as the  BNP  in  the  UK  would  be  obliged  to  decline
       membership to one of their supporters simply due to  lack  of  legal
       immigration status.


   72. The Appellant also accepted in  evidence  that  he  is  not  on  the
       Committee.  He said he was not selected.  He said though that he  is
       involved with their programmes and attends demonstrations when those
       are organised.  He says he attends meetings or demonstrations  three
       times per month and  when  he  is  called,  he  goes.  Under  cross-
       examination, the Appellant said that he had been involved  with  the
       BNP since the end of 2008 or beginning of 2009.  He said that  there
       were a lot of big programmes but could not say how many.   I  accept
       as credible that the Appellant has continued to support the  BNP  in
       the UK at a low level and has attended meetings and  demonstrations.
       The issue though is whether such activities have brought him to  the
       attention of the authorities in Bangladesh.


   73. The particular instance on which the Appellant relies is his  speech
       to a meeting of the BNP in London in 2014.   I  accept  as  credible
       that the Appellant attended that  meeting  which  was  organised  to
       welcome [Mr A] to the UK.  I also accept as credible that there were
       a lot of people at  the  meeting.   [Mr  A]'s  and  the  Appellant's
       evidence about the meeting was broadly consistent.


   74. However, I do not accept that the speech which  the  Appellant  gave
       would cause the Bangladeshi authorities  to  be  interested  in  the
       Appellant.  Even if I accept that [Mr A]'s own profile  might  cause
       the authorities to have some interest  in  a  meeting  organised  to
       welcome him to the UK, I do not accept that this meeting would  have
       come to their attention or that the Appellant's own  involvement  in
       it would cause the authorities to be interested in him.


   75. The Appellant said in evidence that the meeting had  been  broadcast
       on Bengali TV.  Although he mentions in  his  statement  that  a  UK
       newspaper  reported  the  meeting  and  that  it  was  reported   in
       newspapers in Bangladesh, there is no mention there of  the  meeting
       being broadcast on television.  No copy of any  broadcast  has  been
       produced.  The evidence on which the Appellant relies is a DVD taken
       from a person's mobile phone  footage.   I  find  that  this  is  an
       exaggeration.


   76. Although the report of the meeting said to have  been  published  in
       The  Daily  Jalalabad  and  The  Daily  Sylheter  Dak  includes  the
       Appellant's name in the list of those who also spoke, it  gives  the
       Appellant no particular profile as a  main  speaker.   Further,  the
       evidence of both the Appellant and [Mr A] was that  the  Appellant's
       speech was short and was only to welcome [Mr A].  The evidence  does
       not  suggest  that  the  Appellant  was  himself  critical  of   the
       authorities in what he said. Although the Appellant claims  to  have
       been involved in meetings, demonstrations and  "programmes"  run  by
       the BNP in the UK, I find that he is only a low-level supporter.


   77. The background evidence in the  form  of  the  Home  Office  Country
       Information and Guidance dated February 2015  concerning  opposition
       to the Bangladeshi government states that "membership  or  perceived
       support of groups opposed to the  current  government  does  not  of
       itself  give  rise  to  a  well-founded  fear  of   persecution   in
       Bangladesh, but may do so depending on the individual  circumstances
       of  the  applicant."  Taking  into  account  the  Appellant's  prior
       membership of the BNP some ten years ago and based on his  low-level
       support for the party in the UK since, I find that the Appellant  is
       not at risk on this account now.


   78. I turn finally to the impact of delay  on  the  credibility  of  the
       Appellant's claim for asylum.  This relates principally to the  core
       of the claim as to the events  in  2005  and  2006.   The  Appellant
       arrived in the UK in January 2007 and did  not  claim  asylum  until
       December 2014, nearly eight years later,  having  initially  made  a
       claim for leave to remain in December 2007 which had been  rejected.




   79. The Appellant's evidence about  the  delay  was  that  he  had  been
       discovered by the immigration authorities whilst helping  out  at  a
       wedding reception in a restaurant.  He said that  he  had  told  his
       solicitors at the time that he was scared to return  to  Bangladesh.
       He said that his solicitors had told him not to claim asylum at that
       time because "everything was messy in Bangladesh and not settled".


   80. In response to questions put by Mr Staunton, the Appellant said that
       he has a number of friends in the UK who are from Bangladesh and are
       involved with the BNP.  He said that about ten to  twelve  had  been
       granted asylum on dates ranging between 2007 and 2015.


   81. I do not accept the Appellant's explanation for his failure to claim
       asylum earlier as credible.  As  Mr  Staunton  pointed  out  in  his
       submissions, if the situation in  Bangladesh  were  unsettled,  that
       would be precisely the time when a  solicitor  would  be  likely  to
       advise making a claim and not against one.  Further,  the  Appellant
       cannot claim to be unaware of the procedure  for  making  an  asylum
       claim nor that his involvement with the BNP might be  a  reason  for
       claiming if he were genuinely in fear on that account.  He  accepted
       that a number of his friends had successfully claimed asylum in  the
       period before he made his own claim.


    Decision and Summary of Reasons


   82. Paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules states that the fact that  a
       person has already been subject to persecution or serious harm  will
       be a  serious  indication  of  the  person's  well-founded  fear  of
       persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are
       good reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm  will
       not be repeated.


   83. Based on the finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, I accept that
       the Appellant was a member of the BNP as  he  claims  in  Bangladesh
       before he came to the UK.  I also accept based on that finding  that
       the Appellant has demonstrated to the lower  standard  that  he  has
       been subjected to violence.  The source  of  that  violence  is  not
       clear but that this arose because of his BNP support  is  consistent
       with the background evidence about the situation  at  that  time.  I
       have to consider though whether, based on  the  Appellant's  profile
       and the background evidence, he would remain at risk on this account
       some  ten  years  later.  Based  on  background  evidence  in  2015,
       membership or perceived support of the BNP would not of itself  lead
       to a real  risk  on  return.   This  depends  though  on  individual
       circumstances of the asylum seeker.


   84. The Appellant's involvement with the BNP in the  UK  is  at  a  low-
       level.  I accept that he is a low-level supporter and  has  attended
       meetings and demonstrations.  He is not a member and is not  on  any
       Committee.  I accept that  the  Appellant  spoke  at  a  meeting  to
       welcome [Mr A] in 2014 in London.  However, although I  accept  that
       the meeting was reported in newspapers in Bangladesh, those  reports
       only show that the Appellant spoke at the meeting and  the  evidence
       as to what he said is not such as to place him at  risk  on  return.
       Based on that profile and the background evidence and for  the  more
       detailed reasons set out at [71] to [77]  above,  I  find  that  the
       Appellant would not be of interest to the authorities based  on  his
       activities in the UK.


   85. I turn then to consider whether the Appellant  has  established  his
       claim to be at real risk on account of events which he says occurred
       in Bangladesh before he came to the UK.


   86. I accept that the Appellant was the  subject  of  false  charges  in
       2001, 2003 and 2004.  However, I do not accept that the Appellant is
       of interest to the authorities based on those charges  now.  On  the
       Appellant's own evidence, those charges were not pursued.


   87. The Appellant's claim is focussed on the events in  2005/6  when  he
       says he was falsely charged, convicted, detained and  then  released
       on bail.  He says that the  authorities  remain  interested  in  him
       notwithstanding the passage of time because he was released on  bail
       and left the country whilst he was on bail.  He says  that  he  will
       therefore be wanted by the authorities and will  be  re-detained  on
       return.


   88. I start by noting that it is plausible that he would be  subject  to
       false charges in 2005/6 given the earlier false charges to which  he
       had been subject.  On this occasion,  though,  he  claims  that  the
       charges went further and, even though he was not  involved  in  what
       happened,  he  was  convicted  and  sentenced  in  his  absence  and
       subsequently detained, ill-treated whilst in detention before  being
       released on time limited bail.


   89. I give little weight to the  Court  documents  in  relation  to  the
       Appellant's claim to have  been  charged,  convicted,  detained  and
       released in 2005/6 for reasons I have already given.   I  also  give
       little weight to the evidence of [Mr  A]  for  the  reasons  I  have
       given.  I accept that corroboration of a claim  for  asylum  is  not
       required (paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules).


   90. However, based on the Appellant's own evidence and  taking  that  in
       the round with the Court documents and other evidence produced, I do
       not accept as credible that the Appellant  was  charged,  convicted,
       detained and released in 2005/6.  My detailed reasons for so finding
       are given at [34] to [61] above and I do not repeat them.  For  that
       reason, I do not accept that the Appellant escaped  from  Bangladesh
       whilst on bail. I do not accept therefore that the authorities  will
       have any continuing interest in the Appellant or that he is at  risk
       of re-detention on return.


   91. It follows that I also do not accept the Appellant's claim  to  have
       been subjected to ill-treatment by the RAB whilst in detention.  The
       evidence  of  Mr  Mason  provides  very  limited  support  for   the
       Appellant's claim as he cannot provide evidence of when the injuries
       sustained occurred or at whose hands.  He also  accepts  that  there
       are other possible explanations for the physical  injuries  observed
       and those could equally have been sustained during the  violence  to
       which I have been accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  subjected  on
       account of his political opinions whilst in Bangladesh.  I can  give
       only limited weight to Mr Mason's opinions on the Appellant's mental
       health as Mr Mason himself accepts that he is  not  expert  in  this
       area and his diagnosis that  the  Appellant  has  symptoms  of  PTSD
       consistent with the aftermath of being tortured  is  unsupported  by
       other medical evidence showing that the Appellant suffers from  PTSD
       or is being or has been treated for it.


   92. Even if I were to accept the Appellant's account  of  his  detention
       and release in 2006, I do not accept that the  authorities  continue
       to be interested in the Appellant for reasons I have given  at  [62]
       to [70] above. Again, I accept that evidence of past persecution may
       be a serious indicator of future risk.  I also accept that the  lack
       of corroboration of a claim does not  mean  that  it  is  not  true.
       However,  the  Appellant's  own  evidence  as  to  the  authorities'
       continuing interest in him is vague  and  contains  inconsistencies.
       For that reason, and coupled with the lack of documentary  or  other
       supporting evidence as to that continuing interest, I find he is  no
       longer of any interest if he ever was.


   93. Section 8 of The Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc)
       Act 2004 provides that in determining whether to believe a statement
       made by a person claiming asylum, an authority is entitled  to  take
       into account delay in making  an  asylum  claim  without  reasonable
       excuse for the delay.   In  this  case,  I  reject  the  Appellant's
       explanation for why he did not make the claim earlier for reasons  I
       have given at [78] to [81] above.  The Appellant's failure to  claim
       asylum until some eight years after arrival damages his credibility.




   94. For those reasons, the Appellant has not made out his claim to be at
       real risk on return to Bangladesh.  I therefore dismiss  his  appeal
       on protection grounds (there having been no challenge to the  First-
       tier Tribunal's dismissal of the appeal on  humanitarian  protection
       and human rights grounds).   The  Appellant's  appeal  is  therefore
       dismissed.

            DECISION
      The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 10 May 2017


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

                        ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09025/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 21 December 2016                 |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  MR M A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by Cartwright
                 King solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Background

   1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
      N M Paul promulgated on 14 October 2016  ("the  Decision")  dismissing
      the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated
      18 October 2016 refusing his protection and human rights claims.   The
      appeal against the Decision relates only to the protection grounds.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  In 2004 he applied for a
       UK work permit which  application  was  initially  refused  but  his
       appeal was allowed in 2006.  He came to the UK on 11 January 2007 on
       a work permit visa.  He made an application for leave to  remain  in
       December 2007 which was refused.   He  claimed  asylum  in  December
       2014.


    3. The Appellant's claim for asylum is based on his  political  opinion
       as a supporter of the BNP.  He joined Chattra Dal (the student  wing
       of the BNP) in 1999.  He claims that a number of false  charges  and
       cases were brought against him between 2001 and 2004  but  all  were
       dropped. He says that in May  2005,  he  was  falsely  charged  with
       robbery and suspended from the BNP.  On 18 January 2006,  he  claims
       that he was convicted in his absence.  He says that he was  arrested
       in June 2006 and subjected to ill  treatment  by  the  Rapid  Action
       Batallion (RAB).  He was granted bail  by  a  High  Court  Judge  in
       December 2006 whereupon he collected his work permit visa  and  came
       to the UK.


    4. The Judge accepted that the Appellant has been involved with the BNP
       and that at some  stage  in  the  past  he  had  been  subjected  to
       violence, albeit not necessarily at the hands of the RAB.   However,
       the Judge did not accept that the  Appellant's  claim  to  presently
       fear return was genuine, based in large part on his failure to claim
       asylum at an earlier stage.  The Judge did not accept as credible  a
       late claim to be the subject of  an  arrest  warrant  ([36]  of  the
       Decision).  The Judge did not accept that the Appellant would be  at
       risk now on account of events which happened about ten years ago and
       did not accept that he would be at risk as a low  level  participant
       in the BNP ([37] of the Decision).


    5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J  M
       Holmes on 14 November 2016  on  the  basis  that  there  may  be  an
       inconsistency between [31] and [33] of the Decision.  Permission was
       not however limited.   The matter comes before me to decide  whether
       the Decision contains a material error of law and, if so, to re-make
       the decision or remit the appeal for  rehearing  to  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal.

The grounds and submissions


    6. The Appellant  appeals  on  essentially  four  grounds.   The  first
       concerns the Judge's reliance on the Appellant's delay  in  claiming
       asylum as reason for finding him not credible.  Whilst the Appellant
       accepts that the delay is relevant and can be  potentially  damaging
       to credibility, the challenge is that  the  Judge  placed  too  much
       weight on this factor and failed to consider it in the  round.   The
       Appellant relies on JT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department [2008] EWCA Civ 878.


    7. The second ground concerns the Judge's treatment of the  Appellant's
       evidence about the arrest warrant.   Whilst  the  Appellant  accepts
       that he did not produce the warrant in evidence, he relies on  other
       evidence, in particular a letter from a Councillor  of  Sylhet  City
       Corporation which he says supports his case in this regard.  In  the
       course of her submissions, Ms Rutherford accepted that the  document
       relied upon [AB/272] did not actually support the Appellant's  claim
       to have an arrest warrant issued against him.  She relied though  on
       that document as showing that the Bangladeshi authorities were still
       interested in the Appellant.


    8. Ground three concerns the Judge's failure to  consider  whether  the
       Appellant would be at  risk  as  a  person  who  was  convicted  and
       sentenced to two years'  imprisonment  which  sentence  he  has  not
       served.  He relies on background evidence which he says  shows  that
       if he were detained (which he says he would be as a  result  of  the
       unserved sentence) then he would be ill-treated  in  detention.   Ms
       Rutherford in submissions argued that it remains the  position  that
       the Appellant is someone who has been convicted  and  sentenced  and
       who has failed to serve his sentence.  It was  not  clear  therefore
       how the Judge reached the conclusion that the authorities would  not
       be interested in the Appellant now simply because of the passage  of
       time.


    9. Finally, the Appellant relies on the evidence of Mr A  who  is  also
       from Bangladesh and a recognised refugee.  Mr A gave  evidence  that
       he knew the Appellant in Bangladesh and that  the  Appellant  was  a
       member of BNP there.  The evidence which Mr  A  gave  was  that  the
       Appellant was more than just a low level member and the  Judge  has,
       the Appellant says, failed to take that into account.  The Appellant
       also says that Mr A corroborates his claim to have  been  imprisoned
       in Bangladesh and to  have  been  produced  to  a  Court  there.  Ms
       Rutherford drew my attention to the Home Office guidance at [AB/443]
       as supportive of the Appellant's claim that even low  level  members
       of the BNP may be at risk.


   10. Mr Tarlow submitted that the key paragraph in the Decision is  [37].
       The conclusion that the authorities would no longer be interested in
       the Appellant ten years after the  events  on  which  the  Appellant
       relies was a finding which was open to the Judge  on  the  evidence.
       The Appellant has not produced any evidence corroborating his  claim
       that there is an arrest warrant issued against him.  The  Judge  had
       taken into account the evidence of Mr A but found that the Appellant
       was in a different category to Mr A. In relation to the Home  Office
       guidance, the  Judge  expressly  considered  that  at  [26]  of  the
       Decision.  The Judge was entitled to find as he did though  at  [36]
       of the Decision that, given the Appellant's profile and the  passage
       of time, the Appellant would no longer be at risk.
   11.  Following discussions, both parties agreed  that,  if  I  found  an
       error of law, I could re-make the  decision  without  remitting  the
       appeal.  Ms Rutherford invited me though to  preserve  the  positive
       credibility findings in relation to what occurred in the past.   She
       also indicated that the Appellant would wish to put forward  further
       evidence and would wish to give oral evidence.  The  Appellant  also
       intends to call Mr A  to  give  further  oral  evidence.   It  would
       therefore be appropriate for a further hearing to be convened  prior
       to the remaking.


    Discussion and conclusions


   12. Dealing first with ground one, I do not accept that  the  Judge  has
       erred in this regard.   The Appellant accepts that delay is a factor
       which is relevant.  The Judge did not accept the Appellant's reasons
       for the delay in making his claim.  The Judge was entitled  to  make
       that finding.  Furthermore, this is  not  a  case  where  the  Judge
       disbelieved the totality of the claim because of the delay.   It  is
       clear from what is said at [31]  of  the  Decision  that  the  Judge
       accepted that the Appellant had been involved with the BNP  and  had
       been subjected to violence for that reason, although the  Judge  did
       not accept that this was at the hands of the RAB.  Nor do  I  accept
       as the grant of permission suggests that there is  an  inconsistency
       between [31] and [33] of the Decision.  As Mr Tarlow submitted and I
       accept, the core findings made by the Judge are that  the  Appellant
       suffered some problems due to his political views in  the  past  but
       that he would not be at risk on that account now.


   13. I do not accept either that there is any error of law in the Judge's
       treatment  of  the  evidence  concerning  the  arrest  warrant.   Ms
       Rutherford accepted that the document referred  to  in  the  grounds
       does not support the Appellant's  claim  that  there  is  an  arrest
       warrant against him.  Whilst that document does refer to  continuing
       interest by the authorities, the contents of  the  letter  are  very
       vague and do not provide any particulars of raids allegedly made  or
       indeed how the writer of the letter  comes  to  be  aware  of  those
       matters.  There is no error in the Judge  failing  to  make  express
       reference to that letter.


   14. I am however persuaded that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  failing  to
       consider the Appellant's position as someone sentenced to a term  of
       imprisonment which he has not served.  Although there  is  reference
       at [35] of the Decision to an  acceptance  "for  the  sake  of  this
       determination decision" that  documents  relating  to  ill-treatment
       during detention are genuine, there is no  express  finding  whether
       the Appellant was convicted, detained and released on  bail  as  the
       Appellant claims and what impact that would have on the authorities'
       interest in him now.


   15. That ground is also linked to the  evidence  of  Mr  A.   The  Judge
       records that evidence at  [19]  of  the  Decision.  He  there  makes
       express reference to  Mr  A's  evidence  that  he  had  visited  the
       Appellant in prison after his appearance.  That  evidence  does  not
       find its  way  into  the  Judge's  factual  findings  later  in  the
       Decision.  Furthermore, although there is express reference  to  the
       background evidence at [26] of the Decision, I accept that the Judge
       has failed to take that into account when  considering  whether  the
       Appellant's political profile, even if only a low  level  member  of
       the BNP, would put him at risk now.


   16. There is an error of law in the Decision.  I set it aside.   I  have
       given directions below for further evidence to  be  served  and  for
       skeleton arguments to be exchanged.  I have considered whether it is
       appropriate to preserve any findings.  I have decided that it  would
       be appropriate to preserve the findings made in [31] of the Decision
       as those are not affected by the errors of law which I have found to
       exist.

      DECISION
   I am satisfied that the Decision contains material  errors  of  law.  The
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge N M Paul promulgated on 14  October
   2016 is set aside. I  make  the  following  directions  for  the  resumed
   hearing:-
    1. The Appellant  shall  file  with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
       Respondent no later than 28 days from the date when this decision is
       promulgated any further evidence on which he relies. He  shall  also
       by the same date file and serve a skeleton argument dealing with the
       issues in his case.
    2. The Respondent shall  file  with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
       Appellant no later than 28 days from the  date  of  service  of  the
       evidence and skeleton argument at [1] above a skeleton  argument  in
       reply to the Appellant's skeleton argument.
    3. The resumed hearing of this appeal to deal with the subsidiary claim
       shall be listed on the first available date after 56 days  from  the
       date when this decision is promulgated with a  time  estimate  of  3
       hours.  A Bengali interpreter with  Sylheti  dialect  (if  possible)
       will be required for the hearing.


      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  3 January 2017


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


