
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/09618/2019 (V)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 December 2020                            |On 31 December 2020            |
|                                               |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     MRM

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: No attendance. Not legally represented

For the Respondent: Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Sri Lanka with date  of  birth  given
   as 13.4.90, has appealed with permission to the  Upper  Tribunal  against
   the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  18.2.20  (Judge
   Evans), dismissing on all grounds his appeal against the decision of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 20.9.20, to refuse his claim for  international
   protection.




2. The appellant was  previously  legally  represented  by  ABN  Solicitors.
   However, on 15.12.20 the  Upper  Tribunal  received  an  email  from  ABN
   informing the Tribunal that the appellant had "withdrawn instructions" so
   they would not be representing him at the hearing. I was  satisfied  that
   notice of the Upper Tribunal hearing was sent  to  both  the  appellant's
   then legal representatives and  to  the  address  for  correspondence  he
   provided in Stoke on Trent. There has  been  no  communication  from  the
   appellant  and  no  indication  of  any  change  of   address.   In   the
   circumstances, I was satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  aware  of  the
   hearing but found no reason not to proceed with the error of law hearing,
   and that to do so was consistent with the Tribunal's overriding  duty  to
   deal with cases fairly and justly.




3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on  5.6.20,  the  judge  considering  it  arguable  that  having
   accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan
   authorities and released on conditions which he had  since  broken,  "the
   judge arguably should have found that the Sri  Lankan  authorities  would
   maintain an  adverse  interest  in  the  appellant.  Further,  the  judge
   arguably failed to resolve issues which were incumbent upon the judge  to
   resolve." It had been argued by counsel that  putting  the  appellant  on
   reporting conditions meant that the appellant would be on  a  watch  list
   and monitored.

4. The respondent's Rule 24 Reply, dated 20.7.20, submitted that  the  judge
   had carefully considered the two arrests, which  were  found  not  to  be
   linked and that the second arrest was part of  a  general  round  up.  At
   [49.1] the judge  found  the  appellant's  account  of  "relatively  easy
   releases" on  "minor  conditions",  which  were  obtained  formally,  was
   consistent  and  plausible.  However,  the  judge  concluded  that  these
   conditions would not by themselves amount to any adverse interest in  the
   appellant. It is submitted that it is clear that the First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge, having rejected his account of family harassment and the documents
   he adduced, found  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  have  no  further
   interest in the appellant. It is submitted that the grounds are  no  more
   than a disagreement with the decision.

5. The appellant's reply to the Rule  24  submissions,  dated  26.7.20,  and
   maintained that at [49.1] the First-tier Tribunal failed to  engage  with
   counsel's submissions that placing the appellant on reporting  conditions
   was indicative of his being on a watchlist and that he would be monitored
   by them. At [56] the judge accepted that the appellant had been  released
   on conditions which he has since broken. The expert report  of  Dr  Smith
   was to the effect that in the light of that history, the  appellant  will
   likely be arrested and detained on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  Reliance  is
   placed  on  RS  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1796,  and  the
   consequences for a person who had escaped detention and was  the  subject
   of an arrest warrant. It is argued that the appellant will, therefore, be
   at risk on return.

6.  By  directions  issued  on  13.7.20,  the  Upper  Tribunal  proposed  to
   determine the error of  law  issue  on  the  papers  without  a  hearing,
   pursuant to Rule 34. Whilst the respondent did not object to that  course
   of action, the appellant opposed it. In  the  premises,  on  6.10.20  the
   Upper Tribunal issued directions for an oral  hearing  but  to  be  heard
   remotely by video.

7. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

8. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a number  of  findings  in  the
   appellant's favour, I note that the grounds do not challenge many of  the
   adverse findings, including the rejection of the sur place claim. Even in
   respect of those matters that  are  challenged  as  errors  of  law,  the
   grounds fail to establish the materiality of the errors in light  of  the
   overall considerations and conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal.

9. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal are from [44]  onwards.  Relevant
   to the grounds, the judge addressed in detail from [46] onwards the issue
   whether the appellant would be of adverse  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
   authorities on return. At  [49.1]  the  judge  accepted  the  appellant's
   account of two initial detentions and "relatively easy releases"  without
   the need for corruption. "That is to say on each occasion he was detained
   either for a minor matter or when the grounds  for  suspicion  were  very
   limited and released quite quickly."

10. However, at [49.2] the appellant's account of  alleged  ongoing  adverse
   interest by the Sri Lankan authorities was rejected,  together  with  the
   documents in support, for the  comprehensive  reasons  provided,  all  of
   which I am satisfied were open to the judge on the  evidence  before  the
   Tribunal. Similarly, as noted above, the sur place claim was rejected.

11. The judge  repeated  and  summarised  the  findings  from  [55]  of  the
   decision. It was accepted that the appellant  had  come  to  the  adverse
   attention of the authorities for his role in sending medication and other
   items for civilian use in LTTE-controlled areas. He was briefly  detained
   for this but  shortly  afterwards  formally  released  with  a  reporting
   condition following the intervention of his head teacher. At  [55.2]  the
   judge concluded that, "this relatively easy release demonstrated that the
   authorities did not regard his activities too seriously."

12. Shortly afterwards, he was arrested again following the killing  of  two
   STF officers, but arrested simply because he was in  the  relevant  area.
   Shortly afterwards, he was released again, following the intervention  of
   a police officer he knew, with a  no  reporting  conditions  and  only  a
   requirement to attend if required. There is no credible evidence that  he
   was ever required to attend and failed to do  so.  At  [55.4]  the  judge
   concluded, "Again, I find that this relatively easy release  demonstrates
   that the authorities did not regard his activities too seriously."

13. Mr Bates pointed out that between the  first  and  second  arrests,  the
   appellant relocated within Sri Lanka but evidently even this fact was not
   considered significant by the authorities, given  that  he  was  released
   shortly afterwards.

14. At [56] the judge stated that "notwithstanding that  I  accept  that  he
   was released with conditions on each occasion which the authorities could
   regard as having been broken, I find that the  appellant  has  failed  to
   prove to the lower standard of proof that an arrest  warrant  was  issued
   for him in 2010 following the Summons/Notice to an accused dated 30 March
   2009, that he exited Sri Lanka with the assistance of a  corrupt  airport
   official, or that he has since his  departure  been  sought  by  the  Sri
   Lankan authorities." The judge then set out in the sub-paragraphs  cogent
   reasoning  for  reaching  that  conclusion.  In  particular,  the   judge
   considered that neither detention was in respect of matters which the Sri
   Lankan authorities regarded as very serious. His account of  leaving  Sri
   Lanka was inconsistent and problems with the alleged arrest warrant  were
   highlighted,  both  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  account  and  the
   reliability of the documentation. At [57] the judge  concluded  that  the
   appellant left Sri Lanka using his own passport, that he  was  not  on  a
   stop or watch list, and that no arrest warrant has been issued  for  him.
   Those were all findings open to the judge on the evidence.

15. Contrary to the assertions in the grounds, the judge  gave  reasons  for
   accepting or rejecting various elements of the appellant's factual claim.
   The submission of counsel relied on in the grounds  and  further  written
   submissions was that placing the appellant on  reporting  conditions  was
   indicative of the authorities placing the appellant on a watchlist and of
   their monitoring of the appellant. However, the judge  has  given  cogent
   reasons for concluding that the Sri Lankan authorities did not regard the
   appellant as a person of adverse interest.  These  reasons  included  the
   easiness of his release, the findings that he left Sri  Lanka  using  his
   own passport, they did not seek him, and that no arrest warrant had  been
   issued for him.

16. Specific complaint is made that the judge failed to make  findings  with
   respect to the expert report of Dr Smith which was to the effect that the
   appellant will be arrested and detained in light of his  adverse  history
   alone. At [42] the  judge  noted  the  representative's  submissions  and
   reliance on a  skeleton  argument,  including  requesting  the  judge  to
   consider certain paragraphs of the  expert  report.  At  [46]  the  judge
   explained that he was bound to be selective  in  the  references  to  the
   evidence when giving  reasons,  "However,  I  wish  to  emphasis  that  I
   considered all the evidence in the round when reaching  my  conclusions."
   It is clear to me from the markings made on the report by the judge  that
   it was carefully considered and in particular the paragraphs drawn to the
   judge's attention by the appellant's representative have been noted.

17. However, the judge specifically addressed the expert report at  [54]  of
   the decision, noting that Dr Smith misunderstood the appellant's case and
   incorrectly stated that the appellant had been  released  on  the  second
   occasion on the basis of corrupt practices and after a  bribe  was  paid.
   The appellant made no such assertion in respect  of  either  arrest.  The
   judge found in fact that he was released formally and without the use  of
   corruption. The report went on  to  deduce  that  "in  the  eyes  of  the
   authorities, the appellant is an  unacquainted  suspect  and  there  will
   likely be an arrest warrant in his name." Given the facts and findings of
   this case, that opinion amounts to a considerable exaggeration.  At  [54]
   of the report Dr Smith explained that if the appellant was able  to  pass
   through the airport he would not be on the Stop list. It  is  clear  that
   the expert opinion is based on the appellant  being  the  subject  of  an
   arrest warrant and being on the stop list or watchlist and that a warrant
   is automatically issued if an individual failed to report when requested.
   However, the judge rejected the claim that a warrant had been issued  for
   him in 2010 and that the authorities were looking  for  him  in  2014  or
   2015. The judge also addressed the difficulty for the appellant that  his
   wife had returned to Sri Lanka without any difficulty, despite his  claim
   that he was wanted by the authorities. It follows that the premise of the
   expert report opining a risk on return for the appellant on the basis  of
   being on a stop list or watchlist falls away. Even if the  appellant  can
   be said to have not complied with the conditions of release, there is  no
   evidence that he was asked to attend  again  following  his  release  and
   there is no basis to consider that he is of any adverse interest.  As  Mr
   Bates submitted, at the most he will be subject  to  monitoring  but  not
   detention on return to Sri Lanka. It follows that there  is  no  material
   error in not specifically addressing aspects of the  expert  evidence  as
   claimed in the grounds.

18. On the basis of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal,  the  appellant
   does not fall within any of the categories of persons  at  real  risk  of
   persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka set  out  in   GJ  and
   others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319  (IAC).
   The judge found that the appellant would not be  or  be  perceived  as  a
   threat to the  integrity  of  a  single-state  Sri  Lanka  because  of  a
   significant role in post-conflict Tamil separatism. There  is  no  arrest
   warrant for him and given he was able to leave on his  own  identity,  he
   cannot be on a stop list of those against whom there is an  extant  court
   order or arrest warrant. Whilst the Country  Guidance  held  that  "If  a
   person is detained by the Sri Lankan security services  there  remains  a
   real risk of ill-treatment or harm requiring  international  protection,"
   the findings of the First-tier Tribunal were to the effect that there was
   no real risk of such detention on return to Sri Lanka. In  the  premises,
   dismissal of the appeal was inevitable and is unimpeachable.

19. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       17 December 2020



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       17 December 2020





