
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/09973/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 December 2018                       |On 14 January 2019                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                   MR BLA
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smith, Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born on 1 April 1999 and a citizen of Iraq, appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 21
    July 2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 26 September  2018
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Geraint  Jones  QC  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the following grounds:

      1) Ground 1: Failure to give  reasons  why  there  was  no  appeal  on
         protection grounds.

      2) Ground 2  -Failure  to  adequately  assess  the  reasonableness  of
         internal relocation;

      3) Ground 3 - Failure to make independent findings on claimed loss  of
         contact with the family;

      4) Ground 4 - Failure to adequately assess the appellant's ability  to
         obtain a replacement CSID within a reasonable period of time.

Error of Law Hearing

 3. Mr Smith submitted that the judge had found that it was  a  matter  for
    the Tribunal as to whether paragraph 353 of the Immigration  Rules  had
    any application.  The appellant, in a letter dated  17  December  2016,
    had submitted  that  he  feared  persecution  in  Iraq  and  should  be
    considered a refugee and further submitted that his human rights  would
    be breached under Articles 2, 3 and 8 if  returned  to  Iraq.   In  the
    decision, dated 21 July 2018, the respondent treated the application as
    further submissions under paragraph 353 of the  Immigration  Rules  and
    determined that they did not amount to a fresh claim.  However  it  has
    been the appellant's case that the respondent was wrong to characterise
    that  application  as  further   submissions   when   the   appellant's
    application was in fact an application for further leave to remain.

 4. As summarised in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant
    had arrived in the UK on or about 11 September 2015 and claimed  asylum
    on 18 September 2015.  The respondent refused that claim  on  14  March
    2016 but the appellant was granted discretionary leave to remain  as  a
    minor, until 1 October 2016.  The appellant  appealed  the  refusal  of
    asylum and his appeal against that refusal was dismissed on 18 November
    2016.  The appellant successfully appealed to the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    his case was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  The remitted appeal,
    before Immigration Judge Veloso on  1  September  2017,  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated on 25 September 2017.

 5. In the interim, the appellant had made an application for further leave
    to remain, in an application dated  17  September  2016.   Judge  Jones
    accepted  that  the  letter  accompanying  the  application  from   the
    appellant's representatives stated  that  the  appellant  still  feared
    persecution and a violation of his human rights if returned to Iraq.

 6. Mr Smith submitted that,  having  accepted  that  the  application  for
    further leave was just that,  rather  than  further  submissions  under
    paragraph 353, in respect of the human rights  application,  the  judge
    could not rationally refuse to accept that an  application  for  asylum
    had also been made.  Mr Smith relied on the respondent's refusal letter
    which referred to the appellant's "asylum and human rights claim".   Mr
    Smith submitted that  in  effect  the  appellant's  claim  had  been  a
    protection claim, as it  was  Article  15(c)  that  the  appellant  was
    relying on  specifically,  rather  than  asylum.   It  was  Mr  Smith's
    submission that there was a protection claim and a human rights  claim.
    There was a refusal of the  asylum/protection  claim  and  this  was  a
    refusal which had attracted a right of  appeal  under  Section  82  and
    therefore the judge  ought  not  to  have  limited  the  scope  of  his
    consideration.

 7. It was further submitted that having, incorrectly, purported  to  limit
    jurisdiction to exclude the protection claim (and  Mr  Smith  submitted
    that he did not make submissions on this part of the appeal before  the
    First-tier Tribunal) the judge went on to find, at [19], that:

         "There might be a real risk of indiscriminate harm to the appellant
         if he was returned to his home area given that it may fall  outside
         the IKR."

 8. In respect of the second ground, it was submitted that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to adequately assess  the  reasonableness  of  internal
    relocation.  This arises in the context of the protection claim whereas
    the judge had already limited the scope of the appeal to human  rights.
    It  was  Mr  Smith's  submission  that  a  proper  assessment  of   the
    reasonableness of internal relocation had to take account of a raft  of
    factors including the appellant's Kurdish  ethnicity,  Sunni  identity,
    inability to speak Arabic, absence of family or connections in Baghdad,
    the profile of a returnee from the  west,  the  appellant's  relatively
    young age (especially in the context of having left Iraq  as  a  child)
    and the up-to-date security situation in Baghdad.  As was clear from BA
    (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) these factors must be
    assessed cumulatively.

 9. It was Mr Smith's submission that although the judge then went  on,  in
    effect, to deal with the Article 15(c) claim, that error  was  material
    in restricting  the  appeal  as  Mr  Smith  was  unable  to  make  full
    submissions including in relation to the ability to relocate.  Mr Smith
    noted that although it was recorded, at [20], that  the  representative
    did not argue that it would be unreasonable per se for the appellant to
    relocate to Baghdad Mr Smith stated that that was only in  the  context
    of the fact that he had been limited  to  not  arguing  the  protection
    claim.

10. Mr Smith submitted that having found that at [19]  that  the  appellant
    was at a real risk of indiscriminate harm in his home  area  the  judge
    accepted that the appellant's home area fell outside the IKR.  Mr Smith
    relied on headnote 13 of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  544
    where it was found as follows:

         "13. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
             if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's
             Governorate because it is  in  an  area  where  Article  15(c)
             serious harm is occurring.   As  a  result  of  the  violence,
             alternative CSA Offices for Mosul, Anbar and  Saluhaddin  have
             been established in Baghdad and Kerbala.   The  evidence  does
             not demonstrate that the 'Central Archive',  which  exists  in
             Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need
             of them.  There  is,  however,  a  National  Status  Court  in
             Baghdad, to which P could  apply  for  formal  recognition  of
             identity.  The precise operation of this  court  is,  however,
             unclear."

11. It was Mr Smith's submission that it was clear from  paragraph  [8]  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision, that it was accepted that  although
    Judge Veloso's decision was on the basis that the appellant came from a
    village near to Gwer within the province of Erbil in the IKR, that  was
    not geographically correct.  Judge Jones  accepted  therefore  (and  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe did not dispute this) at [19],  that  the  appellant's
    home area fell outside the IKR.

12. In respect of ground 3 it was submitted that the judge  ought  to  have
    made independent findings on the  claimed  loss  of  contact  with  the
    family as the findings of Judge Veloso, which Judge Jones QC adopted on
    the basis of Devaseelan, were made in  the  context  of  the  appellant
    coming from the IKR which  is  "virtually  violence  free."   Mr  Smith
    submitted that this is a world of difference as  the  appellant's  home
    area was actually an area of armed conflict and  on  this  basis  there
    should have been a separate assessment (as  the  appellant  had  argued
    through his representatives in paragraphs 33 and  34  of  the  skeleton
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal).

13. Mr Smith argued that  even  if  ground  3  was  not  made  out  it  was
    sufficient, given the findings on jurisdiction and the  fact  that  the
    judge had found his home area to be in an area of  conflict,  that  the
    appellant could not be expected to relocate.  As regards ground  4,  it
    was  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  adequately  consider  the
    appellant's ability to obtain a replacement CSID  within  a  reasonable
    period of time and he relied on AA (Article 15(c) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT
    544 specifically from [177] that "for reasons identified in the section
    that follows below, at the present time the process of obtaining a CSID
    from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the  person  wishing  to
    obtain the CSID is from an area where Article  15(c)  serious  harm  is
    occurring."

14. Ms Willocks-Briscoe did not specifically submit that the judge did  not
    err in finding that there was jurisdiction in human rights and not  the
    protection claim.  Rather, it was her submission that any error was not
    material given that the judge had gone on in any event to  consider  in
    practical terms the issue of  international  protection  under  Article
    15(c).  It was her submission that the case turns on the issue  of  the
    CSID.

15. Although it had been submitted, on behalf of the appellant, that  there
    were no independent findings on contact and that  there  needed  to  be
    given that the appellant submitted that the findings  of  Judge  Veloso
    were based on the fact that the appellant was from the IKR  whereas  it
    was now accepted that he came from an area of  conflict,  Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe submitted that this was to misunderstand the findings of  Judge
    Veloso.  In Judge Veloso's  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  25
    September 2017, at [51] through to [54], the judge  made  a  number  of
    adverse credibility findings which Ms Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  were
    not concerned with whether or not the  appellant  was  in  an  area  of
    conflict.   The  findings  concerned  the  credibility  of  appellant's
    evidence including the fact that he had  provided  an  Iraqi  telephone
    number in his screening interview only to subsequently  state  that  he
    did not have one and that  he  had  made  it  up.   Judge  Veloso  gave
    detailed reasons for not accepting the appellant's evidence in relation
    to the contact numbers including that the appellant on his own evidence
    had three to four days' notice of departure  and  the  judge  found  it
    incredible that he would not have taken the paper  with  him  with  the
    number on it and the judge, for the  comprehensive  reasons  she  gave,
    found it not credible that the appellant did not have a  mobile  number
    and did not know his parents' contact numbers and  found  that  he  has
    been in contact with his family and further found it not credible  that
    the appellant would not have had the means of contacting his family.

16. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted therefore that to say these findings were
    flawed because they were based on a  misunderstanding  in  relation  to
    where his home area was, was not sustainable.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe also
    relied on the fact that, as recorded as [15],  the  appellant  made  no
    reference in cross-examination in relation to Judge  Veloso's  findings
    about contact with his family when this was put to  him.   Although  he
    denied having any contact with his  family  since  at  least  2014,  he
    failed to address the reasons given by Judge Veloso for  not  accepting
    this evidence.

17. It was Ms Willocks-Briscoe's submission that  there  were  measures  in
    place in Baghdad with respect to CSID cards and in any event the  judge
    had relied on the alternate submission that his  family  would  provide
    him with his  CSID.   It  was  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe's  submission  that
    looking at the determination holistically even if there was an error in
    the judge's consideration of jurisdiction that was as far  as  it  goes
    and given the lack of evidence to challenge Judge Veloso's decision the
    decision must stand.

18. In reply Mr Smith submitted that Judge Jones  did  not  deal  with  the
    internal relocation matter adequately and had not addressed the factors
    set out in BA (Baghdad) including the risk of kidnap due to his Kurdish
    ethnicity.  Although the appellant's ID card is relevant it was not the
    determinate factor in respect of internal relocation.  Although it  was
    said that Judge Veloso's findings on contact were made on  credibility,
    it was not possible to divorce the credibility finding  from  the  fact
    that it is now accepted that this took place in  an  area  of  conflict
    whereas those findings were made in the context that it  was  a  secure
    area and the reasonableness or otherwise of  someone's  evidence  about
    contact had to be assessed in that context.  Mr Smith relied on  a  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 2012  and  that  there
    was no prospect of a replacement ID card from Baghdad if  you  are  not
    from there.

Discussion

19. Whilst Judge Jones may have erred in his conclusion that there  was  no
    protection appeal before him, whilst finding that  there  was  a  human
    rights claim, he nevertheless went on to consider that protection claim
    in substance.  Any error was therefore not material.

20. In relation to ground 2, it was argued that the  judge's  consideration
    of the reasonableness of internal relocation was incorrectly considered
    within his human rights assessment as opposed to within the confines of
    an international protection claim and that a proper assessment  of  the
    reasons of internal relocation had to  take  into  account  a  raft  of
    factors including the appellant's Kurdish  ethnicity,  Sunni  identity,
    the ability to speak  Arabic,  absence  of  family  or  connections  in
    Baghdad the profile of  a  returnee  from  the  west,  the  appellant's
    relatively young age and the up-to-date security situation in  Baghdad.



21. However, the judge considered, at  [20],  that  it  would  be  entirely
    reasonable to expect the appellant  to  relocate,  live  and  work  and
    provide for himself in Baghdad.  Although Mr Smith argued that  he  was
    unable to make his full submissions because the appeal was  limited  to
    human rights, the judge specifically recorded that Mr Smith's  argument
    was that the appellant does not have and would be unable  to  obtain  a
    CSID card and would therefore be homeless and  destitute  (and  I  note
    that Mr Smith's skeleton argument before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to relocation to Baghdad, made submissions almost  exclusively
    on the CSID card issue).  This demonstrates  that  Mr  Smith  did  make
    submissions, which were considered, about the ability or  otherwise  to
    relocate to Baghdad.  Whilst the judge may  have  mischaracterised  the
    appeal rights in form, in substance he  fully  considered  the  Article
    15(c) claim including all the evidence in support of  that  claim.   No
    material error is disclosed in ground 1.

22. The judge's consideration at [20] onwards considered a  number  of  the
    factors including that the judge was satisfied that the  appellant  has
    the means to contact his family in Iraq and  the  judge  was  satisfied
    that the appellant had sufficient family support and  assistance.   The
    judge had a wealth of background material before him, together with the
    country guidance case law as  set  out  in  the  appellant's  extensive
    bundle, which the judge referenced,  including  noting  that  the  only
    material from that bundle referred to before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was the decision of Judge Veloso and the appellant's witness statement.



23. Nonetheless, a fair reading of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision indicates that the judge  had  the  relevant  factors  in  mid
    including as set out in the country guidance case law.  Although  Judge
    Jones may not have individually set out the factors in BA  (Returns  to
    Baghdad) including whether a returnee from the west  is  likely  to  be
    perceived as a potential for kidnap, the judge had the relevant factors
    in mind and the judge found that the appellant has the means to contact
    family members in Iraq and will  have  sufficient  family  support  and
    assistance.

24. The judge's assessment and findings in respect of  internal  relocation
    could not be said to be irrational and was adequate.  I  have  reminded
    myself what was said in MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  1958  that
    adequacy means no more nor less than that.  It  is  not  a  counsel  of
    perfection. Still less should it provide an opportunity to undertake  a
    qualitative assessment of the reasons  to  see  if  they  are  wanting,
    perhaps even surprising, on their merits. The purpose of  the  duty  to
    give reasons, is in part, to enable the losing party to know why he has
    lost.  No material error is disclosed in ground 2.

25. Although in ground 3 it was submitted that the  judge  failed  to  make
    adequate findings in respect of the claim of loss of contact  with  the
    family, that submission is without any merit as  Judge  Veloso  reached
    comprehensive  findings  on  credibility  as  to  why  the  appellant's
    inconsistent  and  contradictory  evidence,  including   about   having
    telephone numbers or not having telephone numbers for his  family,  was
    not accepted together with a number of other credibility  findings  why
    the appellant's evidence was rejected.

26. Mr Smith's submission, that this had to be considered  in  an  entirely
    different context of someone fleeing an area of conflict which  it  was
    now accepted the appellant came from, does not bear scrutiny.  This  is
    not least the case given that the  judge  records  at  [15]  in  cross-
    examination that when the findings made by Judge Veloso, concerning the
    contact with his family,  were  put  to  the  appellant,  there  is  no
    indication that the appellant made any reference to the  fact  that  he
    came from an area of conflict was relevant to the consideration of  his
    account of loss of contact.  Mr Smith made no  submission  which  might
    explain why the fact that it is accepted that the appellant  came  from
    an area of conflict would make a difference to him telling the truth or
    not.  No material error is disclosed in ground 3.

27. The relevant question therefore is the issue of  the  CSID.   This  was
    considered in AAH (Iraqi Kurds  - internal relocation) Iraq  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 00212 as follows:

         "Section C of country guidance annexed to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is  supplemented  with  the
         following guidance:

          1) Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances.  Factors to be considered include:




               i)  whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register.  An INC, passport,  birth/marriage  certificates
                  or on expired CSID would all be of substantial assistance.
                   For someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents  the  process  should  be  straightforward.    A
                  laissez-passer should not be counted for  these  purposes:
                  these can be issued without any other  form  of  ID  being
                  available, or not of any assistance in 'tracing  back'  to
                  the family record and  are  confiscated  upon  arrival  at
                  Baghdad;




              ii) the location of the relevant civil registry office.  If it
                  is  an  area  held,  or  formally  held  by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?


             iii) Are there male  family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether the relevant relative is from the  mother
                  or father's side.  A maternal uncle  in  possession  of  a
                  CSID would be able to  assist  in  locating  the  original
                  place of registration of the individual's mother, and from
                  there the trail would need to be  followed  to  the  place
                  that her records were transferred upon marriage.  It  must
                  also be born in mind that a significant number of IDPs  in
                  Iraq are themselves undocumented; if that is the  case  it
                  is unlikely that they would be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to assist with the process of  the
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all."

28. Mr Smith relied on [177] of AA (Iraq) that the process of obtaining  an
    CSID is likely to be "severely hampered" for  someone  coming  from  an
    area within Article 15(c) serious harm is  occurring  and  it  was  not
    disputed  that  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -   internal   relocation)   [2018]
    establishes that a returnee must be able to obtain the  CSID  within  a
    reasonable time frame.

29. However, it was Judge Jones' finding,  including  in  the  alternative,
    that the appellant's family could provide  the  existing  CSID  to  the
    appellant.  The findings of both Judge Veloso and Judge Jones, that the
    appellant either does have  or  could  have  contact  with  his  family
    members are sustainable.

30. Judge Jones made further evidence based findings, at [22],  that  there
    was 'no reason whatsoever' why the appellant could not obtain the  CSID
    he left behind (it being the appellant's evidence, at  paragraph  2  of
    his witness statement, that he had an ID card in Iraq which his  mother
    looked after).  The fact that it is accepted the appellant's home  area
    is in an Article 15(c) area (which Judge Jones  had  accepted  and  was
    therefore aware of) does not negate the judge's findings.

31. Although Mr Smith relied on what was said including at paragraph 177 of
     AA (Iraq)  that the process of obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely to
    be severely hampered if the person is from an area where Article  15(c)
    serious harm is occurring, this must be seen  in  the  context  of  the
    subsequent discussion in AA  (Iraq)  which  highlighted  (including  at
    paragraph 187) specific difficulties if an individual is 'unable to  go
    to the Civil Status Affairs office of their home Governorate because it
    is in an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring.'

32. The reference  to  'severely  hampered'  in  the  country  guidance  is
    therefore made in relation to having a replacement CSID issued, whereas
    the appellant has confirmed he already has one  with  his  family.   In
    that context, and in the context of  Judge  Jones'  findings  that  the
    appellant was or could be in contact with his family and would have the
    availability of family support Judge Jones' findings were available  to
    him.

33.  Considering all the factors including in AAH, (there was no suggestion
    in the appellant's evidence that his  ID  card  at  home  was  expired.
    However, even if it was AAH notes that if an  individual  possesses  an
    expired CSID obtaining a new CSID should be 'straightforward') there is
    nothing that was not adequately considered by Judge Jones including his
    key findings that the appellant is  or  could  have  contact  with  his
    family and could get his own or a replacement CSID  with  his  family's
    assistance.

34.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
law and shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.






Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


