
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09939/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 April 2019                     |On 02 May 2019                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Greer instructed by Virgo Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Moxon ('the Judge') promulgated on 10  October  2018
        in which  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  both
        protection and human rights grounds.






Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of  Albania  born  on  14  February  1997,
        claimed asylum  on  26  January  2015  which  was  refused  by  the
        respondent. The appellant asserted  she  is  the  victim  of  human
        trafficking and fears her traffickers and her family if returned to
        Albania. At [32] the Judge writes:

             "32.     I agreed at the outset of the hearing  to  treat  the
                   Appellant  as  vulnerable  and  ensured  that   she   was
                   comfortable and that she knew that she will be  permitted
                   breaks where required. I reassured her that she would  be
                   questioned  appropriately   and   fully   explained   the
                   procedure  to  her.  Whilst  Mr  Greer  in  his   closing
                   submissions argued that I  had  found  the  Appellant  "a
                   sensitive witness" this was a misunderstanding as  I  had
                   simply stated that I would  treat  her  as  a  vulnerable
                   witness, as was appropriate unless and  until  I  was  to
                   find otherwise, and was not communicating  a  finding  of
                   fact."

     3. The Judge sets out findings from [47] leading  to  the  appellant's
        credibility being rejected.  The  appellant  sought  permission  to
        appeal on 6 grounds being (i)  committing  procedural  irregularity
        capable of affecting the fairness of the  proceedings  relating  to
        the applicability of the vulnerable witness  guidance,  (2)  giving
        undue weight to  be  relevant  matters  referring  to  the  Judge's
        comments concerning the absence of corroborative medical  evidence,
        (3) giving undue weight to a relevant matters by reference  to  the
        appellant's demeanour, (4) in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons
        relating to the Judge's findings as  to  the  plausibility  of  the
        appellant's account, (5) giving undue weight to irrelevant  matters
        by  reference  to  purported  inconsistencies  in  the   appellants
        evidence, and, [6] in failing to resolve a material dispute between
        the parties regarding the value of the British Embassy letter.
     4. Permission to appeal was granted by another  judge  the  First-Tier
        Tribunal on all grounds on 7 November 2018.



Error of law


     5. Ground 1, asserting procedural irregularity, refers  to  the  Joint
        Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 and the guidance  contained
        therein in relation to the manner in  which  evidence  given  by  a
        vulnerable witness should be taken and assessed. The appellant also
        refers to the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  AM(Afghanistan)
        [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 in which it was found  that  the  guidance  is
        mandatory in nature and that a  Tribunal's  failure  to  apply  the
        guidance and applicable cases is likely to amount to  an  error  of
        law.
     6. The grounds assert the Judge has erred in law in relation  to  this
        ground for the following reasons:

             "6.  At the beginning of the hearing, the Appellant's advocate
                  raised the applicability of the guidance as a  preliminary
                  issue, making an application that the guidance be  applied
                  in the case. The Judge Moxon granted that application,  or
                  at least indicated to the parties that he had granted  the
                  application. However at [32] of the  determination,  Judge
                  Moxon  states  that  he  had  not  actually  granted  that
                  application but only that he would treat the Appellant  as
                  if she were a vulnerable witness unless or until he  found
                  otherwise. If this was the approach to be taken, it  ought
                  to have been communicated to the parties  at  the  hearing
                  rather than in his written  determination,  following  the
                  hearing.


             7.   Judge Moxon notes that the Appellant's advocate proceeded
                  on the understanding that the guidance was  to  apply  but
                  that this was  a  misunderstanding.  If  Judge  Moxon  had
                  detected that  his  ruling  had  been  misunderstood,  the
                  appropriate time to raise  this  was  during  the  hearing
                  rather than  to  allow  the  parties  to  labour  under  a
                  misapprehension. Such an approach is  procedurally  unfair
                  and wrong in law.


             8.   The absence of corroborative medical evidence appears  to
                  be  the  sole  basis  for  Judge  Moxon  disapplying   the
                  Vulnerable Witness Guidance, at [51].  Despite  the  self-
                  direction  at  [52]  of  the  determination,  Judge  Moxon
                  deprives the Appellant of any  practical  benefit  of  the
                  guidance and declines to apply the guidance in  substance.
                  For   example,   the   focus   upon    demeanour,    minor
                  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  account   and   the
                  Appellant's ability to recount matters that occurred  when
                  she was a child is contrary to the Guidance.


             9.    Judge  Moxon's  failure  to  contentiously   apply   the
                  provisions of the guidance amounts to an error of law."

     7. At [51] the Judge wrote:

             "51.     I note that despite the assertion  of  the  Appellant
                   suffering low mood and potential suicidal  ideation,  she
                   has failed to maintain counselling and does to rely  upon
                   a report from suitably qualified practitioner  about  her
                   mental health. I consider this to be a material  omission
                   in light of the fact that it is asserted that she suffers
                   mental  health  problems  arising  from  trauma  and   is
                   vulnerable. Whilst I accept that the Appellant  does  not
                   wish  to  relate  matters,  which   is   plausible,   she
                   nevertheless has been able to disclose information to her
                   General Practitioner,  Home  Office  interviewers,  legal
                   representatives and Ms Read and  I  do  not  accept  that
                   there is adequate explanation why she has not sought  the
                   continued  assistance  of  medical  professionals  or  to
                   obtain a report."

     8. The Judge sets out matters found to  be  relevant  to  the  adverse
        credibility findings from [54] in which the issue of  inconsistency
        in  the  account  is  raised  as  is  the   finding   relating   to
        implausibility.
     9. At [54 (d)] the Judge finds:

             "54(d)   It is not credible that her captors would  make  such
                   effort  to  prevent  her  escaping  that  she   will   be
                   accompanied by two bodyguards, but that they  would  then
                   leave  the  route  of  escape  unsupervised  and   either
                   unlocked or with the key left in  the  door.  It  is  not
                   credible that she would be permitted to  retain  tips  or
                   that she would not  be  searched  for  money,  especially
                   given that she asserts that she was not permitted to keep
                   her passport. It is not credible that  one  client  would
                   give such a substantial tip."

    10. The appellants challenges this finding,  particularly  relating  to
        the E500 tip, as the source of the Judge's apparently authoritative
        knowledge of the tipping habits of men  who  pay  for  sex  or  the
        security  arrangements  of  imprisoned  enslaved  women   was   not
        disclosed on the face of the determination  making  it  unclear  on
        what basis the  Judge  concludes  this  aspect  of  the  appellants
        evidence lacks plausibility;  which  is  said  to  be  an  approach
        infected by lack of adequate reasoning.
    11. The grounds also referred to what is said to be  factual  error  in
        the finding at [54 (a)] in which the Judge criticises the appellant
        for giving an inconsistent account of her age when she left  school
        when there was no dispute between the parties as to the appellant's
        age and it was unclear on what basis the Judge concludes that  such
        inconsistency goes to the core of the appellant's account.   It  is
        also said in the same  paragraph  that  the  Judge  criticises  the
        appellant on the basis  that  Ms  Read,  a  therapist,  incorrectly
        recorded the appellant had 4  brothers  without  explaining  how  a
        typographical error in a third party report could impinge upon  the
        appellants credibility and in failing to take into account that the
        appellant's solicitors wrote to the author of the report correcting
        the error shortly after  the  appellant  had  first  sight  of  the
        document, as evidenced  at  page  170  of  the  appellant's  appeal
        bundle, which it is said the Judge has failed to take into account.
        I find such criticism made out.
    12. It is also the Judge's findings  at  [54(e)]  in  which  the  Judge
        concludes the appellant has given inconsistent evidence relating to
        the paternity of her eldest child, despite accepting the  appellant
        was consistent between her Home Office interview and evidence given
        to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal,   is   irrational.   The   purported
        inconsistency is with her medical notes which was not a point taken
        against the appellant by the respondent or put the appellant at the
        hearing. It is also stated the finding  at  [52(h)]  in  which  the
        Judge criticises the appellant  for  being  unable  to  provide  an
        adequate explanation for how she  came  to  hold  a  false  Italian
        identity card is wrong as at question 189 of her  Asylum  Interview
        the appellant indicated how she came into the  possession  of  such
        document. It is also noted at [49] that the appellant has  given  a
        broadly consistent and plausible account.  I  find  such  criticism
        made out.
    13. Mr McVeety on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that
        although in relation to some aspects of the grounds he would  argue
        there was no error material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal
        he accepted that in relation to ground one the Judge had  erred  in
        law.
    14. The Judge clearly at [32] indicated that  it  was  agreed  that  he
        would treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness which  meant  the
        Judge was required to not only treat the  appellant  in  accordance
        with the published guidance but also to assess the evidence on  the
        same basis. An arguable difficulty in approaching the assessment of
        the evidence in a different manner is that it is only once a proper
        assessment of the evidence is  made  that  it  can  be  established
        whether  the  appellant  is  a  vulnerable  witness  or  not.   The
        vulnerability in this case arises as a result of the allegation  of
        the appellant being a victim  of  trafficking  and  a  person  with
        mental health issues.
    15. What does not appear in the body of the determination  evidence  of
        the manner in which the Judge assess the  appellant's  evidence  by
        specific reference to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note.  There
        appears nothing within the Judge's assessment of the weight  to  be
        given to the evidence indicating how the appellant's  vulnerability
        was  factored   into   the   fact-finding   process.   Absence   of
        corroborative  evidence   relating   to   medical   conditions   is
        insufficient to disapply the Vulnerable  Witness  Guidance  without
        more. The Judge seems  to  find  that  the  lack  of  corroborative
        evidence undermined the appellant's claim to  be  suffering  mental
        health issues and that if  she  was  not  suffering  mental  health
        issues she was not  a  vulnerable  witness  which  is  arguably  in
        conflict with the finding that the material provided warranted  the
        appellant being treated as a vulnerable witness. There was evidence
        before the Judge from other sources  relating  to  the  appellant's
        mental health issues including witness evidence.
    16. The Judge also considering the  appellant's  difficulty  in  giving
        evidence as evidence of her evasiveness which is also said to be at
        odds with the Vulnerable Witness Guidance and established case law;
        neither  is  demeanour  a  basis  for   judging   an   individual's
        credibility as a witness. The  Judge's  assertion  the  appellant's
        responses were evasive is not adequately reasoned and at [13 -  14]
        of the grounds the appellant sets out verbatim questions  asked  of
        the appellant and replies concerning  her  passport  which  do  not
        appear on the face of them to be evasive. The appellant at the date
        of interview was 17 and therefore a child.
    17. In light of the respondent's acceptance concerning the approach  of
        the Judge to the assessment of the  evidence  leading  to  arguably
        unsafe conclusions, arising from the apparent failure  to  properly
        apply the Guidance, I find the decision must be set  aside  on  the
        basis of procedural irregularity sufficient to amount  to  material
        error of law. Failure to properly apply the guidance on  the  facts
        of this case make  the  Judge's  conclusions  arguably  unsafe  and
        unsustainable.
    18. The challenge to the weight given by the Judge to the  letter  from
        the British Embassy has no  arguable  merit  as  such  evidence  is
        admissible and should not be accepted or rejected because it  comes
        from diplomatic sources but should be considered  as  part  of  the
        evidence as a whole.
    19. As the manner in which the evidence  has  been  considered  by  the
        Judge is flawed, the need for a proper assessment of  the  evidence
        in light of the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  involving  extensive
        fact-finding, and in light of there  being  no  preserved  findings
        this is a case, it is wholly  appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
        remitted to the First-Tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Bradford  to  be
        reheard by a judge other than Judge Moxon in  accordance  with  the
        guidance relating to the remission of appeals.
    20. It may be the outcome is the same, but this cannot be found  to  be
        so until there has been a proper assessment of the  evidence  -  AM
        (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 considered.



Decision

    21. The Judge materially erred in law. I set aside the decision of  the
        Judge. I remit the appeal to the  First-Tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
        Bradford to be heard by a judge other than Judge Moxon nominated by
        the Resident Judge. Case management directions shall be  issued  by
        the First-Tier Tribunal in accordance with the operational needs of
        the Bradford Hearing Centre upon receipt of the file.



   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 29 April 2019
