

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09472/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 March 2019                     |On 28 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     GP
                             (ANONMITY DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pickering (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.     This is the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
brought with the permission of a judge of the First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's  appeal  against
the Secretary of State's decision of 13 July  2018  refusing  to  grant  him
international protection or any leave to  remain  under  Article  8  of  the
European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR).  The  tribunal's  decision  was
made on 26 October 2018 following a hearing of 19 October 2018.



2.    Although the claimant had originally asserted  that  he  would  be  at
risk on return to China at the hands of "snakeheads" no  such  argument  was
pursued before the tribunal. Nor, indeed, was it argued  that  the  claimant
met any of the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  But  it  was  argued
that his appeal should succeed under Article  8  of  the  ECHR  outside  the
rules on the basis of what was claimed to be family and private life in  the
United Kingdom (UK). As to that, the claimant had entered the  UK  illegally
in August of 2000.  He  had  claimed,  before  the  tribunal,  to  be  in  a
subsisting relationship with a female national of China I shall call  H  and
to be the father of her two children. Indeed, it was not contested  that  he
is the father of both of them. The eldest of those children was born  on  17
October 2010 and the youngest on 8 May 2012. It was asserted that  they  all
lived together as a family unit. H and the children have  limited  leave  to
remain in the UK which is due to expire on 12 July 2019.

3.    The tribunal did not accept that the  claimant  was  in  a  subsisting
relationship with H though it did accept that he, she and the  two  children
currently shared the same accommodation. But it thought that  was  primarily
because of matters of convenience. It asked itself whether the claimant  had
a general and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  either  of  the  two
children though, in this context, it focused  more  upon  the  eldest  child
because that child was a "qualifying child" as the term is used in rule  276
ADE of the Immigration Rules  and  section  117B  (6)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. What it said about  that  was  interesting.
It said this:

           "51. The issue of whether or not the appellant has a genuine and
           subsisting relationship with his children,  and,  in  particular
           [the eldest] who is a qualifying child pursuant to paragraph 276
           ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules. I conclude  on  the  evidence
           taken as a whole that it is unlikely that the appellant  regards
           himself as having a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
           with his children and intends to continue  to  assist  in  their
           upbringing once H has finished her studies and will then be able
           to take employment when the children are at school. The evidence
           before me is that he has singularly failed to  do  so  prior  to
           February 2018.

           52. I infer that the children no doubt regard the appearance  of
           their father in their home  is  a  permanent  feature  of  their
           future life and that they regard  themselves  as  having  had  a
           genuine subsisting relationship with him as their  father  since
           February 2018".

4.    That passage formed the subject of submissions made to me and  I  will
comment upon it below. Having made what it did of the parental  relationship
issue the tribunal then explained, at paragraph 53 of  its  written  reasons
of 26 October 2017, that it thought the claimant could return  to  China  on
his own (but did not say he should  be  expected  to  do  so)  and  make  an
application in China for entry clearance to come back to the UK  to  re-join
them. Having decided that such a course of action was feasible it then  went
on to consider what would be proportionate with respect to Article 8. As  to
that, it said this:

           "54. The remaining issue to decide is, therefore, would  such  a
           course be proportionate and  in  the  bests  interests  of  [the
           children]? It is accepted by Miss Pickering that  the  appellant
           does  not  receive  any  support  in  this   regard   from   the
           circumstances  as  set  out  in  paragraph  117b.  Although  the
           children are still very young and visited China for  four  weeks
           in 2016 I infer that they will be very upset if their father  is
           removed to China as they will regard themselves as living within
           a normal family setting with both their parents as at  the  date
           of the hearing, namely, 19th October 2018.  This  will  in  turn
           affect their clearly excellent progress at school which,  in  my
           judgment, is not in  their  best  interests.  In  reaching  this
           conclusion  I  have  taken  into  account  the  findings  in  KO
           (Nigeria) and others v SSHD 24 October 2018.

           55.   I conclude on the evidence taken as a whole that it  would
           be disproportionate to remove the appellant to  China  prior  to
           the expiry of the  limited  leave  to  remain  of  H  and  their
           children when the situation of the family  as  a  whole  can  be
           reviewed again if an application is made for indefinite leave to
           remain. It was agreed at the hearing that the respondent will be
           able to restrict  any  LLR  for  the  appellant  following  this
           decision to the expiry of H's and their children's LLR,  namely,
           12 July 2019".

5.    To clarify, "LLR" is an abbreviation for limited leave to remain.

6.    So, the tribunal allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the  ECHR  with
a view to the claimant being granted, in  consequence,  a  short  period  of
limited leave to remain to expire on the same date as the  leave  which  had
been given to H and the children would expire. The  decision  to  allow  the
appeal was not, however, the end of the matter as  the  Secretary  of  State
applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

7.    The Secretary of State, in seeking permission,  advanced  two  grounds
of appeal. The first was to the effect that the tribunal  had  not  properly
considered relevant matters as it was required to do in consequence  of  the
content of section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002. In particular, it had failed to properly consider or reach a  view  as
to whether under section 117B (6) it would be reasonable  for  the  children
to leave the UK. The  second  ground  amounted  to  an  assertion  that  the
tribunal had reached contradictory conclusions in that it  had  decided,  on
the one hand, that it would be  proportionate  to  expect  the  claimant  to
return to China to apply for entry clearance and it  had  then  decided,  on
the other hand, that the same course of action would be disproportionate.

8.    Permission having been granted the appeal was  listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that consideration could  be  given
as to whether the tribunal had erred in law and,  if  it  had,  what  should
flow from that. Representation was as stated above  and  I  am  grateful  to
each representative.

9.    Mr McVeety,  in  addition  to  relying  on  the  grounds  as  pleaded,
spiritedly argued that the tribunal's finding that the  claimant  should  be
permitted to remain in the UK with  the  children  was  perverse  given  its
finding that he did not regard himself as having a  genuine  and  subsisting
parental relationship with those children. Ms  Pickering  pointed  out  that
that specific point had not been pleaded but argued in any event  that  what
the tribunal had said did amount to a finding that there was a  genuine  and
subsisting parental relationship and that, in so finding, the  tribunal  had
been considering the position, as had been open to it,  from  the  point  of
view of the children. It was also apparent that, when  the  written  reasons
were read as a whole, the tribunal had had  proper  regard  to  the  section
117B criteria and to the public interest considerations  contained  therein.
Finally, Ms Pickering argued  that  the  tribunal  had  not,  on  a  correct
reading of its written reasons, made inconsistent findings with  respect  to
the proportionality of the return to China.

10.   It is necessary, I think, for me to say something  about  how  I  read
the tribunal's written reasons and what I  believe  its  reasoning  to  have
been.

11.   The tribunal did not, in my judgment, find that there  was  a  genuine
and subsisting parental  relationship  between  the  claimant  and  the  two
children. I am sure if it had made such a  finding  it  would  have  clearly
said so. So, I am not able to read what the tribunal  had  to  say  in  that
regard in the way Ms Pickering urges me to do. Given its  finding  that  the
claimant did not regard himself as having a genuine and subsisting  parental
relationship I do not accept it can be said that the tribunal  can  possibly
have been finding that, nevertheless, there was one.  Rather,  what  it  was
effectively  saying  was  that  there  was  no  such  relationship.   Having
established that, it did not treat the claimant's  failure  to  satisfy  the
test contained within section 117B (6) as being  determinative.  Indeed,  it
was not required to. Success in meeting the test  is  determinative  from  a
positive perspective but  the  converse  does  not  necessarily  apply.  The
tribunal was still required, as it did, to consider  matters  in  the  round
regarding  proportionality  and  to  take  account  of  all  of  the   other
circumstances of the case. In doing that, the  tribunal  took  into  account
the interests of the children. It decided  that  if  the  claimant  were  to
depart for China as at the date of hearing before  it,  there  would  be  an
impact on the children because of their understandable belief  that  he  had
become as the tribunal put it "a permanent feature of  their  future  life".
It decided that a split in those circumstances would be  disruptive  to  the
children, would cause them upset,  and  that  it  would  be  in  their  best
interests for such a split not to occur at that time. Further,  it  was  not
deciding, with reference to what it had  to  say  at  paragraph  53  of  its
written reasons, that it would be proportionate to expect  the  claimant  to
return to China and seek entry clearance. It said no such thing.  It  simply
made the point that such would be feasible or practicable. It  was  not,  at
that stage, asking itself the proportionality question at all. It then  went
on to consider proportionality. It decided in looking at matters as a  whole
but in particular having regard to what it considered to  be  how  the  best
interests of the children might be served, and bearing in mind the  facility
of a very limited grant of leave, that requiring the claimant to  leave  the
UK now would be disproportionate.

12.   So where does that leave us? It follows from what I have already  said
that I do not accept the argument in ground 2 of the written grounds to  the
effect that the tribunal reached conflicting findings or conclusions  as  to
proportionality. It did  not.  It  clearly  found,  when  what  it  said  is
properly read and understood, that it would be disproportionate in  all  the
circumstances to expect the claimant to return to China as at  the  date  of
the hearing before it. That disposes of ground 2.

13.   As to ground 1, the tribunal's reasoning does have to  be  read  as  a
whole. It was aware that the claimant did not speak English (it  noted  that
at paragraph 22 of its written reasons). It was aware that the claimant  was
not financially independent (it noted that at paragraph 49  of  its  written
reasons when it said that tax credits were being received). I do not  accept
that, its having made reference to those two factors,  it  would  have  then
overlooked them or forgotten about  them  when  it  was  deciding  what  was
proportionate. It did not fail to reach a view as to the test  contained  in
section 117B (6) it actually, if only by implication,  resolved  that  point
against the claimant. There is more of an argument, it seems to me,  to  say
that it did not consider the general statement in  section  117B(1)  to  the
effect that "the maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
public interest". That was a point that was noted when permission to  appeal
was granted. But it did, as Ms Pickering  points  out,  refer  to  paragraph
117B in general terms at paragraph 24 of its written reasons.  I  appreciate
that it did so in a section of its written reasons where it was  summarising
the arguments which had  been  put  to  it.  But  that  does,  nevertheless,
demonstrate that the provision was in its mind. In  any  event,  the  public
interest imperative as enshrined in that section is so basic that I  am  not
able to accept, without more, that  the  tribunal  would  have  simply  lost
sight of it when carrying out its proportionality balancing  exercise.  That
disposes of ground 1.

14.   That leaves the further point made by Mr McVeety which I have set  out
above. Technically, though, that point is not before me. It was not  pleaded
and Mr McVeety did not seek permission to amend his  grounds.  Additionally,
and in any event, had such an application been made and had I granted it,  I
would have concluded  that  the  tribunal's  finding  was  not  perverse.  I
appreciate that there is an  argument  to  say  it  can  hardly  be  in  the
children's best interests for them to continue contact with a  disinterested
father until such time as that disinterest once again manifests itself.  But
I am not able to say it was not open to  the  tribunal  (whilst  differently
constituted tribunals might have looked at the matter differently)  to  take
the view that for the moment at least the best  interests  of  the  children
did lie in their father  remaining  with  them  at  least  until  their  own
immigration status was clarified.

15.   In light of the above I have concluded that the tribunal did  not  err
in law and that, accordingly, its decision shall stand.

16.   This appeal to the Upper Tribunal, then, is dismissed.

Decision

The tribunal's decision did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law.
Accordingly, the Secretary of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I grant the claimant anonymity under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 because it is appropriate given  that  the  case
involves young children. Accordingly, no report of these  proceedings  shall
identify the claimant or any member of his family.  This  grant  applies  to
all parties to the proceedings. Failure to comply may lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.



Signed:                      Dated: 26 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

