

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number: PA/09223/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
             Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 14th February 2018
            On 27th February 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                     T R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr L Rahman (Counsel, instructed by Edward Alam &
Associates)
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is by the Secretary of State. To avoid
   confusion I have retained the titles the parties were given in the First-
   tier Tribunal proceedings and so Ms T R is the Appellant and the
   Secretary of State the Respondent.

2. The Appellant entered the UK as a student in 2010. An application under
   Tier 4 of the points based system was rejected and the appeal dismissed
   in August 2013 after which the Appellant remained in the UK. A further
   application was made and refused in October 2013 without a right of
   appeal and in June 2016 a further application and refusal, certified,
   followed by this asylum claim on the 7th of March 2017.

3. The asylum claim was made on the basis that the Appellant had rejected a
   marriage proposal following which she had been threatened by her suitor,
   disowned by her family and that she would be in danger in Bangladesh. The
   application was refused for the reasons given in the Refusal Letter.


4. The appeal was heard by Judge Carroll at Taylor House on the 18th of
   October 2017 and allowed for the reasons given in the decision
   promulgated on the 30th of October 2017. In that decision the Judge
   accepted the Appellant's account having regard to Police reports and the
   formal warning that her suitor was given, these were provided to the
   First-tier Tribunal but had not been before the Secretary of State. The
   Judge accepted that the Appellant had been disowned by her family in
   Bangladesh and that objective evidence showed that the Appellant would
   not be able to relocate within Bangladesh. At the end of paragraph 21 the
   Judge stated "She has been diagnosed as suffering from severe depression
   and post-traumatic stress disorder and is only now beginning to access
   medical help."

5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
   in grounds of the 9th of November 2017. The grounds were that the Judge
   did not have full regard to the Secretary of State's case mentioning the
   Home Office Presenting Officer only once in the determination and in the
   circumstances had not given adequate reasons for finding in favour of the
   Appellant. The second ground is that the Judge placed significant weight
   on the medical evidence from the GP and erred in accepting the evidence
   as probative referring to a number of cases on the assessment of medical
   reports. Permission was granted on the 5th of December 2017.


6. At the start of the hearing I indicated to the Appellant's
   representative that I had concerns about the contents of the GP's letter,
   it was not clear when or by whom the diagnosis of PTSD had been made or
   the information that had been relied on in the assessment. Mr Rahman
   observed that this was not an article 3 case and submitted that the Judge
   had approached the case on a factual basis and the Police Reports. That
   was slightly out of the usual and so I turned to Mr Tarlow for his
   submissions.


7. Mr Tarlow was brief and to the point relying on the grounds of
   application. He submitted that in paragraphs 15 and 16 the Judge had
   placed undue weight on the GP's letter which had been written on the
   basis of what the Appellant had said and had not been balanced against
   the Presenting Officer's submissions.


8. For the Appellant it was observed that the Judge had summarised the
   Secretary of State's case in paragraphs 8 and 9 of the decision. the
   previous decision had been referred to and the Judge considered that the
   Appellant had not been willing to raise the true basis of the claim. The
   Appellant and the witnesses had been found to be credible about their
   being an abusive relationship and there were the Police reports. The
   Judge found that the family had been contacted and had disowned the
   Appellant.


9. The important of any judgment is that it is clear what the decision is
   and why. From that it must be clear that the Judge has considered
   relevant factors and not placed undue weight on factors that have less or
   no relevance. The judge clearly summarised the Secretary of State's case
   in paragraphs 8 and 9 and it is against that background that the Judge
   went on to assess the evidence. It has to be observed that with the
   Police reports and the warning of the Appellant's former partner the
   evidence before the Judge was somewhat more extensive than that available
   to the Secretary of State. This was reflected in the refusal to make a
   fee award.


10. Although the Judge set out the GP's letter at length in paragraph 15
   and the other medical evidence in paragraph 16 no findings were made on
   the information at that stage. The discussion of the evidence and the
   Judge's findings follow at paragraphs 18, 19 and 21. The Judge was
   obliged to place the evidence of the witnesses in the context of the
   information from the Police and to assess it in that light. This was not
   an unreasoned or wholesale acceptance of the Appellant's case, a cassette
   relied on by the Appellant was not considered by the Judge as there was
   no evidence as to its provenance.


11. The only reference in the discussion to the medical evidence is that
   the Appellant was profoundly affected by events in the UK but that cannot
   be said to be a central or even significant part of the reasoning of the
   Judge. If the final sentence of paragraph 21 is ignored then the
   remaining reasons, albeit brief, were open to the Judge. As noted above
   the Judge had evidence before him that was not before the Secretary of
   State and the Police evidence was particularly relevant.


12. On reflection my concerns about the GP's letter remain as the bald
   statement about the diagnosis of PTSD is so lacking in supporting
   information that it would be wrong to place any weight on it. However
   read as a whole it cannot be said that the GP's letter played any role in
   the Judge's reasoning. Accordingly the Secretary of State's grounds have
   no merit as they challenge an aspect of the evidence on a basis that is
   not justified. It was not suggested by the Secretary of State that the
   Judge's reasoning was flawed in any other way or that the Appellant could
   relocate within Bangladesh.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award and I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 22nd February 2018

