
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/09807/2017
                                                               PA/12258/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2019                  |On 22 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

|                        |P Y                     |First Appellant         |
|                        |K S                     |Second Appellant        |


                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION in force)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms J Norman, Counsel, instructed by Sterling & Law
                    Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellants
    or either of them. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt
    of court. I make this order because the Appellants are  asylum  seekers
    and are entitled to anonymity.

 2. There are two appellants here.  The first Appellant, PY, is  a  citizen
    of Nepal.  She was born in December 1982.  The second Appellant, KS, is
    a citizen of India.  He was born in May 1985.  The parties married in a
    civil ceremony on 15 February 2013 and this  gave  legal  effect  to  a
    religious ceremony that had taken place on 14 December 2012.

 3. They appeal against the Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal
    promulgated on 3 June 2019 dismissing their appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State made, in each  case,  on  20  September  2017
    refusing their application for asylum and/or  humanitarian  protection.
    They appealed the decision on the grounds that they were  refugees  and
    entitled to international protection and also that removing them  would
    contravene their rights under the European Convention on Human  Rights,
    particularly Article 8.  In each case the appeals were dismissed on all
    grounds.  Although the  Appellants  appeal  a  joint  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State which, appropriately, led to joint hearings  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and now the Upper Tribunal their cases are separate
    and have to be considered separately.

 4. The thrust of the appeals was particularly well summarised by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge where she said at paragraph 3:

         "Both appellants claim asylum on the basis  that  their  respective
         families have rejected their marriage and that they will be at risk
         on return to their home countries.   The  first  appellant  claimed
         that she had been threatened by her family because she  married  an
         Indian national.  She claimed that  her  family  are  powerful  and
         wanted her to  marry  someone  else.   She  stated  that  they  are
         politically influential and will be able to find her  even  if  she
         moves to India with her husband.  The second appellant claimed that
         his family disapprove  of  his  marriage  to  the  first  appellant
         because he is Brahmin and that  he  will  be  at  risk  because  he
         married outside his caste.  He also fears that he will be killed by
         the appellant's family who have influence in India because of their
         political connections."

 5. I begin with the case of the  second  Appellant  because  this,  in  my
    judgment, is by far the most straightforward.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the second  Appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom with permission as a student in May 2010.  His leave
    was extended in different capacities until 18 April 2016.

 7. On 25 November 2014 he applied for leave  to  remain  on  "private  and
    family life" grounds as a dependant of his wife, the  first  Appellant.
    That application  was  refused  on  16  February  2015  and  an  appeal
    dismissed on 17 December 2015.  On 7 April 2015,  that  is  before  the
    outstanding appeal was dismissed, he applied for leave to remain  as  a
    general migrant and the application was refused in July 2015.

 8. On 12 March 2017 he was served  with  a  form  identifying  him  as  an
    overstayer and liable to detention.  Shortly  afterwards  on  16  March
    2017 he was served with  removal  directions  for  India.   He  claimed
    asylum on 27 March 2017.

 9. The Judge summarised the Secretary of State's reasons for  refusal  and
    the substance of  the  appeal  before  her.   It  appeared  to  be  the
    Appellants' case that the decisions  leading  to  their  removal  would
    interfere  with  their  private  and  family  lives  disproportionately
    because they would be removed to different countries.   The  Judge  was
    not satisfied that she had been told the truth.  She gave  reasons  for
    her findings, which are criticised in the grounds, and  dismissed  both
    appeals.

10. The Judge also had regard for expert evidence and again  is  criticised
    for the way she considered it.

11. The Judge's findings on the "Article 8" claim are clear and  are  found
    mainly at paragraph 50 of the Decision and Reasons.   I  set  them  out
    below:

         "Ms Norman submitted that any interference  with  their  Article  8
         rights will be disproportionate  and  that  they  would  be  living
         either in Nepal or in India without family support.   I  find  that
         the appellants would be able to live in Nepal where they could seek
         employment and  carve  out  an  independent  life  for  themselves.
         Alternatively they could live in India; the first  appellant  would
         be able to obtain a spouse visa to live with her Indian husband  in
         India.  Both appellants are well educated.   The  second  appellant
         gave evidence that he has a Masters Degree in marketing, innovation
         and engineering.  I find that they can utilise their qualifications
         and experience and settle in India.  If they do not want to live in
         Kerala they could live in another part of India".

12. At paragraph 52 the Judge said:

         "I find that both appellants were well aware that  if  they  feared
         returning to their  countries  of  origin,  they  needed  to  claim
         asylum.  I take into account their level of education.  I find that
         their credibility is damaged under Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004  because  they
         did not claim asylum until they were faced with removal.  The first
         appellant claimed asylum on 22 March 2017 when her application  for
         leave to remain was  refused  on  16  February  2016.   The  second
         appellant claimed asylum only  when  he  was  served  with  removal
         directions on 16 March 2017.  His claim  for  asylum  is  dated  27
         March 2017.  In conclusion, I find that any interference  with  the
         appellants' Article 8 rights, will be proportionate.  I do not find
         that  the  interference  will   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences."

13. There are six grounds of appeal drawn by Ms Norman.  As far  as  I  can
    ascertain only ground 4 relates to the second Appellant.   This  ground
    criticises  the  Judge  for  finding  that  the  credibility   of   the
    "Appellants'" (plural) was damaged because they did  not  claim  asylum
    until they were faced  with  removal.   The  ground  asserts  that  the
    details of the claim were first set out in a human  rights  application
    in November 2014 and so the substance of the claim  was  known  to  the
    Secretary of State before any immigration decision was made.

14. The grounds then draw attention to the terms of  Section  8(5)  of  the
    2004 Act:

         "This Section also applies to failure by the claimant  to  make  an
         asylum claim or human rights claim  before  being  notified  of  an
         immigration decision, unless the claim  relies  wholly  on  matters
         arising after the notification."

15. The ground asserts that the claim could be framed either as  an  asylum
    or as a human rights claim and as the human  rights  claim  was  raised
    before the immigration decision was made Section 8 has no effect.

16. Ground 6 mentions the second Appellant  but  only  in  the  context  of
    criticising the Judge for not making a finding on  the  claim  that  he
    would be arrested and mistreated by the police  in  the  event  of  his
    arrival in Nepal.  That is not material. There is no  question  of  the
    second Appellant being removed to Nepal but to India. The  Judge  found
    that the second Appellant could live safely  in  India  and  the  first
    Appellant could live there with him without difficulty if that is  what
    she wished to do.

17. The grounds do not criticise the First-tier Tribunal's finding that the
    second Appellant had nothing to fear in India.  The evidence to support
    a conclusion that he would face substantial difficulties in India, with
    or without the first Appellant,  was  scant.   India  is  a  large  and
    diverse country.  There was nothing to give  weight  to  the  expressed
    fear that the first Appellant's family would be able to create  trouble
    for the second Appellant in India if that is what they chose to  do  or
    that they could not find somewhere to  live  together  without  risking
    persecution or other really serious ill treatment.

18. I  appreciate  that  the  grounds  do  criticise  the  general  adverse
    credibility finding  but  that  criticism  is,  I  find,  misconceived.
    Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004 sets out circumstances in which  Parliament  says  conduct  is
    discreditable.  It is a difficult section.   Discreditable  conduct  is
    discreditable without the authority of  Parliament  and  conduct  which
    appears to be discreditable  is  not  necessarily  discreditable  or  a
    reason  to  dismiss  a  protection  claim  merely  because  an  Act  of
    Parliament identifies such conduct as discreditable.  This  is  not  to
    disrespect Parliament.  The matters set out in Section 8 are convenient
    hooks on which to hang adverse credibility points and because they  are
    recognised by Parliament there is rarely any need to give any expansion
    or consideration or  explanation  to  justify  an  adverse  credibility
    finding but the point is not that an  Act  Parliament  makes  something
    discreditable but that something is discreditable and Section  8  makes
    it easy to identify and explain.  The Judge's point at paragraph 52 was
    that the Appellants (this applies to both of them)  are  well  educated
    people who did not claim asylum until faced with removal.  In the  case
    of the second Appellant  the  asylum  claim  followed  the  service  of
    removal directions on 16 March 2017 and deferred until 23  March  2017
    and the asylum claim followed on 27 March  2017.   The  Judge's  clear
    point is that the Appellants could have claimed asylum earlier if  they
    were in need of protection and the delay is discreditable.   The  Judge
    was entitled to give weight to that  point  without  any  reference  to
    Section 8.

19. Counsel's grounds argue that  the  Section  has  been  misapplied.   Ms
    Norman argued that it applies where there has been a failure  "to  make
    an asylum claim or human rights claim" and the human rights  claim  had
    been made.  In the case of the  second  Appellant  the  timing  of  the
    asylum claim is something that the Judge was entitled to consider  and,
    given the general weakness of the second Appellant's claim,  the  Judge
    was entitled to give considerable weight to the claim being  made  when
    it was and not on an earlier occasion.

20. Further I do not accept Counsel's contention that Section 8(5) does not
    apply.  It applies where a person makes an  asylum  claim  or  a  human
    rights claim.  Even if a human rights claim had been  made  the  asylum
    claim had not and it could have been because it was not based on  fresh
    facts.  The Act applied and the Judge was  entitled  to  use  it  as  a
    convenient  shorthand  for  explaining  her  finding  that  the  second
    Appellant was not believable.

21. There is no error of law in the decision in  the  case  of  the  second
    Appellant.

22. It does not follow that the decision in the case of the first Appellant
    is sound and I turn to that now.

23. I consider now  the  grounds  as  far  as  they  relate  to  the  first
    Appellant.

24. Ground 1 complains that the Judge  has  made  findings  without  giving
    proper reasons.  Criticism is targeted at paragraphs 27 to  29  of  the
    Decision and Reasons.  It is a feature of the  first  Appellant's  case
    that she has been married, or at least in a  relationship  regarded  as
    marriage (it does not seem to be officially recognised in Nepal) before
    she  started  her  relationship  with  the   second   Appellant.   That
    relationship was unhappy and her former partner since did.  There is  a
    child of that relationship who has now achieved, or is  close  to,  his
    majority.

25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  it  significant  that  the  first
    Appellant never mentioned in her screening interview or her substantive
    asylum interview that she had been married previously  and  had  a  son
    from that marriage.

26. Screening interviews must always be  reviewed  with  considerable  care
    because their function is to identify the gist case so that it  can  be
    categorised, rather than to distil all  the  information  on  which  an
    applicant seeks to rely.  However  the  record  shows  that  the  first
    Appellant was asked directly at question 1.19 to confirm details of any
    spouse or partner or children "not  included  on  asylum  application".
    That may have prompted the first Appellant to say that she  had  had  a
    partner who had now died and had a child who lived in Nepal but she did
    not.

27.  I  have  also  considered  the  Asylum  Interview   Record.    Perhaps
    surprisingly the standard rubric does not ask someone if they have been
    married more than once or about their children.   At  question  27  the
    first Appellant was asked: "Why weren't you married off before you came
    to the UK?".  She replied: "I was not interested in getting married  to
    people linked with politics at all.  I told them I am not interested in
    marriage and I want to study first, get qualified and then think  about
    it."

28. I note too that earlier questions deal with the interviewing  officer's
    professed surprise that the first Appellant had  not  been  married  in
    Nepal but her answers did not indicate that she had been married.

29. The first Appellant was asked at question 35  why  she  did  not  claim
    asylum in 2012.  Her answer was that she had leave at that point.   The
    interviewing  officer  thought  that  that  was  wrong  but  the  first
    Appellant persisted that she had leave and it expired in November  2014
    and she made an in-time application (she thought) on private and family
    life grounds.  She indicated that  the  human  rights  application  was
    based on the husband and her not being accepted in Nepal.

30. She then explained that she later told  her  parents  that  she  had  a
    partner in the United Kingdom and how that news  caused  consternation.
    She said that her father threatened her  because  he  had  been  shamed
    because a match he had planned for her could not happen.

31. The first Appellant then explained how she had an uncle who  was  in  a
    prominent position in politics.  The interviewing officer said that  he
    had not been able to find that relative at all on an "internet  search"
    and asked her to comment on the  suggestion  that  the  uncle  was  not
    sufficiently important to worry about if he could not be found  on  the
    world wide web.  The first Appellant replied "five days  isn't  enough"
    meaning it was not enough to provide further  information.   The  first
    Appellant then referred to evidence she wanted to get in  the  form  of
    the police report  that  her  uncle  and  father  had  submitted.   She
    insisted that she and her husband would be killed in  Nepal.   Marriage
    in different castes was a shocking thing.

32. The Judge was clearly entitled to find that these questions would  have
    prompted a forthright person to have mentioned  the  earlier  marriage.
    Taken at face value the questioning  and  tone  of  the  interview  did
    encourage the first Appellant to  say  that  she  had  had  an  earlier
    relationship and a child and the failure  to  do  that,  without  more,
    clearly supports an adverse credibility finding.  The  grounds  contend
    that the adverse finding is unlawful because there was expert  evidence
    that a previous relationship and a child of the relationship would be a
    matter of shame for the first Appellant and the Judge did not deal with
    the evidence that the first Appellant would find it very  difficult  to
    admit to what she later said had happened.

33. The Judge clearly understood the first Appellant's claim  that  it  was
    shameful to mention the  earlier  relationship  in  Nepal.   The  Judge
    records at paragraph 15 that the first Appellant "said it is culturally
    taboo to say that she was previously  married  and  has  a  child  from
    another husband.  She said that she never mentioned  that  to  anyone."
    Thus it  is  beyond  argument  that  the  Judge  understood  the  first
    Appellant's point.

34. The Judge also noted at  paragraph  37  of  her  Decision  and  Reasons
    Professor Aguilar's report where he said at paragraph 30:

  "It makes absolute sense culturally that  the  appellant  feels  enormous
  shame of having been married with a son who was not with her  and  having
  found a loving partner in Europe.  One cannot speculate on sentiments but
  it is plausible to say that no other Hindu or Nepali would  have  married
  her after finding out that she is a Magalik who was already  married  and
  has a child."

35. At paragraph 38 the Judge suggests that the reason the first  Appellant
    did not mention at an early opportunity her earlier family is  that  it
    would be understood that it disadvantaged her as a marriage partner  to
    be widowed with a child.  The Judge suggested that far from being angry
    the first Appellant's parents would be pleased that  she  had  found  a
    partner and thereby relieving them from the difficult task  of  finding
    one suitable for her.  The Judge also suggested that  the  family  were
    not strict in Nepalian traditional values.  If they were they would not
    have allowed the first Appellant to have left her child in the care  of
    the former husband's family while she  went  to  study  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

36. Professor Aguilar listed the matters that he was expected  to  consider
    as part of his  instructions.   He  refers  to  the  first  Appellant's
    witness  statement  and  her  husband's  witness  statement  and  their
    respective  supplementary  statements.   He  does  not  refer  to   the
    interview  record.   His  observations  about  the  first   Appellant's
    reluctance to disclose her former marital status is not informed by the
    interview record and  the  context  which  might  be  thought  to  have
    prompted a truthful person to have overcome embarrassment and  cultural
    taboos for the sake of her personal safety and to have  explained  that
    she had been married previously.

37. There is theoretical merit in the ground complaining that the Judge did
    not give a proper reason for discounting the explanation  suggested  by
    Professor Aguilar  and  that  criticism  has  to  be  set  against  the
    background and the facts.  There was a full asylum interview  where  it
    is quite clear to me a person who was telling the truth (which is  more
    than just not telling lies) would be expected to have stated  that  she
    had indeed been married before and had a  child.   Professor  Aguilar's
    comments are not informed by the interview record.  The  criticism  has
    no practical merit.  It is quite apparent that the Judge considered the
    evidence as a whole  and  can  be  excused  for  not  giving  a  better
    explanation because it  is  obvious  that  Professor  Aguilar  was  not
    informed properly when he expressed the opinion that he did.

38. Ground 2 complains that  the  Judge  had  given  weight  to  immaterial
    considerations.  At paragraph 29 the Judge does indeed say of the first
    Appellant that:

         "I find that she attempted to hide  the  fact  that  she  had  been
         previously married with a son and as a widow was free to marry  the
         second appellant."

39. However, as the grounds correctly state, it had never  been  the  first
    Appellant's case that she was not free to marry.  It was her case  that
    her chosen partner would be wholly unacceptable to her family.

40. I can make no sense of the finding that the  first  Appellant  hid  the
    fact that she was free to marry the second Appellant but nothing  turns
    on this finding. What the Judge  found  significant  is  that  she  had
    attempted to hide the fact that she had previously been married with  a
    son.  The Judge went on to say that the first Appellant had  said  that
    she feared her own family and her deceased husband's family  and  found
    it significant that she had never mentioned  a  fear  of  her  deceased
    husband's family in the asylum interview. The  Judge  was  entitled  to
    find that  a  woman  genuinely  frightened  for  her  life  would  have
    mentioned these things.

41. Nevertheless the grounds are right when they say that the issue of  the
    previous marriage does not affect the core claim, namely that the first
    Appellant fears her parents' action if she is returned to Nepal and she
    is not free to marry the person that her father has chosen for her  but
    with a husband from a different country and a different caste.

42. The grounds say that the difference between a "district secretary"  and
    a "Home Secretary" for the Congress Party is trivial and does not go to
    the core of the claim.  It certainly does not go to  the  core  of  the
    claim but it is for the Judge to decide if it is  trivial.   The  Judge
    was entitled to give weight to an inconsistency in the  description  of
    an officer when it was the first Appellant's case that  her  uncle  was
    politically active in an important way.

43. The third ground  deals  with  the  expert  evidence.   I  have  looked
    particularly carefully at Mr David  Seddon's  concern  that  the  first
    Appellant's family might instruct thugs and would  be  expected  to  do
    that to intimidate or even kill her.  The Judge is wrong  to  say  that
    the expert took the claim at face value.   Mr  Seddon  was  careful  to
    refer to background material showing that  criminal  gangs  operate  in
    eastern Nepal, including the Sirha District where the  first  Appellant
    originates and the plausibility of  the  claim  was  not  a  result  of
    accepting at face value her assertions but  reading  them  against  the
    background material.  The grounds  contend  correctly  that  the  first
    Appellant's evidence is that her family supported her  before  she  met
    and married the second  Appellant  and  that  was  something  that  she
    expected to be so disturbing she was very reluctant to tell her  family
    about it.  The fact the first Appellant had previously had support from
    her family does not mean that they would continue to  support  her  now
    that she is married.

44. I have already considered ground 4.

45. Ground 5 criticises the Judge  for  failing  to  resolve  conflicts  on
    material matters and failure to take account of the  expert  report.  I
    see merit in this claim.  As the grounds point out, it was consistently
    the first Appellant's case that she had been badly treated by her first
    husband who was an alcoholic.  I do not understand why  the  Judge  was
    able to conclude that there would be no threat from that family in  the
    future except that analysis seemed to fit with her view  that  she  had
    formed of the Appellant's family circumstances in Nepal.  The Judge has
    not dealt with the expert evidence about this.

46. Ground 6 complains there is a failure to make a relevant finding.   The
    point is that the Judge accepted (I think) that the  first  Appellant's
    father had served a notice with the police which could have the  effect
    of creating difficulties for the  first  Appellant  and/or  the  second
    Appellant in the event of their entry to Nepal.  The Judge decided that
    this was done cynically to bolster the claim.  I do not understand  why
    the Judge preferred that explanation to the one advanced by  the  first
    Appellant, namely that it was done because of the parents  wish  to  do
    her harm.

47. The Judge has not dealt adequately with the expert evidence  that  adds
    weight to the credibility of the claim.

48. I  am  far  from  saying  that  the  first  Appellant  is  entitled  to
    international protection but I am satisfied that the  Judge's  decision
    does not deal adequately with the evidence before her and I  set  aside
    her decision insofar as it relates to the first Appellant.

49. Further I find no findings can be preserved  as  everything  should  be
    considered in the light of a proper examination of the expert evidence.

50. Findings regarding the second Appellant are sound  and  I  dismiss  the
    appeal against the decision to dismiss the appeal of the second.

51. I allow the appeal in the case  of  the  first  Appellant  and  I  have
    decided that it is appropriate for this to be dealt with in  the  Upper
    Tribunal probably before me.  I give no further  directions  concerning
    the admission of evidence.  If either party wishes to  adduce  evidence
    not already before the Tribunal then they must do that promptly because
    they may find that the case is listed quite  soon.   In  any  event  an
    application in accordance with the Rules will have to be made.

Notice of Decision

52. In the case of the first Appellant, the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    law. I allow the appeal to the extent that I set aside the decision and
    direct that the appeal be heard again in the Upper Tribunal.

53. In the case of the second Appellant, I dismiss the appeal.





|Signed                   |                      |                         |
|Jonathan Perkins         |                      |                         |
|Judge of the Upper       |                      |Dated 21 January 2020    |
|Tribunal                 |                      |                         |





