

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/09657/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 March 2019                       |On 19 March 2019                    |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                E M (Albania)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The Upper Tribunal of its own motion has made an  anonymity  order  pursuant
to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless
the Upper Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall identify  the  original
appellant, whether directly or indirectly. This order  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this order could  give  rise
to contempt of court proceedings.


Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to
   refuse  him  international  protection  under  the  Refugee   Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Albania.

Background

2. The basis of the applicant's protection claim is that he  was  forced  to
   work on cannabis cultivation by a criminal gang, headed by  a  Member  of
   Parliament in Albania and remains  at  risk  from  them  if  returned  to
   Albania now.  Following a referral  under  the  NRM,  the  respondent  as
   Competent Authority found that  there  were  no  reasonable  grounds  for
   considering him to be a victim of human trafficking.

3. The appellant contended that members of the gang deliberately burned  and
   permanently damaged his hand when he refused to continue working  on  the
   cannabis farm.

4. After he left Albania in February 2012, the appellant says that the  gang
   visited his home address and asked his family members where he was:  they
   said he was out of the country.  There had been no such visit since  2016
   and he was not in contact with the gang.   He still speaks  regularly  to
   his mother: it appears that the gang is no longer interested in him.

First-tier Tribunal decision

5. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal on all  grounds,  finding  that
   the gang had no continuing interest in the appellant and that there  were
   no other features of his claim for which leave  to  remain  ought  to  be
   granted on humanitarian protection or human rights  grounds.   The  Judge
   also found  that  there  was  an  internal  relocation  option  for  this
   appellant.

Permission to appeal

6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  First-tier  Judge
   did not approach the NRM decision correctly:   see  ES  (section  82  NIA
   2002: negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 (IAC).

Rule 24 Reply

7. There was no Rule 24 Reply.

8. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

9. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, the appellant did  not  either  attend  or
   arrange representation.  No explanation has been advanced for his absence
   and I conclude, therefore, that he  has  no  interest  in  pursuing  this
   appeal.

Analysis

10. For the respondent, Mr Jarvis accepted that following  the  decision  of
   the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  MS
   (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594, the  Upper  Tribunal  when  assessing  an
   asylum claim is not bound by a negative NRM decision.

11. However, that does not dispose of the question of  internal  relocation.
   Without the assistance of any submissions on the appellant's behalf, I am
   not satisfied that there is any material error of law in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal decision.

DECISION

12. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.

Date:         18 March 2019                  Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson
