
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09502/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                        |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|on 4 June 2020                       |On 10 June 2020                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     XJ
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge J Robertson promulgated on the 4th  February  2020  in
       which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
    2. The appellant is a citizen of China born on 7 January 1963 who sought
       a grant of international  protection  in  the  United  Kingdom.  That
       application was refused by the Secretary of State.
    3. The Judge notes at [17] that the appellant's claim is  based  upon  a
       fear of persecution on return to China and a claim to be at risk from
       her son and traffickers. The Judge found the appellant's evidence not
       to be plausible on the basis her account of events was said  to  lack
       detail and consistency, for the  reasons  set  out  at  [20]  of  the
       decision under challenge. The findings of fact are set out from [16 -
       29].
    4. Permission to appeal  was  sought  by  the  appellant  asserting  (1)
       procedural unfairness, (2) giving weight to immaterial  matters,  (3)
       giving inadequate reasoning, (4) in failing to apply relevant country
       guidance.
    5. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin,
       sitting as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, on the  basis  it  was
       arguable that the Judge ought to have adjourn the hearing to await  a
       substantive decision from the  NRM  on  the  appellant's  trafficking
       claim given that she had a positive reasonable grounds  decision  and
       further that she ought to have been treated as a vulnerable witness.
    6. In accordance with the Covid-19  proceedings  adopted  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal directions were sent to the parties indicating that  it  was
       considered appropriate to determine the error decision on the  papers
       and seeking their response. No response has been  received  from  the
       Secretary of State. A response  was  received  from  the  appellant's
       representative on 3 June  2020.  It  is  the  Tribunals  view  it  is
       appropriate to determine the merits of the case on the papers at this
       stage as no prejudice or unfairness to either party is made out.

Error of law

    7. The first point raised by  the  appellant's  representative  is  that
       although Upper Tribunal Judge Martin said, "it is arguable  that  the
       judge should have  adjourned  the  hearing  to  await  a  substantive
       decision from the NRM." This is not an argument which  the  appellant
       put  forward  and  does  not  argue  that  adjournment  pending   the
       completion of the NRM was necessarily in the interests of justice  in
       her case.
    8. The key points relating  to  the  assertion  the  appellant  did  not
       receive a fair hearing is set out in the appellants  grounds  in  the
       following terms:


           5.     A submits that  her  hearing  was  marred  by  procedural
                unfairness arising from the following:


                 a. As a victim of trafficking (and SSHD accepts  there  are
                    reasonable grounds to suspect she is one),  A is defined
                    as  a  vulnerable  witness  by  the  Joint  Presidential
                    Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010,  page  1,  footnote  2,
                    regarding individuals who are vulnerable  by  definition
                    ("some individuals are vulnerable because  of  what  has
                    happened  to   them,   e.g.    They   are   victims   of
                    trafficking");
                 b. Contrary to that guidance at [5.1],  the  FTTJ  did  not
                    consider whether A  was  a  vulnerable  adult  and/or  a
                    sensitive witness, and whether it was in  the  interests
                    of justice to adjourn the hearing either for A to obtain
                    representation, or for her to provide any  corroborating
                    medical  evidence  regarding  her  claim  to  have  been
                    trafficked within the United Kingdom  (and  hospitalised
                    as a result), or to obtain expert evidence regarding the
                    effect of her vulnerability on her  evidence.  FTTJ  did
                    not advised A  of  the  possibility  of  asking  for  an
                    adjournment for those reasons;
                 c. Contrary to the guidance at [9], FTTJ does not appear to
                    have identified the issues in dispute at the  outset  of
                    the hearing. Having received a positive grounds decision
                    in relation to her trafficking claim, A was  awaiting  a
                    conclusive decision from the  SSHD  as  to  whether  her
                    account of trafficking that was accepted. However, there
                    is no indication in the determination that SSHD revealed
                    that she did not accept that account was credible  until
                    her representative made his closing submissions;
                 d. contrary to the guidance at {10.1-10.2], FTTJ appears to
                    have taken no steps to assist the A to give her evidence
                    on her traumatic experiences, such as asking SSHD to ask
                    open-ended questions, hearing the matter in  camera,  or
                    offering A the opportunity to ask for a break;
                 e. contrary  to  the  guidance  at  [10.3],  FTTJ  did  not
                    consider how A's vulnerability might have  affected  her
                    evidence and did not record how it had affected  his/her
                    assessment of her credibility.
                 f. Contrary to the guidance at [5.1], FTTJ did  not  ensure
                    that  the  relevant  Home  Office  policies   had   been
                    disclosed - in this instance, that regarding victims  of
                    human trafficking (Victims of modern slavery - Competent
                    Authority guidance Version 8.0). That policy would  have
                    been highly relevant to the assessment of A's  evidence.
                    E.g. it states, "Delayed Disclosure  a  key  symptom  of
                    Post traumatic stress is avoidance of  trauma  triggers,
                    or of those  things  that  cause  frightening  memories,
                    flashbacks   or   other    unpleasant    physical    and
                    psychological experiences. Because of these  symptoms  a
                    person may be unable to fully explain  their  experience
                    until  they   have   achieved   a   minimum   level   of
                    psychological stability. The SCA  must  not  to  view  a
                    delay in disclosing facts as necessarily manipulative or
                    untrue. It may be the result of  an  effective  recovery
                    and reflection period and  the  establishment  of  trust
                    with the person to whom they disclose  the  information"
                    (compare  determination  para  20  (i)-(ii));  it  warns
                    against the 'myth' that a victim is not been coerced  if
                    they don't try to escape (compare determination para  20
                    (iii));  it  states  that  victims   accounts   may   be
                    contradictory and  lack  detail  (compare  determination
                    para 19).
                 g. Neither the Home Office nor  the  FTTJ  apparently  were
                    aware of or alerted  A  to  the  existence  of  relevant
                    Country  Guidance  determination  HC  &  RC  (Trafficked
                    women) China CG [2009] UKAIT 00027 and the issues  which
                    They would therefore need to address by way of  evidence
                    for submissions.
                 h.  Adjudicator  Guidance  Note   No.   5   of   2003,   on
                    Unrepresented Appellants, states that "you must give the
                    appellant every persistence in  putting  his  case,  and
                    tell him so" (page 3). It  suggests  that  the  SSHD  be
                    asked to explicitly identify which parts of the  Reasons
                    for Refusal letter are relied  upon  and  the  Appellant
                    prompted to respond to the points the SSHD makes in  her
                    submissions (page 5). There is no Indic FTTJ  did  this,
                    and A's submissions recorded at para 15 do  not  address
                    the SSHD's arguments. There is no indication  that  FTTJ
                    gave the A any assistance in putting her  case  at  all.
                    He/she did not self direct of the need to do so.
                 i. FFTJ did not put to A his/her  own  concerns  about  the
                    evidence, set out at para 20 (iii),  and  which  do  not
                    appear the SSHD's decision, the summary of evidence,  or
                    the  SSHD's   submissions.   They   therefore   had   no
                    opportunity to respond to them.


    9. Dealing with the fairness point, the Judge was  aware  the  appellant
       was not represented and that she produced a letter dated 25  November
       2019 from the  National  Referral  Mechanism  (NRM)  confirming  that
       following an assessment there were  reasonable  grounds  to  conclude
       that the appellant was a  victim  of  modern  slavery  [9].  What  is
       missing from the decision, even if it was in the Judge's mind at  the
       time, is any mention of the Presidential Guidance or  the  manner  in
       which the Judge considered and assessed whether the  appellant  is  a
       vulnerable witness and how this impacted upon the evidence given.
   10. The guidelines are to enable  a  judge  to  obtain  'best  evidence',
       taking such steps as are necessary to enable a vulnerable witness  to
       feel able to engage in the tribunal process and to  enable  a  proper
       explanation to be given as to how any vulnerability has been factored
       into the decision-making process.
   11. The Court of Appeal reminded us in AM (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of
       State Stayed for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123  of  the
       importance of the guidelines specifically  stating  at  [30]  that  a
       failure to follow the guidance notes on  vulnerable  appellants  will
       most likely be material error of law.
   12. The problem in relation to this decision is that it  cannot  be  made
       out from a reading of the same that the findings made  by  the  Judge
       are safe. I find that for the reasons set out  above  the  Judge  has
       erred in law in a manner material to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal by failing to take into account the appellant's  vulnerability
       and/or to explain how such has been factored into the decision-making
       process in according with the guidance.
   13. In relation to the other grounds, the comment by the  Judge  that  it
       was of note that the referral to the NRM was made  by  the  Salvation
       Army and not by his solicitors is irrational as  solicitors  are  not
       permitted to make referrals to the NRM as  they  are  not  authorised
       "First Responders" whereas the Salvation Army is. So far as the Judge
       gave weight to this matter legal error arises.
   14. There is arguable merit in the claim in the grounds the Judge  failed
       to give adequate reasons for a number of key  findings  made  in  the
       decision and, when making brief findings in the  alternative,  failed
       to take into account relevant country guidance caselaw.
   15. As none of the Judge's findings can be said to be safe  in  light  of
       the matters noted above the decision is set aside with  no  preserved
       findings and remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh
       as  extensive  fact-finding  is  required  applying  the  appropriate
       guidance.
   16. The decision might be the same, but  I  find  cumulatively  that  the
       procedure which was adopted was unfair and the appellant is  entitled
       to a fair and proper hearing which she has not received to date.

Decision

   17. The Immigration Judge materially  erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the
       decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remit the appeal to the
       First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham to be  heard  afresh  by  a
       judge other than Judge J Robertson.




  Anonymity.


   18. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 4 June 2020
