
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09875/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2019                              |On 15 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  LIMO [A]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bashow, instructed Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1 January 1984 and is  a  female  citizen  of
    Iraq. By a decision dated 15 July 2018, the Secretary of State  refused
    the appellant's  claim  for  international  protection.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    19 October 2018, dismissed the appeals. The appellant now appeals, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's claim for protection arises from a fear of her  father,
    a major in the Peshmerga. The appellant claims to have  had  an  extra-
    marital affair and, after DNA  tests  indicated  that  the  appellant's
    husband was not the father of her child, her father  had  tortured  her
    and tried to kill her.

 3. The judge rejected the credibility of the appellant's claim.  At  [21],
    he addressed the DNA evidence adduced in support of her  claim  by  the
    appellant. He recorded that, 'we went through the DNA report  and  this
    did not identify any test being taken by the appellant's husband.'  The
    judge  records  what  he  regarded  as  confusion  as  to  whether  the
    appellant's husband had given the DNA sample in London or in Beirut.

 4. The judge's analysis is problematic. The sample declaration  forms  for
    the husband, the appellant and the child  appear  in  the  respondent's
    bundle at A1-3. The husband's form appears to have been endorsed by  an
    official of  Her  Majesty's  Passport  Office  in  London.  The  report
    produced by Cellmark gives the dates of the samples which  match  those
    on the declaration forms. The  report  acknowledges  that  the  claimed
    relationship  between  the  husband  and  the  child   has   not   been
    established. Whilst  the  appellant  in  her  oral  evidence  may  have
    provided contradictory testimony (there seems to have been reference by
    her to a second test undertaken by the  husband  in  Beirut)  the  fact
    remains  that  the  judge,  despite  recording  in  some   detail   the
    appellant's oral evidence, has made no firm finding as  to  the  weight
    properly attaching to the Cellmark report. Later in the  decision  [28]
    the judge finds that the  appellant's  version  of  events  amounts  to
    nothing more than a 'series of contradictory and incredible  accounts.'
    It is not clear where  the  results  of  the  DNA  tests  sit  in  that
    analysis. If the judge believed that the Cellmark report is  a  forgery
    or if the sample tested purportedly from the  appellant's  husband  was
    not his, then he should have said so. As it is, his  treatment  of  the
    report  remains  incomplete  and  unsatisfactory.  As  Ms  Bashow,  who
    appeared for the appellant before both tribunals  submitted  the  judge
    was not given adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  husband's  sample
    declaration form which  bears  the  signature  of  the  United  Kingdom
    government official.

 5. I told the representatives at the hearing that I intended to set  aside
    the decision. I also told Ms Bashow that I did not intend to  make  any
    findings in respect of the  second  ground  of  appeal.  Given  that  I
    intended to set aside the decision  in  any  event,  nothing  would  be
    gained by lengthy comparison of the various records of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal proceedings.

 6. I set aside the decision. None of the findings of fact shall stand.  It
    will be for the next tribunal to hear  the  evidence  afresh  and  make
    findings; my decision is not intended to restrict the  scope  of  those
    findings as to any issue in the appeal, including the DNA report.

Notice of Decision

 7. This decision of the first-tier tribunal was promulgated on 19  October
    2018 is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The appeal
    is returned to the  first-tier  tribunal  (not  Judge  Tobin)  for  the
    tribunal to remake the decision.


Signed                              Date 13 March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
