
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09669/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2019                            |On 21 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Cole, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 10 December 2018, I found that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law and I set aside its decision. My reasons
    were as follows:

         1.   The appellant, SAS, is a citizen of Iraq. He had  appealed  to
         the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moxon) against  a  decision  of  the
         Secretary of State dated 26 August 2016 refusing him  international
         protection. The First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated on  1
         March 2018 dismissed his appeal. He now appeals,  with  permission,
         to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its
         decision falls to be  aside.  Mr  Diwnycz,  who  appeared  for  the
         Secretary of State, accepted that, should I consider  Ground  1  of
         the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the judge had erred in
         his assessment of the appellant's age  and  in  particular  in  his
         analysis of an age assessment produced by the  local  authority  in
         Kirklees. The Secretary of State now accepts that the appellant was
         born on 2000 and is therefore now 18 years old.

         3.   Judge Allen purported to grant permission only  on  Ground  2.
         However, the grant of  permission  itself  is  not  qualified;  the
         comments of the  judge  regarding  Ground  1  appear  only  in  the
         'Reasons' section of the standard  form  decision.  Mr  Worthington
         relies on the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Safi  and  others
         [2018] UKUT388 (IAC). In the light of that decision, I was prepared
         to accept that permission had, in  effect,  been  granted  on  both
         grounds. Therefore, in the light of Mr Diwnycz's comments I  accept
         that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law. As regards Ground 2,  it
         follows  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  internal   flight
         alternative is vitiated by the fact that the appellant  is  younger
         than the judge found him to be and consequently his findings on the
         internal flight alternative cannot stand.

         Notice of Decision

         4.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 1 March
         2018 is set aside. The findings of fact shall not stand  save  that
         the appellant is a real risk on return to his home  area  of  Iraq.
         The only issue before the Upper Tribunal at the resumed hearing  is
         that of internal flight to the Independent  Kurdish  Region  (IKR).
         The Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane)  shall  remake  the
         decision at or following a resumed hearing at Bradford on a date to
         be fixed. That hearing shall proceed on the basis that both parties
         accept that the appellant was born in the year 2000.

 2. I heard brief evidence from the appellant at the  resumed  hearing.  He
    told me that his parents had kept his CSID card in  Iraq.  He  had  not
    thought to bring it with him to the United Kingdom because he  was  too
    young.

 3. For the Secretary of State, Mrs Pettersen submitted that it was unclear
    which family members of the appellant were still living  in  Iraq.  The
    appellant had said, variously, that he had a sister father  and  mother
    though he had also said that his mother died. She  submitted  that  the
    appellant could obtain a replacement CSID with the  assistance  of  his
    family. Further, she referred to Foreign Office  emails  dated  October
    2018 indicated that the appellant could enter the IKR without having  a
    sponsor. He would receive a  financial  support  package  from  the  UK
    government which would assist him until he found a job in the IKR.

 4. For the appellant, Mr Cole acknowledged that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    directed that the hearing proceed on the basis that the  appellant  was
    born in 2000. He accepted that the appellant's evidence  regarding  his
    family in Iraq was not clear. However, there was no  evidence  that  he
    had contacted his family. Indeed, there was no evidence that any member
    of the family still possessed  the  CSID.  He  submitted  that  it  was
    impossible for the appellant to prove a negative, that is that  he  had
    no contact  with  his  family.  His  access  to  identity  registration
    documentation would  be  hampered  by  reason  of  the  fact  that  the
    registration office is in the contested area. He would be issued with a
    laissez passer but this was not the equivalent of a CSID and could  not
    be used for onward travel to the IKR. In any event, unemployment in the
    IKR was running as high as 70% and the appellant could not work without
    a CSID.

 5. I am grateful to both representatives for  their  helpful  submissions.
    However,  I  agree  with  Mr  Cole  that,  having  regard  to  all  the
    circumstances,  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant,  even
    assuming that he is in contact with  his  family  in  Iraq,  could  not
    obtain through their  agency  or  otherwise  his  existing  CSID  or  a
    replacement  card.  The  relevant  registration  office  remains  in  a
    disputed area and I do not find that it is  reasonably  likely  that  a
    family member or anyone else acting on  his  behalf  could  access  the
    office and obtain a new card. I agree that  it  is  difficult  for  the
    appellant to prove that he does not have contact with his  family  and,
    for the purpose of determining the feasibility of  internal  flight,  I
    have proceeded on the basis that he does not. The appellant is still  a
    young man, he is a Kurd, he has  no  CSID  and  would  be  returned  to
    Baghdad. The existing country guidance clearly indicates that he  would
    be at risk there. I therefore allow his appeal. The appellant should be
    aware, however, that the situation in Iraq is changing rapidly.  It  is
    likely that the Secretary of State will issue him  with  only  a  short
    period of leave to remain. If in the future the appellant's ability  to
    enter the IKR is rendered easier either by direct flights for  enforced
    returnees to Erbil or by easier  access  to  CSID  or  other  necessary
    identity documentation then it is likely that  the  appellant  will  be
    expected to return to Iraq.

Notice of Decision

 6. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    refusing of international protection is allowed.


Signed                              Date 3 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

