
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09273/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2017                            |On 27 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     pt
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born  in  1983.   He  is  of  Tamil
    ethnicity.  He came to the  UK  in  2010  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    student.  He claimed asylum on 18 February 2016.

 2. That application was refused by the respondent in a decision  dated  18
    August 2016.  The appellant appealed  against  that  decision  and  his
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge C J Woolley ("the FtJ") at
    a hearing on 6 March  2017.   The  FtJ  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds, that is to say  asylum,  humanitarian  protection,  and  human
    rights grounds with reference to Articles 3 and 8.

 3. The appellant's claim for asylum was based  on  his  and  his  father's
    membership of or association with  the  Marumalarchi  Dravida  Munnetra
    Kazhagam Party ("the MDMK").  In summary, he claimed  that  his  father
    had been a supporter of the LTTE and that he, the appellant, was  drawn
    to the same cause.  He asserted that members of the MDMK  are  targeted
    due to their sympathies with the LTTE.  The  appellant  himself  became
    involved in the student union part of the MDMK  whilst  at  university.
    He  and  his  father  had  been  arrested.   His  father's  lorry   was
    confiscated on suspicion of  smuggling  goods,  which  led  to  another
    arrest of the appellant and his father.  The appellant was  badly  ill-
    treated during detention.  His father was also ill-treated  during  his
    detentions.  His father died on 10 April 2011.




    The FtJ's decision

 4. The FtJ comprehensively set out the appellant's account,  the  evidence
    that he had before him and the submissions  of  the  parties.   At  the
    hearing before the FtJ the appellant was legally represented.

 5. The FtJ also had before him medical  evidence  that  the  appellant  is
    suffering from PTSD and depression.

 6. In his conclusions the FtJ said at [29]  that  the  appellant  had  not
    claimed that he was ever a member of the MDMK himself, but that it  was
    his father who was the member.  He resolved in the appellant's favour a
    purported inconsistency suggested by the respondent in  terms  of  when
    his father became involved with the MDMK.

 7. However,  the  FtJ  identified  a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's account of his arrests and detentions, which  he  concluded
    undermined his credibility.  He assessed the medical evidence and found
    that it did not support the appellant's claim that he was detained  and
    tortured.  He found that the appellant had not established that he  was
    arrested, detained, tortured or raped as he claimed.  He further  found
    that the appellant's ability to leave India without difficulty, and  to
    renew his Indian passport from the UK,  further  undermined  his  claim
    that he  was  at  risk  in  India.   Finally,  he  concluded  that  the
    appellant's failure to claim asylum for almost five years from the date
    of his arrival, when he could have been expected to have made his claim
    immediately, also undermined his credibility.

 8. He further concluded, in the light  of  relevant  authority,  that  the
    appellant would in any event be able to relocate  to  another  part  of
    India, even if it could be said that there was a risk of persecution in
    his home area.

 9. He  found  that  in  relation  to  Article  3  the  appellant  had  not
    established that there was a real risk of  suicide,  and  he  concluded
    that otherwise the Article 3 threshold had not been met.

10. He considered Article 8, including in terms of the  appellant's  health
    and found that his removal would not amount to a breach  of  his  human
    rights either on Article 3 or on Article 8 grounds.




    The grounds of appeal and submissions

11. In the grounds, the general assertion is made that the FtJ  "failed  to
    take into account relevant  facts  and  provide  reasons  for  specific
    material findings".  It is asserted that the FtJ  was  wrong  to  state
    that the appellant had not claimed that he was ever  a  member  of  the
    MDMK himself, and that it was his father who was the member.  In  fact,
    the appellant had claimed he was part of the student membership of  the
    MDMK, as per his statement.

12. It is further asserted that the FtJ had failed to take into account  in
    terms of the appellant's membership or involvement with  the  MDMK  the
    background to his father's  involvement  and  then  eventually  to  the
    appellant's involvement.  In terms of any apparent inconsistency in his
    account of his arrests, it is argued that the FtJ  had  not  given  the
    appellant the benefit of the doubt in the light of the findings made by
    a Dr Alison Wickert.

13. It is then suggested that the FtJ had applied "a far higher standard of
    proof" in relation to credibility than he ought to have done.

14. In relation to the medical  evidence  and  Articles  3  and  8,  it  is
    contended that the  FtJ  had  unnecessarily  discredited  Dr  Wickert's
    report and that  the  FtJ  "sought  to  agree"  with  the  respondent's
    submissions and therefore appeared to be biased in his decision.

15. At [18] of the grounds it is said that Dr Wickert  concluded  that  the
    appellant had "concrete plans" of self-harm  and  that  he  would  kill
    himself if he were returned to India.  She had  also  referred  to  his
    suicidal thoughts, and the grounds refer to an apparent conclusion that
    his mental health would deteriorate significantly if removed, and  that
    there was therefore a high level of risk of suicide if he was removed.

16. It is suggested that the FtJ  had  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's mental state in terms of his ability to give  coherent  and
    consistent evidence.  Further, the FtJ was wrong to  conclude  that  Dr
    Wickert had overstepped her remit  in  making  a  judgement  about  the
    appellant's credibility.

17. In making his findings, the grounds assert that the FtJ failed to  take
    into account that Dr Wickert specifically  addressed  the  question  of
    whether  it  was  possible  that  the  appellant  had  manufactured  or
    exaggerated his symptoms, and it was concluded  that  his  presentation
    was consistent with the history and his mental state.  It is said  that
    Dr Wickert's report provided examples of the appellant's concrete plans
    to kill himself.  It is further said that the FtJ had made  no  finding
    of his own in terms of whether the appellant was suffering from  mental
    illness,  notwithstanding  that  the  respondent  had   accepted   that
    evidence.

18. It is then said that the FtJ had failed to  apply  the  six-stage  test
    given in the decision in J v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

19. Although the FtJ had said that the appellant had provided  no  evidence
    that he was sought by the Indian authorities, the  FtJ  had  failed  to
    take into account the appellant's explanation that there  had  been  no
    contact with his family in India or any opportunity for him  to  obtain
    any form of evidence.

20. Lastly, it is suggested that the FtJ was wrong  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant would be able to relocate within India, given the appellant's
    skin colour and language.

21. Because the appellant was unrepresented  before  me,  I  considered  it
    appropriate to ask Ms Aboni to make submissions first, in order to give
    the appellant  the  opportunity  to  respond.   Essentially,  Ms  Aboni
    submitted, with reference to various aspects  of  the  FtJ's  decision,
    that there was no error of law in the decision.  The FtJ had considered
    all the evidence and was aware of the medical evidence  to  the  effect
    that the appellant suffered from PTSD and  depression.   He  took  that
    into account in assessing credibility.  The grounds amount  to  nothing
    more than a disagreement with the FtJ's decision.   To  the  suggestion
    that  the  FtJ  had  failed  to  assess  any  inconsistencies  in   the
    appellant's account with  reference  to  his  mental  state,  Ms  Aboni
    submitted that the adverse credibility findings go far beyond issues of
    a poor memory, and the FtJ had said as much at [34].

22. The appellant told me that his witness statement was  prepared  by  his
    solicitors to whom he told the entire story.  It may be, he said,  that
    from their perspective they wrote down what they  considered  were  the
    relevant issues.  That could explain any discrepancies in his  account.



23. He also said that the FtJ should have looked at his medical  condition.






    Assessment and conclusions

24. Before expressing my conclusions it is important to point out  that  at
    the hearing before me the appellant made it clear that he did not  need
    an interpreter, even though it seems that at the hearing before the FtJ
    he did use an interpreter.  His English is good  and  he  was  able  to
    express himself clearly, and to understand what was being said  at  the
    hearing.

25. In addition, the appellant told me that he was feeling well  enough  to
    attend and participate in the hearing, and there was no indication that
    he was unable to understand proceedings or participate because  of  any
    mental, or physical, illness.

26. The contention  that  the  FtJ  had  applied  an  inappropriately  high
    standard of proof is without merit.   There  is  an  appropriate  self-
    direction on the standard of proof at [5] of the  FtJ's  decision.   At
    [25] the FtJ expressly stated that he had applied "the above"  standard
    of proof.  Again, at [41], in expressing  his  global  conclusions,  he
    expressly referred  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof.   Furthermore,
    nothing in his decision indicates that he adopted anything  other  than
    the appropriate standard.

27. The complaint about the FtJ having said  that  the  appellant  had  not
    claimed that he was ever a member of the MDMK himself, is  a  complaint
    that does not advance the grounds much, if at all.  It is true that  at
    [29] the FtJ said that the appellant had not claimed that he was ever a
    member of the MDMK himself, but that it was  his  father  who  was  the
    member.  On the other hand, at [9] the FtJ said  that  the  appellant's
    reasons for claiming asylum were his father's and "his"  membership  of
    the MDMK Party and that the appellant described his activities for  the
    party.  In his witness statement the appellant  did  say  that  he  was
    involved in the student wing or part of  the  MDMK,  as  the  FtJ  also
    recorded at [7].  Likewise,  this  is  what  he  said  in  his  witness
    statement.  However, it is not entirely clear that  the  appellant  was
    saying unequivocally at all stages of his claim that he was actually  a
    member of the MDMK.  In any event, the appellant's membership, or  not,
    of the MDMK was not evidently a major factor in the  FtJ's  credibility
    assessment.  He was well-aware of the appellant's  claim  that  he  was
    involved in activities on behalf of the MDMK at least, and he undertook
    a thorough appraisal of those activities.

28. The FtJ's assessment of the appellant's account was an assessment  made
    within the context of an appreciation of the medical  evidence.   I  do
    not consider that there is any merit in the  contention  that  the  FtJ
    failed to take into account the appellant's mental state when assessing
    any  apparent  inconsistencies  in  his  account.   After  a   thorough
    assessment of Dr Wickert's report,  the  FtJ  said  at  [34]  that  the
    discrepancies in his account were not due to memory problems  "but  are
    fundamental to his credibility".  It is apparent from [34] that the FtJ
    was alive to the argument, or the possibility, that the inconsistencies
    that he identified could potentially be accounted for on the  basis  of
    the appellant's mental state.  He clearly rejected that possibility.

29. Neither do I consider that there is any merit in the complaint that the
    FtJ's analysis of Dr Wickert's report was in some way  legally  flawed.
    The FtJ accepted  Dr  Wickert's  expertise,  but  he  was  entitled  to
    conclude that there was merit in the criticisms of her report  made  on
    behalf of the respondent to the effect that in a number of  aspects  of
    the  report  she  had  overstepped  the  proper  boundaries  of  expert
    evidence.  For example, the FtJ said at [34] that Dr  Wickert  in  many
    instances accepted the appellant's account uncritically without  giving
    an alternative view.

30. I have considered for myself Dr Wickert's  report  in  detail.   In  my
    judgement, the FtJ was entitled to conclude  that  the  medical  report
    does at times stray into  an  assessment  of  credibility,  beyond  the
    boundaries of expert evidence.  The FtJ gave examples of aspects of the
    report which led him to that conclusion. It was a matter  for  the  FtJ
    what weight he attached to the medical report, and absent perversity or
    irrationality, he was entitled to come to the view that it did not,  in
    effect, provide  much  support  for  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    experiences in India, as he said at [35].

31. The suggestion that the FtJ made no finding in  terms  of  whether  the
    appellant suffers from mental illness is in a sense understandable, but
    is nevertheless  misconceived.   It  is  true  that  the  FtJ  did  not
    expressly state whether or not  he  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
    suffering from PTSD and depression.  However, it is certainly  strongly
    implicit in his decision that he did accept the expert evidence on that
    issue.  For example, at [54] in relation to Article  3,  the  FtJ  said
    that the respondent did not dispute that  the  appellant  is  suffering
    from mental illness but it was asserted by the respondent that suitable
    medical treatment was available in India.  The  FtJ  then  went  on  to
    assess the issue of treatment for the appellant on return to India.  In
    my judgement, it is clear that the FtJ accepted that the appellant  was
    suffering from PTSD and depression, although  he  did  not  accept  the
    medical evidence as to the causes of those conditions in his case.

32. The assertion at [18] of the grounds that Dr Wickert concluded that the
    appellant had concrete plans for  self-harm  and  that  he  would  kill
    himself if returned to India is plainly erroneous.  Dr Wickert said  no
    such thing.  As the FtJ correctly pointed out at [53],  Dr  Wickert  at
    [139] of her report stated that the  appellant  had  frequent  suicidal
    thoughts but had not made any plans to commit suicide.  Her opinion was
    that his current risk of suicide was low but that the risk  of  suicide
    would be increased if he returned to India, because he believed that he
    would be arrested and subjected to ill-treatment.  That is far  removed
    from what is asserted in the grounds.  In the light  of  that  evidence
    the FtJ was entitled to conclude that no Article 3 risk was  made  out,
    in terms of suicide or otherwise.

33. Another assertion made in  the  grounds  which  has  no  merit  is  the
    contention that the FtJ failed to apply the test in J.   The  FtJ  made
    repeated reference to that authority, and considered it in detail.

34. Given that the FtJ's conclusions on the credibility of the  appellant's
    claim are entirely sustainable, the complaint about the  assessment  of
    internal relocation is not to the point.  In any  event,  applying  the
    country guidance decision of MD (same-sex oriented males:  risk)  India
    CG [2014] UKUT 65 (IAC), the FtJ was entitled to come to the conclusion
    that the appellant would have available to him the option  of  internal
    relocation given the evidence  in  that  case,  and  reflected  in  the
    guidance, that there is no central registration system in  place  which
    would enable the police to find someone wherever they were in India.

35. In conclusion, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law in the
    FtJ's decision in any respect.




    Decision

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds therefore stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 23/11/17





