

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/09073/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                     |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 February 2018                  |            On 29 March 2018         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  Ms h p x
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Tabacchi, counsel instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr. K. Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant is a national of the PRC,  born  on  28.8.83.  She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 4.6.15 and claimed asylum  on  7.6.15.
    The basis of her claim is that her husband had been arrested  following
    a fight with a government officer over land he had inherited  in  March
    2006 and he was sentenced to 18 months imprisonment. She fled  to  Hong
    Kong and gave birth to their son there. She  returned  to  the  PRC  in
    October 2007 after her husband was released from  prison  in  September
    2007. Due to the fact he was blacklisted  the  authorities  refused  to
    register their son and her husband was unable to work so left  home  in
    2007 and has had no contact with him since 2007.  The  Appellant  tried
    unsuccessfully to register her son and attracted the adverse  attention
    of the authorities, as a result  of  which  she  was  detained  on  two
    occasions, lastly in January 2015. The Appellant then decided  to  flee
    the PRC and utilised the services of agents (snakeheads). En  route  to
    the UK in Holland, the agents demanded more money which she refused  to
    pay as a result of which she was beaten and raped and  told  she  would
    have to work as a prostitute to repay the money. The Appellant  managed
    to escape when the vehicle in which she was travelling was  stopped  at
    customs.

    2.     After her arrival  in  the  UK  the  Appellant  entered  into  a
    relationship with a Chinese man known as William (in English) and  gave
    birth to a daughter on 29.12.16. She said that she has had  no  contact
    with William since he became aware of her pregnancy. She  fears  return
    to the PRC due to repercussions from the snakeheads, to whom  she  owes
    money and because she would have continuing difficulties in  supporting
    her children without being able to register them.

    3.     Her application was refused in  a  decision  dated  1.9.17.  Her
    claim to have been trafficked was also referred to the NRM  who,  in  a
    decision dated 28.4.17 issued a conclusive grounds  decision  that  the
    Appellant was not a victim of human trafficking, slavery, servitude  or
    forced/compulsory labour.

    4.     The Appellant appealed and her appeal  came  before  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker for  hearing  on  16.10.17.  In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 18.10.17 he dismissed the appeal, essentially on
    the basis that he did not accept the credibility of the  claim  and  he
    found, contrary to the  Appellant's  assertion,  that  the  Appellant's
    husband was likely to be the father of her son.

    5.     Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  the
    basis that the Judge had erred materially in law:

         (i)      in failing to treat the Appellant as a vulnerable witness;

         (ii)     in failing to properly consider the expert evidence of the
         consultant psychiatrist;

         (iii)    in failing to properly consider the issue of documentation
         and internal relocation.

    6.     Permission to appeal was granted by First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shimmin in a decision dated 27.11.17 on the basis that all the  grounds
    were arguable.

    7.     The Respondent lodged a rule 24 response on 8.1.18 opposing  the
    appeal and asserting that the Judge  found  the  Appellant  not  to  be
    credible and gave adequate reasons for his findings at [36]-[40] and at
    [39] adequately addressed the medical report.

    Hearing

    8.     In his submissions, Mr Tabacchi sought to rely upon the  grounds
    of appeal. He submitted that the Judge did not engage at all  with  the
    psychiatric report of Dr Gupta, which  should  have  lead  him  to  the
    conclusion  that  the  Appellant  is  a  vulnerable   witness.   As   a
    consequence, the Judge should have applied the Presidential guidance of
    his own volition, requested more breaks and  set  boundaries  on  cross
    examination. It was further asserted that the Judge should  have  asked
    himself  what  weight  should  be  placed  on  the  evidence  and   any
    inconsistencies in light of re-traumatisation.  However,  it  is  clear
    from the findings at [34] and [36] that one of the  criticisms  of  the
    Appellant was that she was vague and changed  her  responses  but  this
    could have been caused  by  her  trauma.  In  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement she raises issues at  [32]  and  [33]  about  her  shame  and
    vulnerability and this was before the Judge.

    9.     The Judge further made adverse findings in respect of  the  lack
    of supporting documentation at [37] and the lack  of  corroboration  of
    documentary  evidence,  however,  the  Respondent  accepted  that   the
    authorities had demolished her house and the Appellant  in  her  asylum
    interview stated that she did not have any documentation:  Q  &  A  24,
    B15, see also Q 25-28 and 32 & 33.

    10.    In respect of internal relocation, Mr Tabacchi asserted that the
    Appellant would be at risk wherever she would  relocate  in  China  and
    that the Judge's findings on  internal  relocation  do  not  deal  with
    relevant issues  ie.  that  she  would  be  returning  with  two  young
    children, which is not reflected in the determination as a whole nor is
    it considered whether this would be unduly harsh.

    11.    In respect of significant obstacles to integration, Mr  Tabacchi
    submitted that the judge's findings at [46] do not adequately cover the
    difficulties that would be faced by a single woman returning  to  China
    with two young children.

    12.    In his submissions, Mr Hibbs submitted that what the  Judge  has
    done is to put weight  on  the  competent  authorities'  assessment  of
    credibility, which is dangerous as this could be overturned on judicial
    review. At [32] the Judge refers to  Kasolo  and  states  he  had  made
    findings based on the evidence as a whole including that  to  which  he
    had not made specific reference. He submitted  that  the  determination
    could have been better drafted but this  is  not  an  error.  Mr  Hibbs
    submitted that the competent authority decision is the  starting  point
    but a Judge can reach a different conclusion.

    13.    Mr  Hibbs  further  submitted  that  the  grounds  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the fact that the  Judge  at  [35]  agreed  with  the
    assessment by the competent authority, who had Dr  Gupta's  report  and
    addressed it in the conclusive grounds decision: AB 42-46 refer.  There
    was also nothing to show that the Appellant is receiving any  treatment
    in the form of medication or counselling and the Judge's  findings  are
    sustainable.

    14.    Mr Hibbs  further  submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  legally
    represented but there was no record of proceedings  to  show  that  the
    legal  representative  asked  that  the  Appellant  be  treated  as   a
    vulnerable witness nor that the conduct of the appeal was  such  as  to
    put the Appellant at risk  of  further  trauma.  There  was  no  cross-
    examination on the Netherlands point but rather  a  focus  on  risk  on
    return. He submitted that it would have made no difference  whether  or
    not the Appellant was treated as a vulnerable witness because  she  was
    not cross-examined about the Netherlands.  He  further  submitted  that
    because the Appellant was found not to be credible little weight can be
    attached to the diagnosis of PTSD given she is not receiving  treatment
    and there was no indication from the Appellant's witness statement that
    it was difficult to take instructions from her and  no  indication  she
    was traumatized in giving the statement.  Whilst  the  Judge  could  be
    criticized for drafting and presentation, the credibility findings were
    open to the Judge to find based on the conduct of proceedings  and  any
    errors were not material to the final outcome, given that at  [32]  the
    Judge looked at the case in the round.

    15.    Mr Hibbs submitted that the  ground  of  appeal  in  respect  of
    Article 8 was a mere disagreement with the Judge's finding of fact. The
    Appellant had been found not to be credible and there  was  nothing  to
    show that a female returning to China would not be able to be helped on
    return. In light of the fact the Appellant has been found not  credible
    she cannot rely on her evidence on this point.

    16.    In his reply, Mr Tabacchi, submitted that at [36] there  was  no
    record of the questions and answers which the Judge found unconvincing.
    He relied on her  detentions  not  being  mentioned  in  her  Screening
    Interview so the questioning must have extended  to  her  claim,  which
    related to previous abuse. He submitted that inconsistency  could  have
    been dealt with differently if she had been  treated  as  a  vulnerable
    witnesss. There may be some other explanation why the Appellant did not
    say straight away that she had been abused and  the  fact  she  is  not
    receiving treatment does not undermine her vulnerability. In Dr Gupta's
    response at AB 46 [73] onwards he has given some possible  explanations
    for the inconsistencies see eg [74] page 47 and it follows that  it  is
    not uncommon for someone who has been subjected to human trafficking to
    deny and avoid discussions. Mr Tabacchi submitted that the Judge should
    have  been  aware  of  the  possibilities  that  when  interviewed  the
    Appellant would not have said straight away how she  had  been  treated
    and had  the  Judge  properly  directed  himself  he  might  have  made
    different credibility findings.

    17.    I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    My findings

    18.    I have considered, firstly, whether if the Judge had either  had
    the Presidential Guidance Note no.2 of 2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult
    and sensitive appellant guidance drawn to his attention or  applied  it
    of his own volition it would have made a  material  difference  to  his
    findings. I have concluded that it would. This is because the  guidance
    is essentially concerned with ensuring that a person who  falls  within
    the guidance receives a fair hearing and that adjustments are made,  if
    necessary.

    19.    What appears to have happened in this case is  that  the  Judge,
    relying upon the findings of the competent authority in their  decision
    of 28.4.17 that the Appellant was not a  victim  of  trafficking,  took
    that as his starting point and so proceeded on that basis. I find  that
    this approach did arguably infect his consideration of the  Appellant's
    credibility because he did not consider at the outset whether she was a
    vulnerable witness.

    20.    On 27.3.16 the Competent Authority made  a  positive  reasonable
    grounds decision in  the  Appellant's  favour.  However,  upon  further
    consideration a negative conclusive grounds  decision  was  reached  on
    28.4.17, essentially due to inconsistencies in the Appellant's accounts
    given at different times as to the amount of money paid to  the  agents
    and where this came from  and  the  whereabouts  of  her  passport  and
    failing to raise that she had been trafficked in respect of her  asylum
    claim.

    21.    In MS (Trafficking - Tribunal's Powers - Art. 4  ECHR)  Pakistan
    [2016] UKUT 00226 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal, following the  judgment  of
    Lord Justice Longmore in AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2014] Imm AR 513 held that in appeal proceedings  the
    Appellant may, in certain circumstances, mount an indirect challenge to
    a negative trafficking decision of the Authority, which is not confined
    to perversity (or irrationality) grounds [39].

    22.    It is clear that as part of her  asylum  appeal,  the  Appellant
    continued to put forward a claim to have been trafficked to the UK  and
    that this was not considered by the Judge, who treated the  trafficking
    aspect of the appeal to have been settled by the  Competent  Authority.
    In light of the jurisprudence cited at [21] above this  is  a  material
    error of law.

    23.    Consequently, whilst the Judge made adverse findings in  respect
    of the Appellant's credibility at [36]  I  accept  that  these  may  be
    rendered unsustainable due to the failure to consider the  Presidential
    Guidance Note no.2 of  2010:  Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
    appellant guidance.

    24.    I further consider that the Judge erred in failing  to  consider
    the best interests of the Appellant's  daughter,  born  in  the  UK  on
    29.12.16. Whilst at [38] the  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's evidence of the paternity of this child  was  questionable,
    this did not exempt him from considering the impact  on  the  child  of
    removal  from  the  UK,  where  she  was  born.  There  is  further  no
    consideration of the impact on  removal  from  the  UK  of  the  second
    Appellant and I consider that the assessment of the  reasonableness  of
    internal relocation by the Judge at [40] is inadequately reasoned.

    25.    For the reasons set out above, I find material errors of law  in
    the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Walker. I set  that  decision
    aside and remit the appeal for a hearing de novo before the First  tier
    Tribunal.




    Rebecca Chapman
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


    27 March 2018
