
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/09080/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 4 May 2017                         |           On 16 May 2017             |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     CD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of a national of Albania  born  in  September  2001.
    There is an anonymity order in place given the fact that the  Appellant
    is a minor.  He made an asylum claim on  16  February  2016  which  was
    refused in a decision dated 15 August 2016. The basis of his claim  was
    that he was subject to a blood feud which commenced when  his  paternal
    uncle killed two other individuals, since which time he stated that his
    father had been in self-confinement and that  subsequently  a  separate
    blood feud had arisen in relation to his cousins.  The Appellant stated
    that in December 2015, he was  directly  targeted  by  members  of  the
    families whom his uncle had shot and he himself was shot  at.   He  had
    then, with the assistance of his cousins, left Albania  shortly  before
    his 14th birthday.  The  Respondent  refused  his  asylum  claim.   The
    Appellant appealed against that decision and  his  appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bartlett for  hearing  on  6  February
    2017.

 2. At the outset of  the  hearing,  the  Appellant's  counsel  Mr  Collins
    informed the Judge that the Appellant was present without either of his
    foster parents and thus there was no responsible adult present and that
    this was in breach of the Presidential Guidance. He informed the  Judge
    that he was unable to act as  the  responsible  adult  as  he  was  the
    Appellant's legal representative and thus it was necessary  to  adjourn
    the appeal in order that Social  Services  could  be  contacted  and  a
    social worker could be arranged to attend any further  hearing  as  the
    Appellant's responsible adult.  Mr Collins submitted that this was  the
    correct course of action in light of the fact the  Appellant  had  also
    been unaccompanied by a responsible adult at his asylum interview.  The
    judge declined to adjourn the appeal and  proceeded  to  hear  evidence
    from the Appellant in the absence of a responsible adult and to dismiss
    his appeal on the basis that she did not accept that the Appellant  was
    a victim of a blood feud.  That decision was promulgated on 16 February
    2017.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made in time to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.   The  grounds  in  support  of  the  application   submitted
    essentially that the Judge had erred materially in law  in  failing  to
    adjourn the appeal in order for a responsible adult to be present.  The
    grounds submit at [7] "while the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No.2
    of 2010 does not indicate that there must be a responsible adult  at  a
    hearing it is obviously best practice and as the Guidance put it at (1)
    good judge craft."  Further it is apparent from paragraph  5.2(iii)  of
    the Joint Presidential Note that "it is  advisable  that  a  child  has
    someone available at all hearings".  There was nothing to indicate that
    Social Services could not have  provided  a  responsible  adult  for  a
    hearing in the future once  they  had  been  appraised  of  the  foster
    carer's failure to attend on this occasion. It was submitted  that  the
    Judge erred and acted unfairly in not adjourning rather than proceeding
    with the asylum appeal of a 15 year old in the absence of a responsible
    adult.  As a result, all of the Judge's purported findings are vitiated
    and the determination should be treated as a nullity.  It was  asserted
    at [9] that whilst the Judge purports to take the Appellant's age  into
    account at all material times in coming to her adverse findings largely
    on the basis of "vagueness" the Judge does precisely the opposite which
    was also a material error.

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing before me, I heard submissions from Mr Collins on behalf
    of the Appellant and from Mr Norton on behalf  of  the  Respondent.   I
    also located the Record of Proceedings by the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    which I read to the parties in its material respects and which properly
    reflected the contents of the grounds of appeal and the submissions  by
    Mr Collins.  It is the case that the counsel for the Respondent on that
    occasion agreed with Mr Collins that it would be best practice to  have
    a responsible adult and that he had only proceeded in cases involving a
    minor on previous occasions with the agreement of  the  representative,
    which is not the position here. Counsel for the Respondent also stated:
    "the legal representative would be in the best  position  to  determine
    what is in the best interests of his  client."   Mr  Collins  submitted
    that the Judge's error was material given that she relied on the Asylum
    Interview Record where there had also been no responsible adult present
    and that it was the case that any 15 year old should have  the  support
    of a responsible adult at his or  her  asylum  appeal  hearing  and  if
    neither foster carer were  present  Social  Services  would  provide  a
    responsible adult for any further appeal hearing.

 5. In his submissions, Mr Norton stated that the Judge was  not  bound  by
    the position of counsel for the Respondent at the appeal  hearing  that
    the presence of a responsible adult was not the requirement  albeit  it
    would have been preferable.  He submitted that it was  a  matter  of  a
    judgment call for the Judge and the only issue  is  whether  it  had  a
    material effect on the appeal hearing.  He agreed  that  if  there  had
    been procedural impropriety the correct course would be for the  matter
    to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing de
    novo.

     Decision

 6. I find for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal  and  the  oral
    submissions of Mr Collins that the Judge erred  materially  in  law  by
    reason of procedural impropriety.  Whilst it is the case that  she  was
    not bound to adjourn the appeal due to the  absence  of  a  responsible
    adult to support the Appellant during his appeal  hearing,  I  consider
    that given that the Appellant and his representative wished there to be
    a responsible adult present, it was unfair on the Appellant who was  15
    years of age to proceed in the absence of  a  responsible  adult.   The
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010: Child  Vulnerable  Adult
    and Sensitive Appellant Guidance provides as follows at 5.2(iii) that a
    Judge should:

         "Identify and record whether a minor asylum seeking Appellant has a
         responsible adult  e.g.  parent,  social  worker,  teacher,  foster
         parent who will be attending the  substantive  hearing  to  provide
         support.  A legal representative is not and cannot be a responsible
         adult.  It is advisable that a child has someone available  at  all
         hearings but it is not possible for you to direct a third party  to
         attend."

 7. There is also footnote 5 to  that  sub-paragraph  which  provides  that
    paragraph 352 of the Rules requires a responsible adult to  be  present
    at all interviews  conducted  by  the  Respondent.   That  should  have
    alerted the Judge to a concern that the Appellant  had  not  previously
    had the benefit of a responsible adult at his asylum  interview.  There
    was a legal representative present but  it  is  clear  from  that  sub-
    paragraph  that  a  legal  representative  is  not  and  cannot  be   a
    responsible adult.  Furthermore, whilst at [3] the Judge  records  that
    of her own volition she telephoned the Appellant's  foster  mother  and
    then reported back to the parties that she was still at home,  this  is
    somewhat unorthodox, not least as there is no attendance note as to the
    contents of the conversation between the Judge and  Appellant's  foster
    mother.  Given that Mr Collins on behalf of the Appellant  had  himself
    telephoned the Appellant's foster  mother,  it  was  not  in  my  view,
    incumbent upon the Judge to double check that information herself.   It
    is also the case that the  Judge  wished  Mr  Collins  to  act  as  the
    responsible  adult  until  her  attention  was  drawn  to   the   Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note.

 8. At [4] of the judge's decision, whilst she gave  consideration  to  the
    decision in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) she
    went on to hold as follows

         "I refused the request for an adjournment as I considered that  the
         Appellant would  be  able  to  have  a  fair  hearing  without  the
         attendance of his foster mother or a responsible adult.  I accepted
         that Mr  Collins  is  the  legal  representative  could  not  be  a
         responsible adult however I  considered  the  Appellant  had  legal
         representation and he also had the full assistance of the  Albanian
         interpreter Ms X."

 9. In so finding, I find that the Judge failed to give adequate reasons as
    to why the Appellant would be able  to  have  a  fair  hearing  in  the
    absence of a responsible adult given  that  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note  makes  clear  that  a  legal  representative  cannot  also  be  a
    responsible  adult  nor  clearly   can   an   interpreter.   In   these
    circumstances, I find that given that the fairness of  the  hearing  is
    undermined, the Judge's findings cannot be sustained and the matter  is
    remitted for a hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal  by  a  Judge
    other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bartlett.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date 12 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

