
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09400/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice      |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 June 2017                       |On 27 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                   [m K b]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Fouladrand of MAAS
For the Respondent:    Ms K. Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on [ ] 1940.  So
    much is not controversial.  She had made a claim which  was  determined
    in a determination promulgated on 24 June 2014 following a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 14 March 2014 before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Khawar.
    In that initial claim she had sought leave to remain or entry clearance
    as an adult dependant relative under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  In addition she had sought to rely upon Article 8 of  the  ECHR
    in its widest terms.  The matter was listed for an oral hearing and  in
    the course of the hearing the judge heard evidence  from  her  grandson
    [HSB] who had adopted a witness statement giving additional evidence.

 2. The brief summary was recorded by Judge Khawar  at  paragraph  6.   The
    appellant was then 74 years old, a citizen of Afghanistan,  settled  in
    India, who had applied for  entry  clearance  as  the  adult  dependent
    relative of her grandson.  She had maintained  that  she  was  a  widow
    living alone in India at the same address in New Delhi since 2006.  She
    claimed that she lived alone and was totally dependent upon her son and
    grandson due to her age  and  health.   She  maintained  that  she  was
    assisted by a maid who attended during the day to cook  and  clean  for
    her but she needed more care than could be provided by such a maid  and
    she needed 24 hours a day care which was not provided to her.

 3. She advanced her claim in 2014 on the basis that as  a  result  of  her
    age, illness or disability she required  long  term  personal  care  to
    perform everyday daily tasks.  There was  no  relevant  information  or
    evidence before the judge to establish, despite her age, the  level  of
    care that she needed or what illnesses she actually suffered  from.  In
    those circumstances and in the course of the determination  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and under Article 8 of the ECHR.  In particular he found that  she  had
    failed to establish that  she  required  long  term  personal  care  to
    perform her everyday tasks.

 4. That was the basis upon which the claim was advanced in 2014.

 5. It was a very different  claim  that  was  advanced  which  became  the
    subject of the appeal relevant to me which was determined by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N.M.K. Lawrence in a determination that was  promulgated
    on 14 March 2017 following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on  21  February
    2017.  In that case she had given  an  entirely  different  version  of
    events.  She had claimed that she was kidnapped  on  two  occasions  in
    Afghanistan by Afghan men.  The first happened in  2011.   She  alleged
    that the men asked her to change her  faith,  promising  her  food  and
    clothing if she converted to Islam.  The appellant refused.  The second
    kidnap was in 2015.  In that case she said it was  the  Mujahideen  who
    kidnapped her.  They too asked her to  change  her  religion  and  once
    again she refused, so it was on that  basis  that  her  family  in  the
    United Kingdom made arrangements for her to leave Afghanistan and enter
    the United Kingdom illegally.

 6. The claim that was advanced and which was the  subject  matter  of  the
    appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence was a  complete  cock-
    and-bull story.  It was a fabrication and  it  was  admitted  to  be  a
    fabrication in the course of the hearing.  The findings that were  made
    in 2012 were put to [MB] who gave  evidence  and,  in  particular,  the
    allegation that the appellant said that she had been  living  in  India
    since 2006.  The judge records in paragraph 10:

         "This was put to [MB] during his oral evidence.  He  confirmed  the
         2012 application was indeed made.  He said his mother is too old to
         live alone and that the UK Government owes it to her to look  after
         her.  He said he and his siblings  tried  to  bring  the  appellant
         lawfully to the UK but it was refused.   They  said  they  have  no
         other choice.  It was put to him that  he  and  his  siblings  made
         arrangements to bring her to the UK.  He denied it.   He  said  the
         first time he knew his mother was in  the  UK  was  when  the  Home
         Office contacted him.  I do not accept this.  In my view  [MB]  and
         his siblings, frustrated by the fact that  the  appellant  did  not
         meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules,  caused  her  to
         travel to the UK clandestinely.  I find the appellant has lived  in
         India since 2006 and therefore I  find  the  basis  of  the  asylum
         application is without foundation.  It is a pack of lies  concocted
         by the appellant's children living in the UK".

 7. Those findings of fact made by Judge Lawrence are undoubtedly  correct.
    They were conceded by [MB] in the evidence that he gave.

 8. Surprisingly, therefore, the appellant has appealed on the  basis  that
    the judge did not give due consideration to her claim that  she  was  a
    single woman and that she was at risk of harm by that  fact  alone  and
    that it was therefore wrong for the judge to omit to mention that  part
    of the claim and to consider her human rights claim  on  the  basis  of
    that material.

 9. In my judgment that submission is misconceived  and  ill-founded.   The
    judge was not required to advance a case and then consider it and  make
    a decision upon it when it was not advanced  by  the  appellant  or  by
    [MB].  The judge was there to determine the case that was  put  forward
    by the appellant and he did so affirmatively and correctly.   The  true
    case namely that she lives in India was not a case which was  advanced.
    Consequently no consideration was necessary as to whether  she  was  at
    risk of asylum in India.  That was not the case that she  put  forward.
    Nor was it a case that she put forward that it would be a breach of her
    human rights to be returned to India because of the social and domestic
    situation that existed there.  Her case was that she  was  at  risk  of
    harm as a result of an entirely  concocted  account  and  that,  having
    refused that asylum claim for good cause, there was nothing  else  that
    was advanced by the appellant.

10. It is not for the judge to concoct a hypothetical case which was  never
    advanced that as a 77 year old woman she would be at risk.  If that  is
    a claim that the appellant wishes to make, she cannot now  legitimately
    make it in relation to Afghanistan, since she herself has said that she
    has not been living there since 2006.  She never sought to  revamp  her
    case and advance her claim on the basis of the true facts.  That  is  a
    claim which she is still entitled to advance and to seek  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State but it was not a claim that  was  before  the
    Upper Tribunal and the judge was not required to speculate on  what  it
    might be.  She may have insuperable difficulties in making out  such  a
    case, since her credibility is at such a low ebb,  but  she  cannot  be
    prevented from doing so, albeit not at public expense.

11. Asylum claims and human rights claims are fact sensitive.  They require
    the foundation of credible evidence as to  the  true  circumstances  in
    which somebody is living and the risks that they face were they  to  be
    returned.  That simply does not admit a  hypothetical  claim  that  was
    never advanced and in these  circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    asylum claim was properly dismissed.  If there is to be a human  rights
    claim it has to be made on the basis that the judge in  2014  had  made
    sustainable findings of fact that her removal  would  not  violate  her
    human rights.  That  decision  was  never  appealed.   It  remains  the
    starting point for any further  application.   I  am  not  prepared  to
    expand the circumstances in which the  Tribunal  is  required  to  give
    consideration to such a claim.  That is  for  the  appellant  to  make,
    based on truthful and credible evidence.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal made no error on a point of  law  and  the  decision
dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
