
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09166/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Oral determination given following       |                                    |
|hearing                                  |                                    |
|On 5 April 2017                          |On 13 June 2017                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                    M P J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer of Counsel, instructed by Gulsen & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Sri Lanka who  was  born  in
    December 1978.  He  originally  claimed  asylum  in  July  2012.   That
    application was treated as having been withdrawn, the reason being that
    the appellant had not  attended  an  asylum  interview  (although  some
    further  consideration  will  be  given  below  to  this)  but  further
    submissions were made on behalf of the appellant in December 2015.  The
    respondent did not decide to treat these submissions as not giving rise
    to a fresh claim but considered  them  afresh  before  deciding  on  12
    August 2016 to refuse to grant the appellant asylum  refusing  also  to
    grant him humanitarian protection.  It was against this  decision  that
    the appellant appealed and  his  appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Buckwell at a hearing which took place over two days  on
    28  September  and  7  December  2016.   In  a  decision  and   reasons
    promulgated very shortly after,  on  9  January  2017,  Judge  Buckwell
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal against this  decision  on  a
    number of grounds and was granted permission to  appeal  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robertson on 15 February  2017.   Judge  Robertson  only
    granted permission on  one  ground  giving  reasons  why  she  did  not
    consider that the other grounds had arguable  merit.   Regrettably  the
    form which was sent to the parties after this decision did  not  inform
    the appellant in terms as it should (see in particular the decision  of
    this Tribunal in Ferrer (limited  appeal  grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT
    00304 that the appellant should himself seek to renew  his  appeal  for
    permission to appeal on the other grounds before the  Upper  Tribunal),
    one of the consequences of which was that a renewed application was not
    made within the timescale set out  within  the  Rules.   However,  even
    though this was submitted a little late, on  22  March  of  this  year,
    which is some two weeks before this  hearing  the  appellant  did  make
    submissions to be allowed to renew the grounds on which permission  had
    been refused before the Upper Tribunal.   I  have  had  regard  to  the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387
    and in particular from paragraph 92 onwards, and having regard to  that
    guidance I  consider  it  appropriate  to  extend  time  to  allow  the
    appellant application for permission to appeal on the other grounds  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Obviously, the application has not been considered
    on the papers before today and in the circumstances it  is  appropriate
    to consider the application for permission as  part  of  the  rolled-up
    hearing in which I will also consider whether there is an error of  law
    in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside and remade.  Accordingly I will  consider  all  the
    grounds together and to the extent that I find an error of  law  (as  I
    do) I also grant permission to  appeal  against  the  decision  on  all
    grounds.

 3. I do not propose to deal at length with all the grounds because  it  is
    not necessary for me to do so.  The  grounds  have  cumulative  effect.
    The relevant grounds are  grounds  1,  3  and  4,  of  which  the  most
    important is clearly ground 3.  I will set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I give my reasons below.

 4. The appellant claims that he would be at risk of persecution by the Sri
    Lankan authorities because he would come within the category of persons
    at risk as set out in the country guidance case of GJ  and  Others  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319, a decision which has subsequently been upheld
    in the Court of Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka) and another  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    829.

 5. The essential basis of the judge's decision dismissing the  appeal  was
    the adverse credibility findings made by the judge which included first
    (the subject of ground 1) a finding that Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 applied, secondly a
    finding that the evidence of the  appellant's  brother,  who  had  been
    granted asylum, was not of sufficient relevance in this case to  assist
    the appellant (the subject of ground 3) and thirdly a  finding  that  a
    document submitted on behalf of the appellant could not be relied  upon
    (the subject of ground 4).

 6. It is right at  the  outset,  notwithstanding  that  I  will  set  this
    decision aside, if I state that Judge Buckwell's decision was clearly a
    very  well  thought  out  and  considered  decision  arrived  at  after
    conscientious consideration of the evidence.  Furthermore, although  as
    I will state below as a matter of fact some of the findings were wrong,
    or are sufficiently in  doubt  as  to  require  further  consideration,
    certainly to some extent as regards the consideration of the Section  8
    point, this Tribunal has the benefit of evidence which does not  appear
    to have been before the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. Notwithstanding the  preceding  paragraph,  at  paragraph  120  of  his
    determination Judge Buckwell stated as follows:

         "I confirm that I take into account all evidence  presented.   That
         includes all documentation, whether or not specifically referred to
         hereafter and subject to any findings in relation to any particular
         document presented".

 8. It is accordingly incumbent on the judge to have taken into account all
    the documentary evidence before him, even though much of that  evidence
    may  not  have  been  specifically  referred  to  by   either   party's
    representative during the hearing and is accordingly easily missed.  It
    is clear from the decision now under challenge that Judge Buckwell  did
    give very careful consideration to  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    brother, setting out the bulk of this evidence from  paragraphs  29  to
    99.  He also gave reasons at paragraphs 130 and 131 why  the  brother's
    case was in many respects different from that of  the  appellant.   The
    judge also had regard to the witness statement given by the  appellant.
    However, what the judge did not do, in my  judgment  is  give  specific
    consideration to an important aspect of the evidence of the appellant's
    brother which was contained in the exhibits to the  witness  statement,
    which may not have been referred to specifically during the hearing and
    on which the witness may not have  been  specifically  questioned,  but
    which was nonetheless included within the documents within the file  to
    which the judge had said he had had regard.  I refer in  particular  to
    the screening interview and asylum interview given by  the  appellant's
    brother, to both of which this Tribunal has been referred.  At question
    4.1 of the screening interview the appellant's brother  had  stated  as
    follows when giving his reasons for coming to the UK:

         "My older brother [this appellant] was  an  LTTE  member  who  went
         missing in the final battle with the army in 2009.   The  army  and
         the CID came to my house in Jaffna on 15/09/09 looking for him  and
         arrested me [my emphasis].  I was held for  ten  days  at  a  camp,
         tortured and interrogated ...".

 9. Then, subsequently in answer to Q117 of his asylum interview  in  which
    he was asked "what has happened when the army  came  looking  for  your
    brother?", the witness had replied that "somebody has given information
    that my brother has come and escaped to my uncle's".  Later in the same
    answer he said that "they [a reference to the authorities who had  been
    questioning him] told me, your brothers were member of the LTTE ...".

10. This evidence was not referred to by the judge within the decision  and
    he does not appear to have had regard to this evidence when setting out
    his conclusion that  there  were  sufficient  differences  between  the
    positions of the appellant and his brother (who had been given  asylum)
    that the brother's evidence could not be relied upon in support  of  an
    assertion that the authorities would have had a significant interest in
    this appellant to have  rendered  it  feasible  that  they  would  have
    tortured him (that is the appellant) rather than just treated him  like
    the bulk of Tamils arrested during this "dreadful  period  of  internal
    conflict and civil war".  It was  for  this  reason  that  although  at
    paragraph 125 the judge accepted the evidence of the appellant  "as  to
    his involvement to a degree with the LTTE", he also found  that  "I  do
    not believe that even then he had a degree of responsibility or profile
    which would have led to his suffering  torture  during  any  period  of
    detention".  Given the brother's evidence that the police had  arrested
    him initially because they had been looking for the appellant and  that
    he had himself suffered torture  in  consequence  of  his  arrest,  the
    judge's failure to deal with this aspect of this witness's evidence  is
    in my judgment a serious omission such as, albeit marginally, to render
    the decision unsafe.

11. This is a finely balanced case but this Tribunal also  must  take  into
    account what appears to have been a mistake of fact made by  the  judge
    (albeit that he cannot himself be blamed for this because  he  did  not
    know the evidence which this Tribunal knows) with regard  to  what  the
    judge regarded as the appellant's failure to pursue his original asylum
    claim or to renew it until some considerable time later.   The  judge's
    finding (at paragraph 135) is that he was entitled to have his views as
    to the unreliability of the appellant's evidence "further bolstered  by
    the fact that the appellant in effect  absconded  after  entering  this
    country and made no effort to advance any claim for  immigration  leave
    between 2012 and 2014".  The evidence  which  at  that  time  had  been
    before the Tribunal was that the appellant had been invited  to  attend
    an asylum interview in or about July 2012, which interview had been due
    to take place on 1 August 2012 but that the  appellant  had  failed  to
    attend.  A letter is in the file apparently written by  the  respondent
    to the appellant dated 1 August 2012 informing him that he  had  failed
    to turn up and inviting the appellant to give his reasons  for  failing
    to attend.  In the absence of any reasons the asylum claim was  treated
    as having been abandoned.

12. It appears from the evidence that this  Tribunal  has  seen  that  that
    letter dated 1 August 2012 had been  sent  to  an  organisation  called
    Refugee Action which had  previously  been  acting  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant but that the appellant  had  changed  solicitors  to  a  firm
    called Raj Law who had written (or at least  a  letter  was  apparently
    sent, although it is not clear whether the address was correct) to  the
    respondent informing the respondent that they were now acting  for  the
    appellant before the letter of 1 August 2012 was  sent.   There  is  no
    independent confirmation of this, but this Tribunal has  no  reason  to
    doubt that it is more likely than not that this was  a  genuine  letter
    and that certainly so far as this appellant was concerned  he  was  not
    personally aware, or certainly he may not have been  personally  aware,
    that he had been invited to an asylum interview.  The other matters  of
    which this Tribunal has been informed (of which the judge was  unaware)
    was that from December 2012 the appellant had been reporting  initially
    weekly and then monthly to the respondent which, if correct (and  again
    there is no reason why I should find at this  stage  that  it  was  not
    correct) would suggest that as a matter of fact the judge was wrong  to
    consider that the appellant had "in  effect  absconded  after  entering
    this country" or that he had "made no effort to advance any  claim  for
    immigration leave between 2012 and 2014" especially as it was  his  new
    solicitors who in 2014 wrote to the respondent (and indeed wrote a pre-
    action Protocol letter prior to an intended  application  for  judicial
    review) complaining that no action  had  been  taken  on  his  previous
    claim.

13. Even if the judge  cannot  be  faulted  for  not  taking  into  account
    material of which he was unaware I must have  regard  to  the  guidance
    given by the Presidential Tribunal in MM  (unfairness;  E  &  R  Sudan)
    [2014] UKUT 00105, where the president, referring to the decision given
    by the Court of Appeal in E & R - v - SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ  49,  stated
    as follows:

         "19. Of unmistakable  importance  also,  in  the  context  of  this
             appeal, is the decision of the Court of Appeal in [E &  R  ...
             [2004] ...].  As appears from the  opening  paragraph  of  the
             judgment of Carnwath LJ, one of the two central issues  raised
             in this appeal concerned cases decided by the  first  instance
             Tribunal (in that  instance,  the  Adjudicator)  where  it  is
             demonstrated that -

                  '... an important part  of  its  reasoning  was  based  on
                  ignorance or mistake as to the facts ...'

             Drawing particularly on the speech of Lord Slynn in R  -  v  -
             Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, ex parte A [1999]  2  AC
             330 (at pages 333 - 336), Carnwath LJ stated:

                  '[63] In our view, the CICB case points to the  way  to  a
                      separate ground of review, based on the principle  of
                      fairness  ...   the   unfairness   arose   from   the
                      combination of five factors:

                      (i)  An erroneous impression created by a mistake  as
                           to,  or  ignorance  of,  a  relevant  fact   (the
                           availability of reliable evidence to support  her
                           case);

                      (ii) The fact was 'established', in the  sense  that,
                           if attention had been drawn  to  the  point,  the
                           correct  position  could  have  been   shown   by
                           objective and uncontentious evidence;

                      (iii)     The  Claimant  could  not  fairly  be  held
                           responsible for the error;

                      (iv) Although there was no duty on the Board  itself,
                           or the police,  to  do  the  Claimant's  work  of
                           proving her case,  all  the  participants  had  a
                           shared interest in co-operating  to  achieve  the
                           correct result.

                      (v)  The mistaken impression played a  material  part
                           in the reasoning.'

             The learned Lord Justice added:

                  '[64]    It is  in  the  interests  of  all  parties  that
                      decisions  should  be  made  on  the  best  available
                      information.'

             He continued:

                  '[66] In our view, the time has now come to accept that  a
                      mistake of  fact  giving  rise  to  unfairness  is  a
                      separate head of challenge in an appeal on a point of
                      law, at least in those statutory contexts  where  the
                      parties share an interest in co-operating to  achieve
                      the correct result.  Asylum law is  undoubtedly  such
                      an area.  Without seeking to lay down a precise code,
                      the ordinary requirements for a finding of unfairness
                      are apparent from the above analysis of CICB.  First,
                      there must have been a  mistake  as  to  an  existing
                      fact, including a mistake as to the  availability  of
                      evidence on a particular matter.  Secondly, the  fact
                      or evidence must  have  been  'established',  in  the
                      sense  that  it  was  uncontentious  and  objectively
                      verifiable.  Thirdly, the appellant (or his advisors)
                      must not  have  been  responsible  for  the  mistake.
                      Fourthly, the mistake must  have  played  a  material
                      (not necessarily decisive)  part  in  the  Tribunal's
                      reasoning.'"

14. Although this ground on its own would not been sufficient  to  persuade
    me to set aside the decision, coupled with the judge's  failure  either
    to consider adequately the evidence of the brother's witness or in  any
    event to give adequate reasons for considering that evidence not to  be
    relevant notwithstanding the matters to which I  have  referred  above,
    this ground adds weight to the challenge, especially  in  circumstances
    where the evidence of the appellant's brother was not impeached at  any
    stage during the proceedings.

15. Similarly, the finding that the documentary evidence adduced in support
    of the claim was not reliable could only be made when all the  evidence
    was considered in the round, and so to the extent  that  I  have  found
    that it appears not to have  been,  the  finding  with  regard  to  the
    documentary evidence is also unsafe.

16.  It  follows  that  this  decision  must  be  set  aside  and  in   the
    circumstances the appeal will have to be reheard.   Neither  party  has
    sought to persuade the Tribunal that the re-hearing should  be  in  the
    Upper Tribunal and I agree with both parties that the appropriate forum
    for the rehearing is the First-tier Tribunal, where the  appeal  should
    be heard afresh by any Upper Tribunal Judge apart from Judge Buckwell.

Decision

17. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Buckwell  is  set  aside  as
    containing a material error of law.  The appeal will be reheard in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, sitting at Taylor House, by any judge  other  than
    Judge Buckwell.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 7 June 2017
