
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09026/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via skype.   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2020                 |On 07th October 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     GK
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. In a decision promulgated on the 30 June 2028 it was found a Judge of
       the First-tier Tribunal, through no fault of his own,  had  erred  in
       the assessment of whether it was reasonable in all the  circumstances
       for the appellant to internally relocate to Kabul as such  assessment
       had been undertaken on the basis of incomplete evidence.
    2. Directions were given for there to be a  Resume  hearing  which  took
       place on the 24 September 2020 remotely with the appellant  attending
       assisted by a representative of the  Greater  Manchester  Immigration
       Aid Unit. No interpreter was present, but the  appellant  is  clearly
       fluent in English and all parties were  content  to  proceed  on  the
       basis the matter did not require additional evidence to be  given  on
       the basis the matter was able to proceed by way of submissions only.
    3. The preserved findings from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       are that the appellant faces a credible real risk in  his  home  area
       but that he will be able to return to Kabul and live there  with  his
       brother.  The  scope  of  the  Resumed   hearing   was   limited   to
       consideration of the reasonableness of internal relocation  to  Kabul
       when considering all relevant aspects, including the appellant's age,
       medical condition, finding of family support the family  can  provide
       for a short or initial period, and other issues identified in  detail
       in the country guidance case of AS (safety  of  Kabul)  (Afghanistan)
       [2020] UKUT 130(IAC).

Decision

    4. It was not disputed that the appellant, who  was  born  on  14  March
       2003, has serious medical issues. Although Mr Jagadesham's submission
       that although there was support it would only be temporary  and  that
       the appellant would need work to contribute to  the  family  finances
       was challenged by Mrs Pettersen who did  not  believe  the  appellant
       would be effectively abandoned by his brother, which is  an  argument
       that may have merit, Mrs  Pettersen  accepted  that  there  was  very
       little she could  say  to  counter  Mr  Jagadesham's  submissions  in
       relation to the appellant's physical and mental health.
    5. In his skeleton argument in relation to these  issues  Mr  Jagadesham
       writes:

           Physical and mental health


            13.    This is dealt with in detail in  the  correspondence  and
                reports at [AB/6-21]. In summary, the Appellant's "liver  is
                severely scarred and damaged (cirrhosis), as a result of the
                continuous injury exerted by the  two  viruses  that  he  is
                chronically infected with (hepatitis B virus  and  hepatitis
                delta virus, also called HBV  and  HDV  respectively)";  see
                email of 10 September 2020 [AB/21] from Dr Giorgio  Calisti,
                Consultant in Infectious Diseases.


            14.    In relation to  treatment  and  the  Appellant's  overall
                prognosis, Dr Calisti explains (ibid):


                    "The problem is that, at present, there are very limited
                    treatment options to treat his infections, in particular
                    hepatitis delta. We have struggled to  treat  him  with
                    Interferon,  the   only   (partially   effective)   drug
                    available  to  date  for  hepatitis  delta.   Interferon
                    treatment has been limited by the mood changes that  [G]
                    is having,  as  a  consequence  of  the  difficult  life
                    experiences he has gone through  since  early  childhood
                    and  the  concern  that  he  may   be   repatriated   to
                    Afghanistan. Unfortunately, in the  presence  of  mental
                    health  problems,  we  can't  use  Interferon,   because
                    Interferon could  make  these  problems  worse. Without
                    effective treatment, [G]'s cirrhosis will progress  more
                    quickly and he is at greater risk of  developing  cancer
                    of the liver.


                    ...


                    The other important treatment option that  [G]  is  very
                    likely to require at some point in the future  is  liver
                    transplantation.   Clinical   Indications   for    liver
                    transplantation  are  liver  failure   (end   stage   of
                    cirrhosis) and liver cancer. Liver  transplantation  can
                    lead to eradication of hepatitis delta. I am  not  aware
                    of  a  liver  transplantation  programme  in  Kabul   or
                    elsewhere in Afghanistan. In fact, it is very  unlikely,
                    if not impossible, that [G} will have  access  to  liver
                    transplantation in Afghanistan when he is going to  need
                    it.


                    In answer to your question, given the premises above, it
                    is my  opinion  that  [G]'s  life  expectancy  would  be
                    significantly  reduced   if   he   is   repatriated   to
                    Afghanistan" (emphasis in original).


            15.    This followed on from an earlier email dated 14  February
                2020, where Dr Calisti explained that the Appellant  "...has
                a serious medical condition (liver cirrhosis) and is at risk
                of  developing  fatal  complications  (e.g.  liver   cancer,
                gastrointestinal haemorrhages) within the next few years..."
                [AB/18].


            16.    It is evident  that  the  Appellant  is  the  subject  of
                specialist monitoring on a regular basis. In a letter  dated
                9 January 2020 from Dr Pippa Newton, Consultant  in  General
                Medicine and Infectious Diseases, she referred to  the  fact
                that [AB/12] "...He will need to  be  closely  monitored  on
                this treatment and will need to regularly attend the  clinic
                every few weeks in the first  instance  to  check  that  his
                liver function  tests  remain  stable...He  is  awaiting  an
                endoscopy to look for varices  and  will  need  long-term  6
                monthly abdominal ultrasounds to check for  the  development
                of a hepatocellular carcinoma..."  In  a  subsequent  letter
                dated 15 February 2020, Dr Newton highlighted  that  [AB/16]
                "...His liver function tests had worsened" and explains that
                "...An urgent MRI liver scan was performed..."


            17.    It is also of note that  the  Appellant  is  said  to  be
                experiencing  "...side  effects   of   treatment   including
                intermittent  dizziness,  chest   pain   and   palpitations,
                increased lethargy and fatigue, a disturbed  sleep  pattern"
                (e.g. see letter dated 9 January 2020 [AB/10]).


            18.    In relation to  the  interplay  between  the  Appellant's
                mental and physical health issues, the  correspondence  from
                the Appellant's current social worker, Tom Stephenson, dated
                11 September  2020  [AB/6-7],  is  of  particular  note.  Mr
                Stephenson states, "...Whilst [G] therefore has a number  of
                both physical and mental  health  difficulties,  those  same
                mental health difficulties mean that he  finds  it  hard  to
                engage  with  professionals  in   order   to   receive   the
                appropriate  support..."  This  follows  on   from   earlier
                concerns raised about the  Appellant,  as  detailed  by  his
                previous social worker [AB/8] and a Specialist LAC Nurse  in
                a letter of 5 December 2019 [AB/10], where she also referred
                to concerns about "learning needs and cognitive development"
                and the Appellant's ability to  tell  his  account  and  his
                anxiety and potential  confusion;  concerns  about  possible
                physical/sexual   abuse,    trafficking/exploitation;    and
                concerns about his emotional health and well-being.


            19.    It is thus submitted that  in  relocating  to  Kabul  the
                Appellant will be particularly vulnerable  (see  AS  [2020],
                headnote (v)) due to his physical and mental health  issues,
                as well as the further issues set out below. This is also in
                the context  of  Kabul  being  described  as  "becoming  the
                epicenter  of  the  virus"  (see  article,  31   July   2020
                [AB/262]).  Furthermore,  any  support   provided   by   the
                Appellant's brother will not be  sufficient  to  counter  in
                particular the Appellant's physical and mental health issues
                and the absence of the necessary treatment.


            20.    Indeed, it is submitted that the Appellant will not  have
                available to him/be able to access the necessary  specialist
                treatment he requires as summarised above.  When  addressing
                the availability of healthcare in Kabul, the UT in AS [2018]
                referred to  the  EASO  Report:  Afghanistan  -  Key  socio-
                economic indicators, state protection, and mobility in Kabul
                City, Mazar-e Sharif and Herat City (August 2017); see [140]-
                [143] and later relied on this  evidence  at  [221],  albeit
                with reference to someone in "good health". The EASO report:
                "Afghanistan Key socio-economic indicators  Focus  on  Kabul
                City, Mazar-e Sharif and Herat City" (August 2020) sets  out
                a concerning picture of healthcare in Afghanistan bearing in
                mind the specialist and regular treatment and monitoring the
                Appellant  requires;  see  section 2.6  "Health  care"  at
                [AB/172]; see also reports/articles at [AB/102,  105,  111].
                In relation  to  mental  healthcare/support,  see  the  EASO
                report at section 2.6.3 [AB/179-180] and see the HRW  report
                at  [AB/114].  It  is  of  note  that  as   regards   mental
                healthcare, in AS [2020] the UT noted:


                    "242.  The evidence before us  is  consistent  with  the
                    Panel's findings: the conflict has  resulted  in  mental
                    health problems for many inhabitants of Kabul, but there
                    is a lack of facilities (and professionals) available to
                    provide treatment. There is  no  new  evidence  on  this
                    issue to warrant a departure from the  findings  of  the
                    Panel."


            21.    The Appellant relies also on the report of  Dr  Giustozzi
                of  18  September  2020  addressing  the   availability   of
                healthcare and, in particular, the absence  of  availability
                of liver transplants (para 11 [AB/61]).

    6. It is not disputed that the Supreme Court  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  [2020]
       UKSC 17 lowered the threshold previously established in N v UK but it
       still maintained a high threshold  by  reference  to  the  applicable
       test. The medical evidence, including the  expert  reports,  supports
       the claim the appellant will face a real risk of being exposed  to  a
       serious, rapid, and irreversible  decline  in  his  state  of  health
       resulting in intense suffering or a  significant  reduction  in  life
       expectancy and that any serious,  rapid,  or  reversible  decline  in
       health leading to intense suffering or the substantial  reduction  in
       life expectancy will arise as a result of the absence of  appropriate
       treatment in Afghanistan or the lack of access to such treatment.
    7. Mrs Pettersen was unable to show that medical assistance or treatment
       that was required is available in Afghanistan or that  the  appellant
       will have access to the same.
    8. I find it established, pursuant to AM, that there will be a breach of
       article 3 ECHR at the very least on medical grounds if the  appellant
       is returned to Afghanistan. Such a scenario makes it unreasonable  in
       all  the  circumstances  to  expect  the  appellant  to  return   and
       internally relocate to Kabul even if his brother is able  to  provide
       him with accommodation and practical support.
    9. It is a preserved finding that the appellant faces  a  real  risk  of
       persecution in his home area. As it has not been  found  there  is  a
       reasonable viable relocation option  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
       succeed with his asylum claim. The appeal is allowed on this basis.

Decision


   10. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is  allowed  on  asylum
       grounds.

  Anonymity.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 2 October 2020
