
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09654/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 January 2018                         |On 05 January 2018               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     AOS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Moueety a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Marwaha of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify AOS or any of his family members. This direction
       applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with
       this direction could give rise to Contempt of Court  proceedings.  I
       do so in order to preserve the anonymity of  AOS  who,  as  will  be
       seen, is a refugee.


    2. For consistency with the decision  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I
       shall hereafter refer to AOS as the Appellant and the  Secretary  of
       State as the Respondent.

    3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 16 August 2016. His appeal against this  was
       allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones ("the Judge") following a
       hearing that concluded on 28 March 2017.


The grant of permission


   4. Judge Chamberlain granted permission to appeal (7 September  2017)  as
      it is arguable that the Judge materially erred in failing to;

          1) give reasons for finding the  Appellant  to  be  credible  with
             regard to a land dispute,

          2) address why he could not seek state protection  from  the  non-
             state agents he claimed to fear, and

          3) identify the risk factors to him in relocating to Baghdad.


   5. Judge Chamberlain said  there  was  less  merit  in  relation  to  the
      feasibility of returning him due  to  his  lack  of  documentation  or
      ability to obtain  a  CSID,  but  she  did  not  limit  the  grant  of
      permission to appeal.



The Respondent's position

   6. It was submitted in the grounds seeking permission to appeal that  the
      Judge had;

          1) made no finding that the Appellant or his family  members  such
             as his brother have been subjected  to  any  adverse  attention
             from the other family,

          2) made no finding as to why the state is unable or  unwilling  to
             provide protection,

          3) not identified the factors that indicated the  Appellant  would
             be at risk in Baghdad, and

          4) made no finding as  to  the  Appellant's  inability  to  obtain
             documentation to enable him to  return,  or  explained  why  he
             needed international protection if his return was not currently
             feasible.


   7. It was submitted orally that the Judge materially erred in saying [41]
      that it was many months since the alleged  problems  occurred  whereas
      the claim was that it was over 20 years. The Judge made no finding  as
      to the power of the allegedly problematic family.  The  Appellant  did
      not know who the family were. It was not clear how  the  family  could
      track him down. The issue regarding the  documentation  was  the  risk
      arising from not having them and not the lack of the document itself.



Appellant's position

    8. It was submitted in the rule 24 notice (9 October 2017) that;

          1) adequate reasons were given  for  finding  in  the  Appellant's
             favour on the land dispute. He had  been  interviewed  (11  May
             2016) and filed a statement (17 March 2017).  The  Judge  noted
             why the Appellant had little knowledge of the land dispute  and
             was entitled to accept that [41] "It must be the case, since it
             was so long ago, that the Appellant who was not born then would
             be vague as regards the detail, these things have  been  handed
             down to him." The suggestion that there was no evidence  of  an
             ongoing interest in him or his family was not put to him at his
             interview, or in cross-examination. The Judge cannot have erred
             by not considering a point not challenged.

          2) the Judge was entitled to  conclude  that  there  had  been  no
             durable change in that part of Iraq where  the  Appellant  came
             from and that it was still a  "contested  area".  It  would  be
             unreasonable to require him  to  relocate  to  the  Independent
             Kurdish Region (IKR) for the reasons given [41] namely the land
             dispute,  difficulty  in  reaching  there,   the   absence   of
             documentation, the absence of a support  network,  the  limited
             support services, and the issues  with  employment.  The  Judge
             made findings open to him on the evidence.

          3) as a Sunni Muslim, it would be unreasonable to require  him  to
             relocate to Baghdad (BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG UKUT 00018
             (IAC) headnote (vi) and (vii)). The Judge set out the  guidance
             in AA (Article 15 (c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC)  in  full
             at [3] and plainly  had  this  in  mind  when  formulating  his
             decision. The factors the Judge considered [16, 19, 36, 44, 46]
             included the Appellant's lack of Civil Status Identity Document
             (CSID) and ability to obtain one, his ethnicity,  his  lack  of
             ability to speak Arabic,  the  lack  of  accommodation  through
             family and or friends, the lack of a Sponsor to access a  hotel
             or rent accommodation, his membership of a minority  community,
             and his lack of support.

          4) the Respondent had conceded that there were  difficulties  with
             the CSID and this was noted by the Judge  [45],  the  Appellant
             was not cross examined on this, and the Judge  was  accordingly
             entitled to make the findings he did.


   9. It was submitted orally in addition that the  Judge  did  not  suggest
      that the land dispute was many months ago.

Discussion

   10. In relation to ground 1, I am satisfied that the Judge gave adequate
       reasons for believing to the lower standard that there  had  been  a
       land dispute. The Judge noted that the Appellant was vague regarding
       the details but made a finding open to him as to the reason why [41]
       namely it happened before he was born and the information  had  been
       handed down to him. The Appellant gave information in his  interview
       and statement and was not challenged in cross-examination as to  his
       account. The Judge did not have to make a finding that the Appellant
       or his family members such as his brother  have  been  subjected  to
       adverse attention from the other family. This was not raised in  the
       refusal letter and he was not cross-examined about it. In any event,
       the evidence was clear that the events occurred in  Sulaimaniya  [9]
       and he was from Tuz Khoramato which is near Kirkuk [5].


   11. In relation to ground 2, I am satisfied that the Judge gave adequate
       reasons for finding [42] that there had been no  durable  change  in
       that part of Iraq where the Appellant came  from  and  that  it  was
       still a "contested  area".  The  Judge  noted  that  the  background
       evidence presented a mixed picture but was entitled to rely  on  the
       Respondent's  own  evidence  from  the  2017  Country   Policy   and
       Information Note that the situation has in fact declined in his home
       area since April 2015.


   12. The Judge  made  findings  open  to  him  as  to  why  it  would  be
       unreasonable to require him to relocate to the IKR  [41]  given  the
       land  dispute,  difficulty  in  reaching  there,  the   absence   of
       documentation, the absence of a support network, the limited support
       services, and the issues with employment.

   13. In relation to ground 3, the Judge made findings open  to  him  [44,
       46] as to why as a Sunni Muslim, it would be unreasonable to require
       him to relocate to Baghdad. The Judge considered and applied BA  and
       AA and plainly had this in mind when formulating  his  decision.  As
       stated above (see [8 (3)], the Judge set out the multiple factors he
       considered.


   14. In relation to ground 4, the Respondent had conceded that there were
       difficulties with the CSID and this was noted by the Judge [45]. The
       Appellant was not cross examined on this. I am  satisfied  that  the
       Judge was accordingly entitled to make the findings he did.


   15. The grounds amount to nothing more than a disagreement with findings
       the Judge was entitled to make on the evidence. I am  not  therefore
       satisfied that the Judge made any material error of law.





Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
3 January 2018
