
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/09748/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23 March 2018                          | On 1 May 2018                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                     S B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi, instructed by Wilson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  in  1989.   He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Courtney  dismissing
    his appeal against the refusal of his protection claim  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds on 23 November 2017.


Appellant's Immigration History

2.   The Appellant came to the UK in 2009 as a student. In  2015  his  leave
    was curtailed and he made an application for leave to remain on Article
    8 grounds which was unsuccessful. In 2017  he  claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis that he is homosexual. The  Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's
    claim in September 2017 on the basis  that  there  was  sufficiency  of
    protection and the Appellant could internally relocate. The  Respondent
    expressly accepted that the Appellant had been living openly as  a  gay
    man in the UK. At paragraph 66 of the refusal letter she states: "It is
    therefore accepted that you have  had  problems  with  your  family  in
    Bangladesh and have been living as an openly gay man in the UK."

3.   The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Courtney
    on 1 November 2017. The judge noted the Respondent's concession that he
    was living openly as a  gay  man  in  the  UK  and  accepted  that  the
    Appellant would face a real risk of persecution on return to  his  home
    area. However, the judge did not accept that there was a real  risk  of
    persecution for gay men throughout Bangladesh. She found that there was
    sufficiency of protection and it would  not  be  unreasonable  for  the
    Appellant to internally relocate.

4.   The relevant country policy  and  information  note  [CPIN]  which  was
    before the judge at the hearing on 1 November was version  2  published
    on 18 September  2017.   However,  shortly  after  the  hearing  on  16
    November 2017 version 3 was published.  Neither the Respondent nor  the
    Appellant notified the  judge  of  this  development  and  the  judge's
    decision, dated 21 November 2017, was promulgated on 23 November  2017.
    The judge specifically took into account the  CPIN:  Bangladesh  sexual
    orientation and gender identity (September 2017), version 2.

5.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on 5 December  2017.  At
    this  time  he  was  represented  by  different  solicitors  to   those
    instructing Counsel today. In granting  permission,  Judge  Ford  noted
    that the grounds were poorly drafted and did not focus or identify  any
    arguable material error of law. However, he concluded  that  the  CPIN:
    Bangladesh, sexual orientation and gender identity (17  November  2017)
    painted a very different picture as to  the  level  of  risk  to  those
    nationals of Bangladesh who  are  openly  gay  and  the  likelihood  of
    protection being offered by the state  to  those  individuals.  It  was
    arguable that the assessment of risk did  not  adequately  reflect  the
    Home Office's own guidance on the issue as at  the  date  of  decision.
    Permission was granted on that basis.

6.   In her Rule 24 response the Respondent states:
         "3.  In a comprehensive determination Judge  Courtney  has  clearly
             considered all of the evidence presented including the Country
             Policy and information note to which Judge Ford refers at  [3]
             of his decision of 20 December 2017.  The judge  analysed  the
             evidence, applied the ratio of guiding case law  including  HJ
             (Iran)  and  concluded  that  the  discrimination  which   the
             Appellant  may  receive  living  as  an  openly  gay  man   in
             Bangladesh, on relocation to a major city such as Dhaka,  will
             not amount to persecutory treatment.
         4.   It is of note that the Appellant only made a claim for  asylum
             when he had no further avenue to remain in the UK. It is  open
             for the Appellant to seek Entry Clearance to return to  UK  as
             [sic] partner of someone who is settled in UK [sic] should  he
             wish to do so.  Any temporary separation clearly would not  be
             disproportionate. During any separation social services  would
             be seized by law of providing such care  as  is  necessary  as
             defined by law to the appellant's claimed partner."


Submissions

7.   Mr Hoshi relied on his skeleton argument and submitted  that  the  CPIN
    came out before the decision  was  promulgated  but  after  the  appeal
    hearing and that the new evidence, the CPIN, was first acknowledged  at
    the  permission  stage.  He   submitted   that   where   there   is   a
    misunderstanding or ignorance of an established and relevant fact,  for
    example the existence of evidence that can result  in  unfairness  such
    that it amounts to an error of law.

8.   Mr Hoshi referred me to E and R v the Secretary of  State  [2004]  EWCA
    Civ 49.  In that case, E appealed to the Court of  Appeal  against  the
    Immigration Appeal  Tribunal's  refusal  to  grant  him  permission  to
    appeal. He had claimed asylum on the basis that he was a sympathiser of
    the Muslim Brotherhood and feared persecution on return to  Egypt.  The
    IAT concluded that  mistreatment  of  Muslim  Brotherhood  members  was
    related to the 2000 Egyptian elections and that any risk to E  was  now
    historic. E sought to challenge that finding by  relying  on  two  non-
    governmental organisation  reports  concerning  country  conditions  in
    Egypt which had both been published after the IAT  hearing  but  before
    the promulgation of its decision and which were  not  produced  by  him
    until after the promulgation of its  decision.  The  new  material  was
    produced with E's application for permission to appeal. The IAT refused
    permission to appeal because the reports had not been before it at  the
    date of the hearing.

9.   Mr Hoshi submitted that the  position  of  the  Appellant  R  was  very
    similar. He also appealed to the Court  of  Appeal  against  the  IAT's
    refusal to grant him permission to appeal. He had claimed asylum on the
    basis that he  was  Christian  and  feared  persecution  on  return  to
    Afghanistan. The Tribunal concluded that  since  the  Taliban  were  no
    longer in power any risk to R was now historic. R sought  to  challenge
    that finding by relying on a  Home  Office  report  concerning  country
    conditions and an expert report which had both been published after the
    IAT hearing but before the promulgation of its decision and which  were
    not produced by him until after the promulgation of its  decision.  The
    new material was  produced  with  R's  application  for  permission  to
    appeal. The Tribunal refused permission to appeal because the  material
    had not been before it at the date of the hearing.

10.  In E and R, the Court of Appeal  allowed  the  appeals  and  held  that
    where it was shown that an important part of the  Tribunal's  reasoning
    was based on ignorance or mistake of fact it was permissible  to  admit
    new evidence to demonstrate the mistake.  As to the failure  to  adduce
    evidence in question until after  the  promulgation  of  the  decision,
    Carnwath LJ stated at paragraph 94:
         "In the present case, the new evidence was not produced until after
         the decision was promulgated. Mr Kovats [Counsel for the  Secretary
         of State] submits that in such circumstances  the  IAT  would  have
         been entitled to reject it, applying Ladd  v  Marshall  principles,
         because it could have been  made  available  earlier.  We  see  the
         theoretical force of  that  submission.  However,  it  ignores  the
         practical realities. Assuming some legal assistance is available to
         the asylum seeker it is likely to be concentrated at  the  critical
         points in the process: that  is,  for  the  present  purposes,  the
         hearings before the Adjudicator and IAT and  the  consideration  of
         possible appeal following receipt  of  their  decisions.  It  seems
         unrealistic  to  expect  continuous  monitoring  of  potential  new
         evidence in the intervening periods. Even if it  were  possible  it
         would be very difficult for the IAT, as their stated  reasons  made
         clear, to handle such new evidence  administratively.  The  obvious
         point to  review  the  matter,  where  necessary,  is  part  of  an
         application for leave to appeal.  If the discretion of the Tribunal
         is limited in the way we have suggested the extra burden should not
         be unmanageable."

11.  Mr Hoshi submitted that the appeals of E and R  were  remitted  to  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal for consideration under the Ladd v Marshall
    principles.  Mr Hoshi also relied on  MM  (Unfairness;  E  &  R  Sudan)
    [2014] UKUT 105  (IAC)  in  which  McCloskey  J  undertook  a  detailed
    analysis of the authorities in the area including E and R and held:
         "A successful appeal is not dependent on the demonstration of  some
         failing on the part of the First-tier Tribunal. Thus  an  error  of
         law may be found to  have  occurred  in  circumstances  where  some
         material evidence, through no fault of the First-tier Tribunal, was
         not considered with resulting unfairness."

12.  In the case of  MM,  the  material  evidence  was  a  letter  from  the
    Appellant's solicitors who had represented at first instance  and  also
    on appeal. This evidence could  with  reasonable  diligence  have  been
    obtained at an earlier stage and considered at the hearing.   McCloskey
    J, in allowing the appeal, held at paragraph 25:
         "It is established that neither  the  rule  in  Al-Mehdawi  v  SSHD
         [1990] 1 AC 876, that a procedural failure caused by an applicant's
         own representative did not lead to an appeal being in breach of the
         rules of natural justice nor a failure to meet  the  first  of  the
         Ladd v Marshall principles, applies with full rigour in asylum  and
         human rights appeals: see FP (Iran) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 13.  The
         decision of the Court of Appeal in E and R  v  Secretary  of  State
         points towards a broader approach in which the common law right  to
         a fair hearing predominates."


13.  Mr Hoshi submitted that the First-tier Tribunal was not  aware  of  the
    updated CPIN and therefore this had led to unfairness in the asylum and
    human rights context. It was important to take a broad  and  permissive
    approach. The evidence could and should have been before the First-tier
    Tribunal and the solicitor was not at fault. He invited me to apply the
    principles in Ladd v Marshall.

14.   Firstly,  could  the  evidence  have  been  obtained  with  reasonable
    diligence for use at trial. The hearing took place on  1  November  and
    the CPIN was published on 16 November and therefore it could  not  have
    been produced prior to the appeal hearing. The question is  whether  it
    ought to have been brought to the attention of the judge prior  to  the
    promulgation of the  decision  on  23  November.  Mr  Hoshi  relied  on
    Carnwath LJ's rejection  of  this  argument  at  paragraph  94  of  the
    judgment set out above. The permission stage was the obvious  stage  to
    produce such evidence. Mr Hoshi accepted that the Appellant's  previous
    solicitor did not put forward such evidence, but  fortunately  for  the
    Appellant the judge granting permission was aware of the new  CPIN  and
    aware of the solicitor's failure. There  was  also  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's current solicitors, who contacted his  previous  solicitors
    to try and ascertain whether the CPIN of November 2017 was  put  before
    the judge prior to the decision. They received no response  from  their
    various communications.

15.  Mr Hoshi submitted that, in any event,  on  these  facts  the  evidence
    came up at the obvious point, the permission stage, and the  fact  that
    it was pointed out by the judge rather than the Appellant's instructing
    solicitors was irrelevant. This was the appropriate time to  raise  the
    new material and therefore the first principle in Ladd v  Marshall  was
    satisfied.

16.  In relation to the second principle the question was: if  the  evidence
    had been adduced would it  have  had  an  important  but  not  decisive
    result. Mr Hoshi submitted that another judge might well have come to a
    different conclusion had he seen the updated CPIN.

17.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant  would  have  to
    live discreetly to avoid discrimination. At paragraph 59 she states:
         "Although if he  were  not  to  act  discreetly  in  the  place  of
         relocation the Appellant may be the subject of some  discrimination
         in his daily life. I do not consider that such discrimination  even
         if taken cumulatively is capable of amounting to  a  real  risk  of
         being persecuted in Bangladesh. For the same  reason  I  find  that
         requiring Mr B to return to Bangladesh would not lead to  a  breach
         of the Qualification Directive or Article  3  ECHR.   There  is  no
         reason  why  internal  relocation  to  a  major  city  should   not
         ameliorate any risk to a level where it can no longer be considered
         to be real."


18.  At paragraph 67 the judge found:
         "I accept that  same  sex  relationships  are  viewed  as  socially
         unacceptable in Bangladesh and that life for Mr B and  his  partner
         would not be as easy there as in the UK. However, I do not consider
         that they would be prevented from living together there as a couple
         particularly if they were to reside in  a  more  enlightened  urban
         area such as Dhaka. Bangladesh's laws  will  not  have  a  damaging
         effect on the parties'  family  relationship.  There  has  been  no
         suggestion that Mr B and Mr T are part of a gay scene in London and
         they seem to live a low-key existence.  In his witness statement of
         20 October 2017, Mr T says only that in the UK 'we are able  to  go
         out to restaurants for dinner as a couple without feeling  insecure
         or scared'."

19.  Mr Hoshi submitted that the judge found the  Appellant  would  have  to
    live discreetly to avoid discrimination and the  evidence  in  the  new
    CPIN stated that this was enough to render relocation unreasonable.  He
    submitted that principle three of Ladd v Marshall that the evidence  is
    apparently credible but does not need to be incontrovertible,  was  not
    relevant. This was the Respondent's own  guidance  note.   Accordingly,
    having found that the Appellant was an openly gay man at  risk  in  his
    home area the appeal could be allowed on the facts found by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and the concession made by the Respondent.

20.  Mr Melvin submitted that  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  tie  the
    judge's hands and preserve any of the findings. Read as a  whole  there
    was very little difference between the CPIN of September 2017 and  that
    of November 2017. The  new  evidence  would  not  influence  a  further
    decision. The only difference between the CPIN was in  relation  to  HJ
    (Iran). There was nothing new in the Secretary of  State's  policy.  On
    the new evidence there was sufficiency of protection and there had been
    little change in Bangladesh.


Discussion and Conclusions

21.  Mr Hoshi pointed out the differences between versions 2 and  3  of  the
    CPIN. In relation to risk on return to Bangladesh as an openly gay man,
    version 2 states:

         "In general LGBT persons are not open due to social  pressures  and
         norms and to avoid a level of discrimination arising from this. But
         even when taken cumulatively this is not  sufficiently  serious  by
         its nature or repetition as to reach the high threshold of  serious
         harm." (2.3.14 and 3.1.3)


          "Effective state protection against societal discrimination may be
         available on the facts of the case." (3.1.5)

         "It would not in general be unreasonable for an actual or perceived
         gay man who is able to demonstrate a real risk  in  his  home  area
         because of his  particular  circumstances  to  relocate  internally
         within Bangladesh." (2.5.5 and 3.1.5)


22.  Version 3 states, risk on return as an openly gay man:

         "In general an LGBT  person  who  does  not  conceal  their  sexual
         orientation or gender identity may be at risk of treatment which by
         its nature and repetition amounts to persecution or serious  harm."
         (2.3.17 and 3.1.5)

         "In general the state appears able but unwilling to offer effective
         protection." (3.1.6)

         "Internal relocation will not be an option if  it  depends  on  the
         person concealing their sexual orientation and/or  gender  identity
         in the proposed new area for fear of persecution (3.1.7)."


23.  Applying Ladd v Marshall, I find that  the  fresh  evidence  could  not
    have been obtained with reasonable diligence for use at trial. The  new
    CPIN was not published until 16 November and the hearing took place  on
    1  November.  The  Appellant's  representatives  were  not  obliged  to
    continuously monitor potential new evidence in the  intervening  period
    between the hearing and the promulgation of the decision (E and R). The
    appropriate time to disclose such evidence would be on  an  application
    for permission to appeal. Version 3 of  the  CPIN  was  published  days
    before Judge Courtney made her decision.  It was therefore produced  at
    the appropriate moment on the application for permission. I accept that
    the Appellant's previous solicitors failed to bring it to the attention
    of the judge granting permission. However, that was the date upon which
    permission was granted because the judge saw it as a  Robinson  obvious
    point. I adopt a broad approach in which the common law right to a fair
    hearing predominates in asylum and human rights context.

24.  I also find that the second principle in Ladd v Marshall is  satisfied:
    if adduced the fresh evidence would have had an  important  though  not
    decisive influence on the result.  There  are  significant  differences
    between versions 2 and 3 as summarised above.  Further, it  would  also
    have influenced the result in respect of very significant obstacles  in
    paragraph 276ADE.

25.   I  find  that  the  evidence  is  apparently  credible  although   not
    necessarily incontrovertible. The evidence came from the Respondent and
    was not in dispute.  Accordingly, I find that, had the judge been aware
    of it, he may well have come to  a  different  conclusion.  I  set  the
    decision aside on the basis  that,  through  no  fault  of  the  judge,
    material  evidence  was  not  considered  and  that  has  resulted   in
    unfairness.

26.  I remake the decision as follows. Given  the  Respondent's  concessions
    that the Appellant will live as an openly gay  man  in  Bangladesh  and
    would be at risk from his family on return,  and  the  judge's  finding
    that the Appellant would be at risk in his home area, then  the  issues
    to be decided are  whether  there  is  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the  Appellant  to  internally
    relocate.

27.  Applying the low standard of a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood,  the
    information contained in  the  CPIN  leads  me  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk of persecution or serious harm or  treatment
    in breach of Article 3. I rely on the following paragraphs of the CPIN:
         2.3.14   There is an indication that the rise in social  media  has
                led to an increase  in  hate  speech  against  LGBT  people.
                Whilst there are support groups for LGBT persons  some  have
                reduced their activities following the  murder  of  two  gay
                rights activists in 2016.

         2.3.16   In general LGBT persons are not open due to social stigma,
                pressures and norms and to avoid a level  of  discrimination
                and violence arising from  this.  LGBT  persons  who  openly
                express their sexual  orientation  or  gender  identity  are
                likely to be socially excluded, receive threats of  violence
                and some cases (particularly gay men) may be attacked by non-
                state actors. Widespread stigma and discrimination  is  also
                likely to restrict their participation in the community  and
                the workforce and  access  to  healthcare.  The  nature  and
                degree of treatment may  vary  according  to  geography  and
                socioeconomic status.


         2.3.17   Therefore, in general, an LGBT person who does not conceal
                their sexual orientation or gender identity may be  at  risk
                of treatment which by its nature and repetition  amounts  to
                persecution or serious harm.  However,  each  case  must  be
                considered on its facts with  the  onus  on  the  person  to
                demonstrate why their  particular  circumstances  would  put
                them at real risk from non-state actors.


         2.4.1    Where the person's fear is of persecution  and/or  serious
                harm  by  the  state,  they  will  not  be  able  to  obtain
                protection.


         2.4.2    Where the person's fear is of persecution or serious  harm
                from non-state actors, decision makers must  assess  whether
                the state can provide effective protection.


         2.4.3     Some  sources  indicate  that  many  LGBT   persons   who
                experience  societal  ill  treatment  do  not   report   the
                incidents to the police due to a fear of  having  to  reveal
                their sexual  orientation.  LGBT  persons  from  influential
                families may be able to access protection.


         2.4.4    State authorities  have  been  responsible  for  arbitrary
                arrests, detentions, harassment and  discrimination  towards
                LGBT persons with  reports  of  the  police  physically  and
                sexually assaulting them. There  is  some  evidence  of  the
                authorities taking  appropriate  action.  For  example,  the
                police are reported to have investigated the murder  of  the
                two gay rights activists in 2016 and one arrest was made.


         2.4.5    In general the state appears able but unwilling  to  offer
                effective protection and the person  will  not  be  able  to
                avail themselves  of  the  protection  of  the  authorities.
                However each will be needed to be considered on its facts.


         2.5.3    It would not, in general, be unreasonable for  a  gay  man
                who has chosen to live discreetly due to social or religious
                pressures to relocate internally within Bangladesh.  However
                internal relocation will not be an option if it  depends  on
                the person concealing their sexual orientation and/or gender
                identity  in  the  proposed  new  location   for   fear   of
                persecution.


         3.1.3    Reports indicate that LGBT persons  are  reluctant  to  be
                open about their  sexual  identity  due  to  social  stigma,
                pressures and norms, and to avoid a level of  discrimination
                and violence by non-state actors, including  family  members
                and Islamic extremists arising  from  this.   Similarly  the
                LGBT community is closed and private.


         3.1.5    In general an LGBT  person  who  does  not  conceal  their
                sexual orientation or gender identity  may  be  at  risk  of
                treatment which by its  nature  and  repetition  amounts  to
                persecution or  serious  harm.  The  nature  and  degree  of
                treatment may vary according to geography and  socioeconomic
                status. Gay rights activists and bloggers may be at  greater
                risk due to their profile.  Each case must be considered  on
                its facts and merits.


         3.1.6    In general the state appears able but unwilling  to  offer
                effective  protection.   However  each  will  need   to   be
                considered on its facts.


         3.1.7    Internal relocation may be  reasonable  depending  on  the
                person's individual circumstances. For  example  where  they
                have chosen to live discreetly due to  social  or  religious
                pressures. However,  internal  relocation  will  not  be  an
                option if it depends on the person concealing  their  sexual
                orientation and/or  gender  identity  in  the  proposed  new
                location for fear of persecution.

28.  The Appellant's circumstances are that he lives openly as a gay man  in
    the UK and  would  continue  to  do  so  in  Bangladesh.   Accordingly,
    applying the CPIN to the facts as  found  by  the  Respondent  and  the
    judge, there is a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  the  Appellant
    would be at risk of persecution, serious harm or Article 3 treatment on
    return.

29.  In relation to Article 8,  I  find  that  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to integration.  The Appellant has satisfied the requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.


30.   There  was  no  challenge  to  the  judge's  finding  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to show that the Appellant and  his  partner  had
    been living together for two years. The Appellant could not satisfy the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  However,  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant  was  in  a  long-tern  relationship  with  his  partner  and
    therefore Article 8 is engaged. There was no challenge to paragraph  70
    of the judge's decision which dealt with the first  four  questions  in
    Razgar.  I find that the Appellant's removal would be  disproportionate
    in the circumstances. The Appellant would be  unable  to  continue  his
    family life with his partner outside the UK and he would not be able to
    live openly as a gay man. The Appellant's right to family  and  private
    life outweighs the public interest in maintaining immigration  control,
    particularly given the risks on return.

31.  Accordingly, I find that there was material, which was not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that has led  to  unfairness  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.  On the new material the Appellant's case
    succeeds on asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.  The  decision  of  23
    November 2017 is set aside. The Appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum
    and human rights grounds, Article 3 and Article 8.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 27 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 27 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
