
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09170/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2019                       |On 17 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     A B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

    1. The appellant in this appeal is a citizen  of  Albania  born  on  10
       August 1990. He  appeals  with  the  permission  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal against a decision of Judge the  First-tier  Tribunal  M  B
       Hussain, dated 13 April 2019, in which he dismissed the  appellant's
       appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights  grounds
       against the decision of the respondent made on 9 July 2018.


    2. The background to this appeal is  that  the  appellant  entered  the
       United Kingdom with leave to enter as a  Tier  5  religious  migrant
       which was originally  valid  until  22  April  2017  but  which  was
       curtailed on 29 January 2016 so as to expire on 29 March  2016.  The
       appellant then overstayed. On  4  March  2018  he  was  arrested  in
       connection with criminal matters and he claimed asylum.


    3. At his screening interview the appellant gave his religion as Mormon
       and said he had come to the United Kingdom to preach the  gospel  of
       Jesus Christ. He said that, in Albania, he had been the  subject  of
       violence because he is homosexual  and  also  because  he  told  his
       father he had been baptised. He described himself  as  a  missionary
       for his church.


    4. At the substantive interview he said his life was threatened because
       he converted to Christianity from  Islam  and  also  because  he  is
       bisexual, not homosexual. He said he feared his father and  Albanian
       society in general.


    5. While in the detention centre, the  appellant  obtained  a  rule  35
       report showing that he has scars on the left side of his chest.  The
       GP  who  examined  him  stated  the  appellant  was  suffering  with
       depression, flashbacks and nightmares because he had been bullied by
       other Albanians in detention and he  felt  his  symptoms  were  even
       worse. Additionally, he has scars which may be due  to  the  history
       given of being beaten and cut with knives.


    6. The respondent refused the claim. In brief summary,  the  respondent
       did not believe the appellant was either a Mormon  or  bisexual.  In
       any event, the country guidance in IM (Risk - Objective  Evidence  -
       Homosexuals) Albania CG [2003] UKIAT 00067 showed there  was  not  a
       reasonable likelihood gay people are persecuted in Albania.

    7. Prior to the hearing of the appeal, on 1 April 2019, the appellant's
       solicitors wrote to the tribunal to state that  they  did  not  have
       instructions to represent him. However, in the interests of  justice
       and to avoid prejudice to the appellant, they requested the  hearing
       be adjourned. The following day they wrote again  and  asked  to  be
       removed from the record. The appellant did not attend the hearing of
       the appeal. Judge Hussain decided not to adjourn and he proceeded to
       hear the appeal.


    8. In his decision, under the heading My Findings, Judge Hussain stated
       that he had had  regard  to  the  background  evidence  relating  to
       Albania and found there nothing inconsistent  with  the  appellant's
       claims. He  noted  the  respondent  accepted  the  appellant  was  a
       national of Albania. However, he also noted the respondent had given
       a number of reasons for rejecting the credibility of the appellant's
       claim to be bisexual and to have converted to Christianity, as  well
       as his experiences of ill-treatment in Albania. At paragraph  33  of
       his decision, Judge Hussain stated that he considered the respondent
       had  given  cogent  reasons  why  the   appellant's   claim   lacked
       credibility. In effect,  he  agreed  with  those  reasons.  Then  at
       paragraph 34 he stated as follows,


           "34. It seems to me that the appellant has thrown in  everything
           he could possibly find to support his claim, including testimony
           to a medical practitioner who prepared a report in his  support.
           In paragraph 6 of the report of Dr Krishna  Balasubramaniam,  it
           is recorded that the appellant claimed that  his  father  was  a
           gangster and a loan shark. That has echoes of what the appellant
           told the respondent. However, the appellant also told the doctor
           that his father wanted his sons to follow the Muslim religion in
           a strict manner. It seems to me that the  appellant  cannot,  on
           the one hand, portray his father as a merciless murderer and, at
           the same time, a  strict  Muslim.  The  two  things  do  not  go
           together. In my view, this is  a  further  illustration  of  the
           appellant throwing in everything that he is able to, to  bolster
           an otherwise weak claim."


    9. Finally, in paragraph 35, Judge Hussain stated that, if he was wrong
       in making an adverse credibility finding, the  appellant  should  be
       able to obtain protection from the  authorities  in  Albania  and/or
       relocate internally.


   10. The grounds seeking permission to appeal  contain  five  points.  In
       summary, the first point  is  that  Judge  Hussain  failed  to  take
       account of evidence which had  been  filed.  In  particular,  whilst
       noting his agreement with the respondent regarding the impact of the
       lack of evidence supporting the claim made by the appellant that  he
       had had gay partners in the United Kingdom, he  had  overlooked  the
       fact there was a letter from one of them, a Mr  Kanley  McHayle,  in
       the bundle. Secondly, the judge had ignored the expert report Doctor
       Antonia  Young.  Thirdly,  Judge  Hussain  had  made   perverse   or
       irrational findings. This ground appears to be a restatement of  the
       first and second grounds. Fourthly, the judge erred  by  failing  to
       provide adequate reasoning and had made an error of fact. This is  a
       challenge to paragraph 34 of the judge's decision  and  argues  that
       there are clear examples in the world of violent jihadis claiming to
       be strict Muslims. Fifthly, there  had  been  procedural  unfairness
       because the judge should have adjourned. This ground  explains  that
       the appellant had moved address which is why his solicitors had been
       unable to take instructions from him.


   11. Permission to appeal was granted, in my  judgement,  solely  on  the
       first two grounds. Mr Eaton took issue with this  but  it  is  clear
       from the order of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Ford  that  she
       intended that the only  grounds  which  she  considered  to  contain
       arguable errors of law were those she referred to as 2a and  2b.  In
       relation to 2c and 2d (equivalent to the fourth and fifth  grounds),
       the order contains reasons why the grounds are not arguable.


   12. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal.


   13. I heard submissions as to whether  or  not  the  decision  of  Judge
       Hussain must be set aside because it  contains  material  errors  of
       law. Having done so, I have concluded the decision must be set aside
       and re-made. My reasons are as follows.


   14. Mr Eaton's best point, in my judgement, was  his  challenge  to  the
       judge's reliance on the  challenge  made  in  paragraph  36  of  the
       refusal letter that the appellant's failure to adduce evidence  from
       his partners damaged his credibility. At paragraph 20, Judge Hussain
       wrote,

           "The appellant was questioned about his  relationships  in  this
           country when he claimed that he was getting to know  Kanley  and
           Waleed and that he was still connected with his former  partner,
           Shy, whom he described as a very important person in  his  life.
           However, it was noted that the appellant had not  submitted  any
           evidence from these individuals and, therefore, in line with the
           decision in TK (Burundi), his failure to adduce  evidence  which
           was readily available damaged his credibility."


   15. The judge does not expressly adopt  the  respondent's  reasoning  at
       that point. However, it is clear from the decision read as  a  whole
       that he agreed with and adopted the respondent's reasons for refusal
       as his own at paragraph 33. That  is  not  an  error.  However,  the
       problem is that the judge had, by  agreeing  with  the  reasons  for
       refusal, adopted the approach set out in TK (Burundi).


   16. I take this to be a  reference  to  the  well-known  observation  of
       Thomas LJ at paragraph 16 of TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40,
       as follows:


           "Where evidence to support an account given by  a  party  is  or
           should readily be available, a Judge is,  in  my  view,  plainly
           entitled to take  into  account  the  failure  to  provide  that
           evidence and any explanations for that failure. This  may  be  a
           factor of considerable weight in relation to  credibility  where
           there are doubts about the credibility  of  a  party  for  other
           reasons."


   17. The grounds point out, and Mr Eaton reiterated, that the appellant's
       bundle did contain a letter from Kanley McHayle, which Judge Hussain
       has not had regard to in his decision. I have  carefully  considered
       the letter.


   18. The document in question  appears  at  pages  A81  and  A82  of  the
       appellant's bundle. In it Mr McHayle describes the appellant as  his
       "friend" but states their friendship grew stronger and  "we  started
       becoming intimate". He says he is willing to support  the  appellant
       in any way he can but he does not believe in the necessity  for  gay
       people to have to prove they are gay.


   19. Ms Isherwood pointed out that the letter is not signed  and  I  note
       that it does not have a copy of the author's passport or  any  other
       identity document attached to it. The  author  did  not  attend  the
       hearing  to  give  evidence.  However,  the  bundle   does   contain
       transcriptions of some WhatsApp communications between the appellant
       and Mr McHayle.


   20. In the circumstances, I find that  Judge  Hussain  made  a  material
       error of law. He has drawn an adverse inference from the absence  of
       evidence which could reasonably be expected to be made available  in
       circumstances in which such evidence had in fact been  adduced.  The
       error would be immaterial if the evidence was not capable of leading
       the judge to make a different decision. However, the evidence is, in
       my  judgment,  capable  of  bearing  some   weight   and,   in   the
       circumstances, must be deemed to have been capable  of  leading  the
       judge to consider the case differently.

   21. I note as well that the appeal was adjourned on 22 August  2018,  on
       which occasion the appellant attended, because Mr McHayle  had  been
       unable to attend to give evidence following a cycling accident.

   22. Although it is not strictly necessary to decide the point, I do  not
       agree with Mr Eaton that the failure to refer to Dr  Young's  report
       led Judge Hussain to make a material error of law.  A report  by  Dr
       Young was the subject of serious criticism in MF  (Albania)  v  SSHD
       [2014] EWCA Civ 902 because she had allowed herself to take  on  the
       role of advocate. Although she states at the end of  her  report  in
       this case that she has taken this on board and sought to address the
       suggested lack of objectivity,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  report
       prepared in the instant case is vulnerable to a degree of  criticism
       for similar reasons.

   23. Mr Eaton argued the judge erred by failing to apply the most  recent
       country guidance given in BF (Tirana - gay men) Albania [2019]  UKUT
       0093 (IAC), which was promulgated on 26 March 2019, six days  before
       the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and around four weeks  before
       the decision was promulgated. It  is  clear  neither  side  referred
       Judge Hussain to the decision. Mr  Eaton  accepted  the  case  could
       cause the appellant "some difficulties" in  establishing  his  claim
       but he highlighted the first headnote, which states,

           "Particular care must be exercised when assessing  the  risk  of
           violence and the lack of sufficiency of  protection  for  openly
           gay men whose home area is outside Tirana, given the evidence of
           openly gay men from outside Tirana encountering  violence  as  a
           result  of  their  sexuality.  Such  cases  will  turn  on   the
           particular evidence presented."

   24. I have noted above that Judge Hussain decided that, even if he  were
       wrong to make an adverse credibility finding against  the  appellant
       with respect to his sexuality, he would be able to obtain protection
       and relocate. That alternative finding is very briefly expressed and
       does not take account of the up to  date  guidance  provided  in  BF
       (Albania). I find therefore that  the  failure  to  have  regard  to
       country guidance was capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.


   25. The appeal is allowed to the limited extent that the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  representatives  were  in
       agreement that, in the event I were to conclude the decision  should
       be re-made, given the appellant had not attended  the  hearing,  the
       appropriate order was to remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal
       for a re-hearing before another judge with  no  findings  preserved.
       The appellant and his witnesses will have to give oral evidence.

   26. Having considered the Senior President's Practice  Direction  of  15
       September 2012, I make an order under  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
       Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.



NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.  The  appeal  will  be
    heard de novo by another judge in the First-tier Tribunal.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 10 July 2019


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom


