

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09319/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26th February 2020                     |On 2nd March 2020              |
|                                          |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     SO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  SO.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings


         1. The appellant sought and was granted  permission  to  appeal  a
            decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Perry promulgated on 19th
            December 2019.


         2. The judge refused to adjourn the appeal hearing  and  dismissed
            the appeal against the refusal of  the  appellant's  claim  for
            international and human rights protection.

         3. The respondent, in her Rule 24  response  dated  18th  February
            2020  confirmed  that  she  did  not  oppose  the   appellant's
            application for permission and agreed the judge failed to apply
            the correct legal test when considering whether to adjourn  the
            hearing. In those circumstances the respondent  took  the  view
            the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  no
            findings preserved.

         4. I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal judge  failed  to  apply
            the correct test and proceeded with the hearing in  error.  The
            First-tier Tribunal judge  has  erred  in  law  such  that  the
            decision taken is set aside to be remade.

         5. When I have set aside a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
            s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case  to  the
            First-tier Tribunal with directions or remake  it  for  myself.
            The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does
            not assign the function of primary fact finding  to  the  Upper
            Tribunal.


         6. The  Practice  Statement  dated  25th  September  2012  of  the
            Immigration and Asylum Chamber First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
            Tribunal states:

                  7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion  to
                         proceed  to  re-make  the  decision,   instead   of
                         remitting the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
                         unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

                  (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                  (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
                  overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
                  the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


         7. I am satisfied that in this case not  only  has  the  appellant
            been deprived of a fair hearing and an opportunity to  put  her
            case but also the extent of judicial fact finding  required  is
            such that it is appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  First-
            tier Tribunal de novo.

Conclusions:

    The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did/did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard de novo.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


                                    Date 26th February 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
