
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09039/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th August 2017                       |On 25th August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                             lungelwa lloyd moyo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw, Counsel instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Zimbabwe born on 8th February  1974.
    The Appellant arrived in the UK on 23rd December 2000 when he was given
    leave to enter as a visitor for a period of six  months.   He  did  not
    embark, and after various convictions for criminal offences he left the
    UK some time in 2006  or  2007.   The  Appellant  returned  to  the  UK
    illegally on 14th September 2007 and after various further  convictions
    for criminal offences and unsuccessful asylum applications,  eventually
    and on 30th March 2011 the Appellant was convicted at Leeds Crown Court
    of offences of deception and sentenced to two years' imprisonment.   As
    a consequence, the Appellant was served  with  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation  order  against  him.   The  Appellant   made   a   further
    application for asylum but that was refused for the  reasons  given  in
    the Respondent's letter of 15th August 2016  when  it  was  decided  to
    maintain the decision to deport him.  The Appellant appealed,  and  his
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge (the Judge) sitting
    at Birmingham on 27th April 2017.  He decided to allow  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds for the reasons given in his Decision of  1st  May
    2017.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision and on  24th
    May 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  a  material
    error on a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal under the provisions of  paragraph  399(a)
    of HC 395 on  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    children [C1] and [C2].  Particularly in the case of  [C2],  the  Judge
    found that it would be unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK  with
    his father, and that it would contrary to his best interests and unduly
    harsh for [C2] to remain in the UK without his father.

 4. At the hearing, Mrs Aboni referred to the grounds  of  application  and
    argued that the Judge had erred in law in coming  to  this  conclusion.
    The Judge failed to give adequate reasons for his decision.   The  only
    evidence of the effect upon [C2] of his  father's  departure  was  that
    given by the Appellant.  The  report  of  the  Social  Worker  provided
    little supporting evidence.  The fact of the matter was that [C2] lived
    with his mother and not his  father.   The  Judge  failed  to  identify
    factors which outweighed the public interest.

 5. I indicated to Ms Shaw that I did not need to hear from her.  I find no
    material error of law in the decision of the Judge and I  am  satisfied
    that  he  gave  sufficient  reasons  for  his  decision.    The   Judge
    demonstrated that he had carried out the balancing  exercise  necessary
    for any assessment of proportionality.   He acknowledged  at  paragraph
    38 of the Decision that the Appellant had a long  history  of  criminal
    offending.  At paragraph 35, the  Judge  attached  due  weight  to  the
    public interest which weighs heavily in cases involving the deportation
    of foreign  criminals.   The  Judge  was  aware  that  the  Appellant's
    children did not live with him, but found at paragraph 31 that he cared
    for his two children.  The Judge analysed that  relationship  carefully
    and found  that  the  Appellant's  absence  would  have  a  detrimental
    psychological effect upon [C1], and a "devastating impact" on [C2].  It
    is not true to say that there was little or no evidence in  support  of
    this finding apart from that from the Appellant.  There was before  the
    Judge a report from  a  Social  Worker  named  Rukhsana  Farooqi  which
    contained emphatic evidence that it would not be in the  best  interest
    of either child for the Appellant to be deported.  I therefore conclude
    that the Judge came to a conclusion open to him on the evidence  before
    him and which he fully explained.  There was no  misdirection  at  law.
    For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the  Judge.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date   25th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
