
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09702/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |Decision & Reasons promulgated    |
|on 7 September 2017                      |on 31 October 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          GARFIELD ALEXANDER WRIGHT
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Vokes instructed by Rashid & Co Solicitors


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler who allowed the  appeal  on  human
        rights grounds against the decision to deport  the  appellant  from
        the United Kingdom.






Background


     2. Mr Wright is a national of Jamaica born in 1978 who entered the  UK
        on 22 March 1997 using a false identity. Various  applications  for
        leave to remain have been made and granted, periodically, including
        a period of discretionary leave granted to 12  March  2015.  On  11
        March 2015, Mr Wright applied for leave to remain on the grounds of
        family life and 10 years residence which was refused on  18  August
        2016 although the decision was subsequently reviewed and  withdrawn
        by the Home Office.
     3. On 22 May 2015, Mr Wright was convicted of possession  with  intent
        to supply cannabis and possession of cannabis/cannabis resin and on
        24 June 2015 sentenced to 12 months imprisonment  and  on  17  July
        2015 served with notice of a decision to deport him from the United
        Kingdom.
     4. Mr Wright relies on an exception to deportation,  namely  that  his
        removal will breach a Convention right. The basis of the  claim  is
        set out at [3 - 4] of the decision under challenge.
     5. The Judge sets out the evidence and submissions made before  moving
        on to findings of fact from [34] of the decision under challenge.
     6. The Judge did not find Mr Wrights account of attacks and threats he
        and his wife claimed to have suffered in the UK and in  Jamaica  to
        be credible [36]. The Judge did not believe Mr Wrights  account  of
        having been lured to a friend's house to be accused  of  an  affair
        with the mother of  that  friend's  child  and  being  beaten,  yet
        himself being charged with  committing  grievous  bodily  harm  and
        that, even if this account was true, there was no indication of how
        it was relevant to his fear of persecution  in  Jamaica  [37].  The
        Judge did not believe the account of the threat to Mr Wright's wife
        in Jamaica finding it rather convenient that it was alleged to have
        taken place whilst he was out [38]. The Judge found that Mr Wrights
        account was not believed by another judge in a previous appeal  and
        was not believed now and that it was found  to  be  so  lacking  in
        credibility that it was  a  fabrication  designed  to  bolster  his
        asylum claim; leading to the conclusion Mr Wright had not made  out
        a well-founded fear of persecution on return  to  Jamaica  or  that
        there was a real risk of suffering treatment contrary to articles 2
        and 3 or other serious  harm  or  an  entitlement  to  humanitarian
        protection [39]. These are all arguably sustainable findings on the
        facts of this case.
     7. The Judge notes Mr Wright's representative submitted that the  main
        thrust of the claim is article 8 ECHR. The Presenting  Officer  did
        not seek to rely upon the assertion  in  the  refusal  letter  that
        there was no genuine subsisting relationship such as  to  establish
        family life when the evidence showed there  was.  The  Judge  finds
        that with nine children of Mr Wright and his wife, including a new-
        born baby, it will be implausible to  reach  any  other  conclusion
        [41].
     8. The Judge noted the issue in the appeal was whether deportation was
        proportionate [42].
     9. The Judge noted that six of the children are under the  age  of  18
        and British nationals. The Judge found that it will be unduly harsh
        for the children to live in Jamaica as they  live  under  one  roof
        with their parents, attend school, their mother has a job,  and  in
        addition to her wages is in receipt of  substantial  benefits.  The
        family also have access to the NHS  as  is  the  right  of  British
        citizens and the standard of living enjoyed in the UK could not  be
        replicated in Jamaica where the Judge finds they  would  surely  be
        destitute [45].
    10. The Judge considered whether  it  will  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
        children to remain in the UK without their father, in  relation  to
        which evidence was given by Mr Wright, his wife,  and  his  mother.
        The evidence received was that Mr Wright played a significant  part
        in the lives of his children by caring for them, taking them to and
        from school, taking them to the park and preparing their meals. The
        Judge noted that when Mr Wright was in prison his  wife  could  not
        work and needed to be at home to look after the children with  help
        from Mr Wright's mother. The Judge  attached  some  weight  to  the
        letters from the children regarding how their father had  influence
        their lives and the importance of him to  them  before  finding  at
        [46] that it will be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the
        UK with Mr Wright being removed to Jamaica.
    11. The Judge thereafter finds that Mr Wright has satisfied  the  Rules
        and that the situation of his children constitute  exceptional  and
        compassionate circumstances [47].
    12. The Judge, in the alternative, considered the  matter  outside  the
        Rules by reference to section 117C of the 2002 Act in  relation  to
        which the Judge repeats his finding that the effect of  deportation
        on the  children  would  be  unduly  harsh.  The  Judge  thereafter
        considers the effect on Mr Wright's partner  before  concluding  at
        [53] that it would not be proportionate to remove him in  the  face
        of the compelling circumstances set out in the decision.
    13. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was
        granted by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis it
        was arguable the Judge erred  in  law  by  making  findings  as  to
        hardship to the Mr Wright's partner and children without sufficient
        evidence to ground those findings.




Error of law


    14. Mr Mills adopted a  professional  and  pragmatic  approach  to  the
        decision which is that whilst allowing the  appeal  may  have  been
        within the range of possible  findings  open  to  the  Judge,  this
        conclusion could only be reached if the  Judge  had  made  adequate
        findings in relation to  the  key  components  when  assessing  the
        question of whether it was unduly harsh for the children to  remain
        in the United Kingdom if their father is deported.
    15. On behalf of Mr Wright Mr Vokes argued that whilst it may have been
        preferable for the Judge to have structured the decision to  ensure
        that all required findings were in one place, when the decision  is
        read as a whole, it  is  clear  the  Judge  did  consider  all  the
        elements he was required  to  consider  and  the  finding  that  Mr
        Wrights deportation will be unduly harsh was a finding  fully  open
        to the Judge on the evidence.
    16. Mr Vokes sought to rely on the recent  decision  of  the  Court  of
        Appeal in Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  Mandibya
        [2017] EWCA Civ 1002 in which that Court found:


             13.  The correctness of the legal threshold to  be  surmounted
                  by a foreign criminal whose case falls outside paras.  399
                  and 399A of the Immigration Rules, as identified  by  this
                  court in MF (Nigeria), has been affirmed  by  the  Supreme
                  Court in Ali v Secretary of State to the  Home  Department
                  [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799, at [37]-[38] and  [46].
                  Accordingly, I am left in no doubt that the FTT failed  to
                  apply the correct test when  considering  the  case  under
                  Article 8. Therefore, the appeal must be allowed  and  the
                  FTT's decision and that of the Beauty must be set aside.


             14.  Miss Rowlands for the Secretary of State submits that  it
                  is clear that, on application of  the  correct  test,  the
                  respondent's article 8 claim  must  fail.  Therefore,  she
                  says this court should itself decide here and now that the
                  respondent's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
                  decision to deport him should be dismissed.


             15.  I do not agree. Upon remission of the case to the FTT for
                  fresh  consideration,  it  is  possible   that   on   full
                  exploration of the facts the Article 8  interests  of  the
                  family, taken as  a  whole,  might  be  found  to  provide
                  reasons to the  "very  compelling  reasons"  standard,  as
                  explained in the Ali  case,  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
                  great weight of the public interest in  deportation  of  a
                  foreign criminal sentenced to 20 months' imprisonment.  In
                  making the reassessment, the FTT is required to treat  the
                  interests of the  children  is  a  primary  consideration,
                  although  not,  of  course,  as  a  trump  card:  see   ZH
                  (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
                  [2011] UKSC 4; [2011] 2 AC 166 and Zoumbas v Secretary  of
                  State of the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74; [2013] 1  WLR
                  3690.  I do not consider that this court can say,  on  the
                  limited and very out of  date  material  before  us,  that
                  there is no real prospect of the respondent being able  to
                  make  out  his  claim  based  on  Article   8   to   avoid
                  deportation.


    17. In Hesham Ali the Supreme Court found:


             37.   How  is  the  reference  in  rule  398  to  "exceptional
                  circumstances"   to   be   understood,   compatibly   with
                  Convention rights? That question  was  considered  in  the
                  case of MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
                  Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014]  1  WLR  544.  The
                  Court of Appeal accepted the submission made on behalf  of
                  the Secretary of State that the reference  to  exceptional
                  circumstances (an expression which had been  derived  from
                  the Jeunesse line of  case  law)  served  the  purpose  of
                  emphasising that, in the balancing exercise, great  weight
                  should be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  deporting
                  foreign criminals who did not satisfy rules 398 and 399 or
                  399A, and that it was only exceptionally that such foreign
                  criminals would succeed in showing that their rights under
                  article 8 trumped the public interest in their deportation
                  (paras 40 and 41). The court went on to explain that  this
                  did not mean that  a  test  of  exceptionality  was  being
                  applied.  Rather,  the  word   "exceptional"   denoted   a
                  departure from a general rule:


                  "The general rule in the present context is that,  in  the
                  case of a foreign prisoner (sic) to  whom  paragraphs  399
                  and 399A do not apply, very  compelling  reasons  will  be
                  required to outweigh the public interest  in  deportation.
                  These   compelling   reasons    are    the    'exceptional
                  circumstances'." (para 43)


                  The court added that "the exceptional circumstances to  be
                  considered  in  the   balancing   exercise   involve   the
                  application of a proportionality test as required  by  the
                  Strasbourg jurisprudence" (para 44). As explained  in  the
                  next paragraph, those dicta summarise the  effect  of  the
                  new rules, construed compatibly with Convention rights.


             38.  The implication of the new rules is that  rules  399  and
                  399A identify particular categories of case in  which  the
                  Secretary of State accepts that the public interest in the
                  deportation of the offender is outweighed under article  8
                  by countervailing factors.  Cases  not  covered  by  those
                  rules (that is to say, foreign offenders who have received
                  sentences of at least four years,  or  who  have  received
                  sentences of between 12 months and four  years  but  whose
                  private or family life does not meet the  requirements  of
                  rules 399 and 399A) will be dealt with on the  basis  that
                  great weight should  generally  be  given  to  the  public
                  interest in the deportation of such offenders, but that it
                  can be outweighed, applying  a  proportionality  test,  by
                  very compelling circumstances: in other words, by  a  very
                  strong claim indeed, as Laws LJ put it  in  SS  (Nigeria).
                  The countervailing considerations must be very  compelling
                  in order to outweigh the general public  interest  in  the
                  deportation of such offenders, as assessed  by  Parliament
                  and the Secretary of State. The  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
                  indicates relevant factors to consider, and rules 399  and
                  399A provide an indication of the sorts of  matters  which
                  the Secretary of State  regards  as  very  compelling.  As
                  explained at para  26  above,  they  can  include  factors
                  bearing on the  weight  of  the  public  interest  in  the
                  deportation  of  the  particular  offender,  such  as  his
                  conduct since  the  offence  was  committed,  as  well  as
                  factors relating to his  private  or  family  life.  Cases
                  falling within the scope of section 32 of the 2007 Act  in
                  which the public interest in  deportation  is  outweighed,
                  other than those specified in the  new  rules  themselves,
                  are likely to be a very small  minority  (particularly  in
                  non-settled cases). They need not necessarily involve  any
                  circumstance which is exceptional in the  sense  of  being
                  extraordinary (as  counsel  for  the  Secretary  of  State
                  accepted, consistently with Huang [2007] 2  AC  167,  para
                  20),  but  they  can  be  said  to  involve   "exceptional
                  circumstances" in the sense that they involve a  departure
                  from the general rule.


             .....


             46.  These observations apply a fortiori to  tribunals  hearing
                  appeals against deportation decisions. The special feature
                  in that context is that  the  decision  under  review  has
                  involved the application of rules which have been made  by
                  the Secretary of State in the exercise of a responsibility
                  entrusted to her by Parliament, and which  Parliament  has
                  approved. It  is  the  duty  of  appellate  tribunals,  as
                  independent judicial bodies, to make their own  assessment
                  of the proportionality of deportation  in  any  particular
                  case on the basis of their own findings as  to  the  facts
                  and their understanding of the relevant  law.  But,  where
                  the Secretary of State has adopted a  policy  based  on  a
                  general assessment of proportionality, as in  the  present
                  case, they  should  attach  considerable  weight  to  that
                  assessment: in particular, that a  custodial  sentence  of
                  four years or more represents  such  a  serious  level  of
                  offending that  the  public  interest  in  the  offender's
                  deportation   almost   always   outweighs   countervailing
                  considerations of  private  or  family  life;  that  great
                  weight should generally be given to the public interest in
                  the deportation of a foreign offender who has  received  a
                  custodial sentence of more than 12 months; and that, where
                  the circumstances do not fall within rules  399  or  399A,
                  the public interest in the deportation of  such  offenders
                  can generally be outweighed only by countervailing factors
                  which are very compelling, as  explained  in  paras  37-38
                  above.


    18. It is not disputed that the wife and children will not accompany Mr
        Wright to Jamaica if he is deported which means this  is  a  family
        splitting case. It is not disputed that the Court of Appeal made it
        clear that it is a fact sensitive assessment in relation to whether
        the facts allow a finding that the decision  is  unduly  harsh.  Mr
        Mills argues [46] is not adequately reasoned and that on the  facts
        the appellant was not able to show he can overcome the  significant
        hurdle and high threshold.
    19. Mr Vokes argued the decision was not  infected  by  arguable  legal
        error. Mr Wright has lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for  20  years
        lawfully, the conviction  was  for  a  period  of  12  months,  the
        appellant has developed family life with  his  children  which  was
        accepted by the respondent. There is  a  reference  to  an  earlier
        decision and it is argued the Judge adequately reasons the  finding
        on a fact sensitive basis.
    20. In MM (Uganda) and [2016] EWCA Civ 450 it was held that the  phrase
        'unduly harsh' plainly meant the same in  section  117C(5)  of  the
        2002 Act as it did in paragraph 399 of the  Immigration  Rules.  It
        was an ordinary English expression coloured  by  its  context.  The
        context invited emphasis on two factors: first, the public interest
        in the removal of foreign criminals and, secondly, the need  for  a
        proportionate assessment of any interference with Article 8 rights.
        The public interest factor was expressly vouched by  Parliament  in
        section 117C(1). Section 117C(2) provided that the more serious the
        offence committed, the greater the public interest in  deportation.
        That steered the tribunals and the court  towards  a  proportionate
        assessment  of  the  criminal's  deportation  in  any  given  case.
        Accordingly, the more pressing the public interest in his  removal,
        the harder it would be to show that the  effect  on  his  child  or
        partner would be unduly harsh. Any other approach  would  dislocate
        the 'unduly harsh' provisions from  their  context  such  that  the
        question of undue hardship would be decided wholly  without  regard
        to the force of the public interest in deportation. In such a  case
        'unduly' would  be  mistaken  for  'excessive',  which  imported  a
        different  idea.  What  was  due  or  undue  depended  on  all  the
        circumstances, not merely the impact on the child or partner in the
        given case. The expression 'unduly harsh' in  section  117C(5)  and
        paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)  required  consideration  of  all   the
        circumstances, including the criminal's  immigration  and  criminal
        history. MAB was wrongly decided (paras 22 - 26)
    21. In IT (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 932 it was held that the First-tier
        Tribunal had not given appropriate weight to  the  public  interest
        when revoking a deportation order made against a foreign  criminal.
        The undue harshness standard in section 117C  of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  read  in  the  context  of  the
        Immigration Rules, meant that a deportee had  to  demonstrate  that
        there were very compelling reasons for revoking a deportation order
        before its expiry.
    22. In this appeal, the Judge was fully aware of  the  public  interest
        argument relied upon by the Secretary of State. The Judge posed the
        correct question when assessing whether the  undue  harshness  test
        had been satisfied. The Judge clearly refers at [51] to the view of
        the Court of Appeal that "very compelling circumstances involves  a
        proportionality test but seen through the  lens  of  strong  public
        interest" and factors in section 117B and 117C. The Judges specific
        finding at [53] is in the following terms:


             53.  Having considered the appellant's family  life  with  his
                  partner  and  children,  I  also  take  into  account  the
                  seriousness of the appellant's crime,  namely,  possessing
                  cannabis  with  intent  to  supply  it.   This   was   the
                  appellant's first conviction and  he  has  not  reoffended
                  since being sentenced on 24 June 2015. The judge  referred
                  to him as someone of previous good character and a  family
                  man and gave him the most lenient sentence  possible.  The
                  public interest in deporting those criminals  involved  in
                  drugs is high. However, in this case, I consider the  fact
                  that the appellant plays a significant part in bringing up
                  eight children is compelling. Were the only two  or  three
                  children in their late teens,  my  view  might  have  been
                  different. But there are young children and  one  baby  in
                  the appellant's family and I do not consider it  would  be
                  proportionate  to  remove  him  in  the  face   of   these
                  compelling circumstances.


    23. Whilst that decision may appear unduly generous to some, it  cannot
        be said to be outside the range of findings reasonably open to  the
        judge on the evidence. It is not a decision based upon  the  number
        of children as it may appear to be if this  paragraph  is  read  in
        isolation, but assessment upon the  impact  upon  the  family  unit
        composed of two adults and eight children if Mr Wright  is  removed
        when balanced against his immigration and offending history.
    24. It was accepted by  Mr  Mills  in  his  opening  address  that  the
        conclusions are within the range of those reasonably  open  to  the
        judge, the issue being whether the judge had  done  enough  in  the
        decision to justify those findings. Having considered the  material
        before the Judge and submissions made by the advocates I find  that
        it has not been made out that any error that may have been made is,
        on the facts, material to the decision to allow the appeal.
    25. In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60  Lord  Reed  noted  that
        "cases falling within the scope of section 32 of the  2007  Act  in
        which the public interest in deportation is outweighed, other  than
        those specified in the new rules themselves, are  likely  to  be  a
        very small minority (particularly in non-settled cases). They  need
        not necessarily involve any circumstance which  is  exceptional  in
        the sense of being extraordinary (as counsel for the  Secretary  of
        State accepted, consistently with Huang [2007] 2 AC 167, para  20),
        but they can be said to involve "exceptional circumstances" in  the
        sense that they involve a departure from the general rule".
    26. Although the case was decided on its own particular  facts,  in  CD
        (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1433 the Court  of  Appeal  upheld
        the Upper Tribunal who agreed that it would be unduly harsh on  the
        4 children of the appellant to  remain  in  the  UK  without  their
        father who although sentenced to 3 years for  dealing  in  class  A
        drugs was now a very  low  risk  of  offending,  was  committed  to
        change, and there was evidence that the children would find it very
        difficult to cope if their father were separated from them.


Decision

    27. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


        Anonymity


        The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  order.  No  request  for
        anonymity was made to the Upper Tribunal and no such order is made.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 30 October 2017












