
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09111/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 November 2017                           |On 6 December 2017            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     IP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel instructed by Eagle
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Turkey  and  his  date  of  birth  is  1
    February 2000.  He Appellant made an application for asylum  which  was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 17 August 2016.

2.   The Appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Young-Harry in a  decision  that  was  promulgated  on  20  April  2017
    following a hearing on 15 March 2017. Permission was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor on 5 September 2017.

3.   At the hearing before me Mr Kotas conceded that  the  judge  materially
    erred for the reasons identified by the Appellant  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal. I agree.  It is without doubt that the  judge  failed  to  take
    proper account the Appellant's age and vulnerability and he  failed  to
    factor this into the assessment of his evidence. This is  a  procedural
    irregularity resulting in  unfairness.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal is set aside.


Notice of Decision


4.   The decision of the FtT  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal  is  set
    aside.   In the light of the nature of the error,  I  agreed  with  the
    parties that the matter should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing.


Directions


5.   I make the following directions:

    (1)  Representations are to be made by the  Appellant's  solicitors  to
         the First-tier Tribunal within fourteen days of the  date  of  this
         decision, identifying any measures sought to ensure a fair  hearing
         including the necessity of a CMHR.   Regard is  to  be  had  to  AM
         (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]
         EWCA Civ 1123 and  the  Practice  Direction  First-tier  and  Upper
         Tribunal Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Witness, 30  October
         2008 and the Joint Presidential Guidance Note, No. 2 of 2010.


    (2)      Mr Richardson raised concerns at the hearing before  me  about
         the ability to take independent evidence from the Appellant and  no
         doubt those concerns will be explored and taken on board  by  those
         instructing him.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                   Date 1 December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
