
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/09779/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 January 2018                    |On 02 February 2018             |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [F Z]
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms S Rogers of Immigration Advice Centre Ltd.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ruth, promulgated on 11/08/2017  which
allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3.    The Appellant was born on 17/02/1985 and is a  national  of  Iran.  On
11/03/2016  the  Appellant  made  a  protection  claim.  On  31/08/2016  the
Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Ruth  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against   the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  24/10/2017
Judge Pickup gave permission to appeal stating

    1.     The respondent seeks permission to appeal, (in time), against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ruth) who, in a decision and
    reasons  promulgated  on  11/8/2017,  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's  decision  to  reject  his  protection
    claim.


    2.     It is arguable that once the Judge found at [40]  to  [41]  that
    the appellant was involved in the  Basij  and  serious  crimes  against
    humanity by suppression of dissent and including attacks on  civilians,
    it was incumbent on the tribunal  to  consider  whether  he  should  be
    excluded from  protection  of  the  refugee  convention,  following  JG
    (exclusion, risk, Maoists) Nepal [2002] UKAIT 04870.

The Hearing

5.    (a) Mr Diwyncz, for the respondent moved the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
told me that the circumstances  of  this  appeal  are  similar  to  criminal
proceedings in which an  accused  incriminates  himself  in  the  course  of
evidence. He told me that the Judge adjourned the appeal part heard so  that
consideration could be given to article 1F of  the  refugee  convention.  He
told me the once article 1F had been raised the Judge was  obliged  to  deal
with it. The exclusion provisions of 1F had  not  been  considered  in  this
case because the Home Office did not believe what the  appellant  said.  The
decision makes it  clear  that  the  Judge  believed  the  appellant.  After
finding the appellant credible, the Judge finds  at  [41]  of  the  decision
that the appellant was involved in attacking  civilians  and  ensuring  that
civilians being executed were not rescued. He told me  that  those  findings
place a duty on the Judge to consider article 1F of the refugee  convention.


(b)   Mr Diwyncz asked me to find that the decision is tainted  by  material
error of law. He asked me to set the decision aside and remit  the  case  to
the First-tier to be determined of new.

6.    For the respondent, Ms  Rogers  relied  on  the  rule  24  note  dated
02/01/2018. She told me that the decision does not contain  material  errors
of law and that the grounds of appeal are misconceived.  She  told  me  that
the judge followed the  guidance given in Gurung (Refugee exclusion  clauses
especially 1F (b))  Nepal  CG  *  [2002]  UKIAT  04870,  because  the  Judge
adjourned the hearing specifically so that  the  respondent  could  consider
her position in relation to article 1F in the light of the evidence  brought
out in cross-examination. She said that the Secretary  of  State's  position
has consistently been that the appellant is not telling the  truth  so  that
there cannot be article 1F considerations. She told  me  that  there  is  no
evidence to support a finding that the appellant  should  be  excluded  from
the benefit of the refugee convention. She urged me to  dismiss  the  appeal
and allow the decision to stand

Analysis

7.    The appellant claimed to  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
because of he is considered to be apostate. The  appellant  claims  that  he
became a member of the Basij when he was  a  student,  that  he  attended  a
protest as a member of  the  Basij,  but  did  not  follow  orders  to  harm
protesters. The respondent rejects the appellant's  claim  to  have  been  a
member of the Basij.

8.    The Judge summarises the appellant's claim between  [7]  and  [10]  of
the  decision.  Between  [11]  and  [14]  he  summarises  the   respondent's
position. At [18] and [19] the Judge explains that in cross-examination  the
appellant gave answers suggesting that he had been  involved  in  activities
which would require consideration of  exclusion  under  article  1F  of  the
refugee convention. At [20] the Judge explained that he  adjourned  so  that
the respondent could consider her position in the light of  the  appellant's
oral evidence.

9.    At [21] the Judge records that when the hearing resumed  he  was  told
that the respondent does not rely on the exclusion clauses  of  the  refugee
convention.

10.   The Judge's findings of fact are between [29] and [51].  At  [41]  and
[42] of the decision, the Judge notes that under  cross-examination  on  the
first date of hearing the appellant claims to have  been  actively  involved
in attacking civilians. At  the  resumed  hearing  the  appellant  distanced
himself from that evidence. At [42] the Judge finds that the  appellant  was
a member of the Basij. At [43] the Judge decides that as the  respondent  is
not relying on exclusion clauses it is not necessary for the Judge to  reach
any firm conclusions about whether and to what  extent  the  appellant  was,
himself, involved in attacks on  civilians  and  the  policing  of  civilian
executions.

11.   The Judge's  findings  of  fact  only  amount  to  findings  that  the
appellant was a volunteer member of the Basij.

12.    In  AA  (Palestine)  UKIAT  00104  the  Tribunal  indicated  that  an
Adjudicator had an obligation to consider  Article  1F  of  his  own  motion
where the issue is obvious.  Because  the  Judge  raised  article  1F  after
listening to the appellant's oral evidence, and because  the  judge  records
between [41] and [43] that the appellant gives inconsistent  evidence  about
his involvement with the Basij, it is an obvious issue.

13.    At  paragraphs  46  to  48  of  Gurung  (Refugee  exclusion   clauses
especially 1F (b)) Nepal CG * [2002] UKIAT04870 say

    46.    Although the Court of Appeal was here discussing the duty of the
    appellate authorities to consider points which, although not raised  by
    the asylum-seeker, were in his favour, the same  logic,  submitted  Mrs
    Grey, should apply  with  equal  force  to  points  which  are  not  so
    favourable.  Thus if an adjudicator considers that on  the  facts  that
    have emerged (whether on the papers or  at  the  hearing)  there  is  a
    "strong prospect" that one of the three limbs of the  exclusion  clause
    might apply, he should raise the issue.


    47.    We find ourselves in agreement with Mrs  Grey`s  submissions  on
    this point. Because Art  1F  is  in  mandatory  terms,  the  answer  an
    adjudicator must give to the overall question of whether someone  is  a
    refugee  can  only  be  made  by  reference  to  the  elements  of  the
    definitions variously set out in Articles 1A - IF. So long as  the  Art
    1F issues are "obvious" they can, indeed must, be raised.


    48.    When raised in this way by an adjudicator (or the Tribunal), the
    difficult issue then arises of whether an adjournment should be granted
    (or, if so, for how long) so as to  ensure  the  parties  have  had  an
    opportunity to deal with the issue. We do not propose to lay  down  any
    separate  guidelines  on  this  issue  here  save  to  emphasise   that
    adjudicators will no doubt bear  in  mind  that  after  the  events  of
    September 11, the EU Commission has echoed UNHCR`s call  to  States  to
    apply the Exclusion Clauses scrupulously and rigorously.

14.   The Judge followed the guidance in Gurung (Refugee  exclusion  clauses
especially 1F  (b))  Nepal  CG  *  [2002]  UKIAT04870  when  he  granted  an
adjournment as soon as the appellant has given  evidence  which  raised  the
question of consideration of  article  1F.  The  respondent  considered  her
position  and  decided  that  the  appellant  was  not  excluded  from   the
protection of the refugee convention.

15.   After correctly following the guidance in  Gurung  (Refugee  exclusion
clauses especially 1F (b)) Nepal CG *  [2002]  UKIAT04870,  the  Judge  then
falls into error of law because it is obvious that article 1F  consideration
has been raised. At [40] and [41] of the decision the Judge clearly  records
inconsistency in the appellant's evidence  and  says  that  he  prefers  the
evidence  that  the  appellant  was  involved  in  attacking  civilians  and
policing executions. At [43] the Judge  incorrectly  says  that  it  is  not
necessary for him to reach a conclusion about the appellant's activities.

16.   AA (Palestine) UKIAT 00104   says that it is necessary for  the  Judge
to reach a conclusion about the appellant's activities.  It  was  the  Judge
who raised consideration of article 1F of the  refugee  convention.  It  was
then incumbent on the Judge to reach a decision in relation  to  article  1F
of the refugee convention, and that is what the Judge did not do.

17.   The Judge finds that the appellant is  a  member  of  the  Basij;  the
Judge then does not go on to complete his fact-finding. What the  Judge  has
done amounts to an inadequacy of fact finding. In  effect,  the  appellant's
case has only been partially considered. Having  found  that  the  appellant
was a member of the Basij and recording that  the  appellant  gave  evidence
which may amount to evidence of crimes against humanity,  it  was  incumbent
upon the Judge to deal with that evidence and reach a decision. The  Judge's
failure to reconcile a  conflict  in  the  appellant's  evidence  and  reach
conclusions about article 1F of the refugee convention is a  material  error
of law. I must set the decision aside.

18.   As the decision is tainted by material error of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. I am asked to remit this case to the First -tier. I consider  whether
or not I can substitute my own decision,  but  find  that  I  cannot  do  so
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

19.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of  the  findings  of
fact are to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

21.   I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Bradford  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Ruth.

Decision

22.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

23.   I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 11  August  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 31 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
