
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09538/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2019                       |On 18 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 Rovena [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Brown, Counsel instructed by Oliver Hasani
                    Solicitors (Queensbury)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   In a decision sent on 3 April 2019 Judge  Buckwell  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the  appellant,  a  national  of
    Albania, against the decision made by the  respondent  on  7  September
    2018 refusing her protection claim.  The basis of the appellant's claim
    was that she would be at risk of persecution on return at the hands  of
    her family who had attacked her  when  they  learnt  of  her  pregnancy
    following an illicit relationship she had formed with a local  man  and
    saw her as having disgraced family honour.  The judge did not find  the
    appellant's account credible.

2.   The appellant's grounds, as succinctly  summarised  by  the  judge  who
    granted permission were that the judge misdirected himself in:

         "(a) rejecting the Appellant's protection claim almost  exclusively
             on adverse findings of fact and speculation with no  reference
             to the country evidence, the detail of the expert evidence  or
             country guidance caselaw with particular reference to

             (i)  finding it unusual that no family plan was in  place  for
                  the Appellant to  be  married  given  her  strict  Islamic
                  family background,

             (ii) by finding  it  "extremely  surprising"  that  no  female
                  member of the Appellant's family was  aware  or  suspected
                  that she was pregnant and

             (iii)    by finding it inconceivable that  the  Appellant  was
                  not tracked down to her sister's home or her sister  could
                  retrieve  the  Appellant's  travel   document   when   the
                  Appellant remained at sister's house for only one  or  two
                  nights before leaving the  country  and  when  the  sister
                  attended her parents' house  the day after the Appellant's
                  arrival feigned ignorance  of  her  whereabouts  to  allay
                  suspicions and by doing so was able to  discreetly  obtain
                  the Appellant's passport and identity document;

         (b)  by finding that there are organisations that could assist  the
             Appellant and that as an adult she could re-establish  herself
             in Albania on return without reference  to  the  evidence  and
             authority for the basis of that conclusion and what the expert
             country evidence adduced;

         (c)  by failing to consider the best interests of  the  Appellant's
             child given that  the  child  will  be  illegitimate  and  the
             Appellant  presented  with  mental  health  conditions   which
             additionally had not been taken into account and

         (d)  by basing the findings in relation to paragraph 276 ADE of the
             Immigration Rules on an unparticularised assessment."

3.   It is unnecessary to set out my reasons in  full  for  concluding  that
    the judge materially erred in law since both parties were in  agreement
    with me that his decision contains legal errors.

4.   The judge's  principal  error  was  that  he  failed  to  approach  the
    assessment of  credibility  by  reference  to  established  credibility
    indicators, and as a result failed to explain what positive  weight  he
    gave to his finding that the appellant had given a  consistent  account
    (paragraph 73).  He did not appear to dispute that  the  appellant  had
    given sufficient detail of her account.  The  only  factors  the  judge
    expressly weighed against the appellant concerned lack of plausibility.
     In relying exclusively on  findings  of  (im)plausibility,  the  judge
    failed to heed well-established judicial guidance warning against undue
    reliance on implausibility findings: see e.g. HK [2006] EWCA Civ  1037.
    Several of the judge's findings illustrate one  of  the  main  problems
    with undue reliance on plausibility, namely that they depend on finding
    an account wanting by reference to the judge's own idea of  what  would
    be reasonable or likely behaviour in the country of origin without  any
    apparent basis for such a finding in  background  country  information.
    For example, he considered it implausible in  this  case  that  if  the
    appellant's family was strict in its approach to the Islamic faith they
    would have allowed the appellant's sister to  live  together  with  her
    boyfriend prior to formal marriage (paragraph 75).  That  was  contrary
    to the opinion expressed in the expert report by Dr Young who had noted
    "instances even in strict families, where  couples  may  live  together
    (partners of arranged marriages, though not yet  married)  ...  in  the
    past this was more usual, and for the situation to continue  until  the
    final son was born ... usually in the man's  family  home".  The  judge
    should at the very least have explained why he  considered  implausible
    something the country expect did not.

5.   The judge's failure to engage  with  the  expert  report  of  Dr  Young
    appears to be a consequence of his view, expressed at paragraph 73 that
    her report was of no value because it was "written from the  standpoint
    that the Appellant's account is credible" whereas "I do not  find  that
    the Appellant established  her  credibility."   This  formulation  also
    appears, erroneously, to consider that  in  assessing  credibility  the
    judge should not take into account as  part  of  the  evidence  in  the
    round, the expert report.  The  earlier  quotation  from  the  expert's
    report demonstrates that her report was not  simply  written  from  the
    standpoint of the appellant but sought to  consider,  inter  alia,  the
    plausibility of various aspects of the claim.  It is fair to  say  that
    at paragraph 74 Judge Buckwell said that he had "taken into account, in
    considering credibility, in the round, the reports by  Drs  Obuaya  and
    Young", but both before and after this statement  he  had  plainly  not
    taken Dr Young's report into account.

6.   Ms Cunha said that the respondent  had  particular  worries  about  the
    judge's failure to  address  the  best  interests  of  the  child  when
    considering risk on return, given that the child was illegitimate.  All
    that the judge said about this was:

         "With reference to Article 8 ECHR maters it was not asserted by the
         Appellant that she  has  any  partner  in  this  country.   It  was
         accepted that the best interests of Ryan would be  to  remain  with
         the Appellant, so he could return to Albania  with  the  Appellant,
         where his father is also present."

    That failed to address the child's illegitimacy (something not disputed
    by the  respondent)  and  how  that  would  be  viewed  by  family  and
    community.

7.   I am conscious when deciding this case that the judge concerned  is  an
    able and experienced judge, but in light  of  his  faulty  approach  to
    assessment of the appellant's credibility in this  particular  instance
    his decision must be set aside, I see no alternative to the case  being
    remitted to the FtT.

8.   To conclude:

    (1)  The decision of the judge is set aside for material error of law;

    (2)  The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not before  Judge
         Buckwell).

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed   Date: 14 June 2019


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
