
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number PA/09117/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th February 2019                |On 4th September 2020                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms J Sachev (Legal Representative, Bury Law Centre)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis of his conversion to
   Christianity and events in Iran arising out of his expression and
   following his new faith. His application was refused. The appeal against
   the decision was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Evans who dismissed
   the appeal for the reasons given in the decision promulgated on the 26th
   of February 2018. The Judge rejected the Appellant's account of events in
   Iran and considered his conversion and faith as a separate matter finding
   that the Appellant was not a genuine convert and in the circumstances the
   Appellant was not in need of international protection.

2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
   basis that the Judge had failed to consider whether the Appellant was
   credible with regard to his religious observance in the UK. Although the
   Judge had rejected the Appellant's credibility in some aspects, following
   Chiver, the Judge could have found the Appellant credible in respect of
   other aspects.

3. The evidence of the supporting witnesses had been rejected when there
   were no specific shortcomings in their evidence. Permission was initially
   refused but granted on a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal on the
   basis that it was arguable that the Judge erred in placing reliance on
   inconsistencies between his Screening Interview and later evidence.

4. At the hearing both parties maintained their respective positions. The
   oral submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings and are
   referred to where relevant below. In summary it was submitted for the
   Appellant that the rejection of the Darodian witnesses was erroneous,
   although they were not aware of the Appellant's full history the decision
   did not take account of the actual role of the church and that baptism is
   re-birth. Relying on Chiver the rejection of one part of the Appellant's
   evidence did not lead to a wholesale rejection of the case.

5. For the Home Office it was argued that the Refusal Letter had identified
   discrepancies and the Judge had to engage with that and had considered
   the representatives letter and there had been no reasonable explanation
   for the Appellant's wife's non-attendance. In the Screening Interview the
   Appellant had given developed answers. The Judge had rejected the
   Appellant's explanation about events leading to his conversion and none
   of the supporting witnesses knew about how or why the Appellant had
   become a Christian or about the miracle in Iran and some did not know
   about the baptism. The Appellant's evidence and the explanations
   including the solicitors letter had been considered. The Judge needed to
   look carefully at the question of conversion.

6. The fact that an Appellant has given an account which is found to be
   incredible in a core aspect does not automatically lead to a finding that
   all aspects of the claim are false but such findings are relevant in the
   assessment of the Appellant's evidence in respect of other matters that
   are relied on. The Judge was clearly aware that such an approach would be
   inappropriate as the observations in paragraph 48 of the decision
   demonstrate.

7. The analysis that followed paragraph 48 treated the evidence of the
   supporting witnesses discretely. In paragraphs 50 to 54.4 the Judge
   discussed the evidence that related to the Appellant's practice of
   Christianity in the UK and did not dismiss the views of the witnesses as
   lacking bona fides. The Judge was troubled by their lack of knowledge of
   the Appellant himself and his personal history as had been related to the
   Judge in the Tribunal papers.

8. The supporting witnesses were in the nature of experts and while their
   views attracted weight the decision remained that of the Judge who gave
   reasons for not accepting that their view of the Appellant was correct.
   To repeat the decision was not simply an exercise whereby because one
   aspect of the Appellant's account had been rejected the Judge rejected it
   all out of hand, a considered analysis and reasons were given.

9. On a proper and fair reading of the decision the Judge's approach to the
   evidence cannot be said to be superficial or inappropriate. The analysis
   of the Appellant's claim regarding events in Iran and his conversion was
   justified and the discrepancies relied on by the Secretary of State
   properly analysed. The Judge did not treat those as determinative of the
   case but looked to the supporting evidence and analysed that
   independently. In the circumstances the decision was open to the Judge
   for the reasons given and the decision does not contain an error of law.
   Accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands as the
   disposal of the Appellant's appeal.

10. The above decision has been amended under rule 42 of the Upper Tribunal
   (Procedure Rules) to correct an administrative error in paragraph 4. The
   substance of the decisions remains unaltered.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

27th August 2020


Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 27th August 2020
