
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/09057/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|                                     |                                 |
|On 5 October 2018                    |  On 16 October 2018             |
|                                     |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                  KORSH [A]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms L Irvine, advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge D H Clapham promulgated on 25/08/2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 26 February 1995 and is a national of Iraq.  He
arrived in the UK on 14 February 2016 and  claimed  asylum.  The  respondent
refused the appellant's protection claim on 12 August 2016


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  DH  Clapham  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 03 January  2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      3. The Judge accepted that the appellant was a Sunni Kurd  from  Salah
      Al Din province (a contested area). She did not purport  to  make  any
      finding that the area was now safe, but went on to find that it  would
      be reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate  from  Baghdad  (the
      place of return) to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR). However, it is  at
      least arguable that she failed to give sufficient consideration to the
      guidance given in AA(Iraq) relating to admissibility to the IKR  when,
      on the face of it, there appeared to be no evidence to show  that  the
      appellant had any connections there. If the Judge  arguably  erred  in
      that respect, then it  is  also  arguable  that  she  failed  to  give
      sufficient consideration to factors that might be relevant to a proper
      assessment of risk on return to Baghdad in accordance with the country
      guidance decision in BA(Iraq)


      4. Permission to appeal is granted.

The hearing

5. (a) For the appellant Ms Irvine that told me that  the  Judge  failed  to
apply the country guidance given in the cases of AA  (Iraq  CG)  IJR  [2017]
UKUT 00119 (IAC) and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG  [2018]
UKUT 212. She took me straight to [61] of the decision and told me  that  it
is there that the error lies. She told me that  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant is an Iraqi Kurd from Salah Al Din province;  that  Salah  Al  Din
province is a contested area to which  the  appellant  cannot  be  returned;
that the appellant has lost his family and his only  surviving  relative  is
his uncle, who remains in a contested area; that the appellant has no  other
family contacts in either Baghdad or IKR, and  that  the  appellant  has  no
identity documentation.

(b) Ms Irvine relied  on  R  (H)v  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (application of AA (Iraq CG) IJR  [2017]  UKUT  00119  (IAC)  and
told me that the Judge's findings of  fact  are  inadequate,  and  that  the
Judge had not correctly applied the country guidance.

(c) Ms Irvine told me that IKR is impoverished and struggling to  cope  with
the number of IDPs who have flocked to the comparatively  safe  region.  She
told me that the appellant's  prospects  of  finding  employment  there  are
negligible. She then took me to the guidance given in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212.

(d) The thrust of Ms Irvine's argument was that the country  guidance  given
in AA (Iraq) 2017 indicates that the appellant cannot  return  to  Salah  Al
Din because it has been judicially determined that there is  internal  armed
conflict there, and that mere presence in Salah Al Din creates  a  need  for
article 15c protection. As the appellant is a Kurd  he  can  enter  IKR.  He
will be allowed to stay there legally for 20 days and  then  be  allowed  to
remain if he finds employment;  with  the  appellant's  profile  he  has  no
chance of obtaining employment. If he  remains  in  IKR,  he  will  have  to
remain illegally.

(e) Ms Irvine told me that the respondent cannot return a man  to  a  region
where he will inevitably become an unemployed, illegal, resident.  She  told
me that return will make the appellant a destitute IDP  deprived  of  status
in IKR. She told me that means that internal  relocation  is  unduly  harsh,
the appellant is therefore entitled to humanitarian protection.  By  analogy
there are very significant obstacles to reintegration.

(e) Ms Irvine urged me to allow the appellant's appeal and set the  decision
aside.

6. (a) For the respondent, Mr Govan urged  me  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
appeal. Mr Govan told me that the guidance  given  In  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
internal relocation) Iraq CG  [2018]  UKUT  212  makes  it  clear  that  the
appellant can go to IKR. He reminded me that  the  respondent  accepts  that
the appellant is an Iraqi Kurd, and argued that the appellant can recover  a
CSID and safely relocate to IKR.

(b) Mr  Govan  told  me  that  the  respondent's  report  dated  March  2017
indicates the level of violence in Iraq has dropped. He  told  me  that  the
Judge had correctly taken guidance from  relevant  case  law  and  that  the
Judge reached conclusions which were open to her on the facts as  she  found
them to be. He told me that there is no real challenge  to  the  credibility
findings made by the Judge. He urged me to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Analysis

7. The Judge found that that the appellant is an Iraqi Kurd  from  Salah  Al
Din province; that Salah Al Din province is a contested area  to  which  the
appellant cannot be returned; that the appellant has  lost  his  family  and
his only surviving relative is his uncle, who remains in a  contested  area;
that the appellant has no other family contacts in either  Baghdad  to  IKR,
and that the appellant has no identity documentation.  It  is  not  disputed
that the appellant cannot speak Arabic. The permission to appeal notes  that
there is no challenge the Judge's credibility findings.

8. The Court of Appeal provided the  following  guidance  in  AA  (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944.

    A.      INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE   15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE


         1. There is at present  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
              certain parts of Iraq, involving government  security  forces,
              militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group  known  as
              ISIL. The intensity of this armed conflict  in  the  so-called
              "contested  areas",  comprising  the  governorates  of  Anbar,
              Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-din,  is
              such that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds
              for believing that any  civilian  returned  there,  solely  on
              account of his or her presence there, faces  a  real  risk  of
              being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting   to
              serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
              Qualification Directive.

9. In making that finding the Court of Appeal adheres to what  was  said  in
AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 0054 (IAC). The following guidance  is  also  found
in AA (Iraq) 2017

    D.     INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


    14.    As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:


         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);


         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;


         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


      16.   There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).


10. The Judge's decision was promulgated after AA(Iraq) [2017],  but  before
AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 and  K(H)  v
SSHD.

11.   If the Judge had followed the country  guidance  in  AA(Iraq)  [2017],
the facts as she found them to be should have lead her to conclude that  the
appellant cannot return to  his  home  area.  The  Judge  should  then  have
considered internal relocation. Insofar  as  the  Judge  considers  internal
relocation at [61] of the decision, her reasoning there is  inadequate.  The
Judge does not properly explain why she finds that  internal  relocation  to
IKR is a viable  alternative.  The  Judge  does  not  resolve  the  conflict
between the facts as she  found  them  to  be  and  the  guidance  given  at
paragraph 15 of the annexe to AA(Iraq)[2017].  The  guidance  in  AA  (Iraq)
[2017], when applied to the facts as the Judge  found  them  to  be,  should
have drawn the Judge to the conclusion that  not one of  the  considerations
in paragraph 15 of the annex to AA (Iraq) [2017] favour the appellant.

12. The decision promulgated on 25 August 2017  is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. I set it aside. I am able to substitute my own decision.

13. AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212  amended
the guidance given in AA (Iraq) [2017] insofar as it relates to Iraqi  Kurds
(ie the guidance relating to this appellant)

     Section E of  Country  Guidance  annexed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
     decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
     [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is replaced with the following
     guidance:


     1. There are currently no international flights to  the  Iraqi  Kurdish
        Region (IKR). All returns from the United Kingdom are to Baghdad.


     2. For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of Kurdish origin  in  possession
        of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from Baghdad  to  the
        IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable and practical and can  be
        made without a real risk of P suffering persecution,  serious  harm,
        Article 3 ill treatment nor would any difficulties  on  the  journey
        make relocation unduly harsh.


     3. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and  the  IKR
        without either a CSID or a valid passport.

     4. P will face considerable difficulty in making  the  journey  between
        Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or valid passport.  There
        are numerous checkpoints en route, including two checkpoints in  the
        immediate vicinity of the airport.  If P has neither a  CSID  nor  a
        valid passport there is a  real  risk  of  P  being  detained  at  a
        checkpoint until such time as the security  personnel  are  able  to
        verify P's identity.  It is not reasonable to require  P  to  travel
        between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability of  P  to  verify
        his identity at a checkpoint. This normally requires the  attendance
        of a male family member and production of P's identity documents but
        may also be achieved by calling upon "connections" higher up in  the
        chain of command.

     5. Once at the IKR border (land or air) P  would  normally  be  granted
        entry  to  the  territory.  Subject  to  security   screening,   and
        registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would be permitted to
        enter and reside in the IKR with no  further  legal  impediments  or
        requirements. There is no sponsorship requirement for Kurds.

     6. Whether P would be at particular risk of  ill-treatment  during  the
        security screening process must be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
        Additional factors that may increase risk include: (i) coming from a
        family with a known association with ISIL, (ii) coming from an  area
        associated with ISIL and (iii) being a single male of fighting  age.
        P is likely to be able to evidence the fact of recent  arrival  from
        the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of having arrived directly
        from ISIL territory.

     7. If P has family members living  in  the  IKR  cultural  norms  would
        require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances P would,
        in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as to lead
        a 'relatively normal life', which would not be unduly harsh.  It  is
        nevertheless important for decision-makers to determine  the  extent
        of any assistance likely to be provided by P's family on a  case  by
        case basis.

     8.  For  those  without  the  assistance  of  family  in  the  IKR  the
        accommodation options are limited:

                 i) Absent special circumstances it is not reasonably likely
                    that P will be able to gain access to one of the refugee
                    camps in the IKR;  these  camps  are  already  extremely
                    overcrowded and are closed to newcomers. 64% of IDPs are
                    accommodated in private settings with the vast  majority
                    living with family members;


                ii) If P cannot live with a family member, apartments  in  a
                    modern block in a new neighbourhood  are  available  for
                    rent at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;


               iii) P could resort  to  a  'critical  shelter  arrangement',
                    living  in  an  unfinished   or   abandoned   structure,
                    makeshift shelter, tent, mosque, church or squatting  in
                    a government building.  It  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
                    require P to relocate to the IKR if P  will  live  in  a
                    critical  housing  shelter  without  access   to   basic
                    necessities such as food, clean water and clothing;

                iv) In considering whether P would be able to  access  basic
                    necessities, account must be  taken  of  the  fact  that
                    failed asylum seekers are entitled to apply for a  grant
                    under the Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could  give  P
                    access to �1500. Consideration should also be  given  to
                    whether  P  can  obtain  financial  support  from  other
                    sources such as (a)  employment,  (b)  remittances  from
                    relatives abroad, (c) the availability of ad hoc charity
                    or by being able to access PDS rations.

     9. Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed on a case-by-
        case basis taking the following matters into account:


                    i) Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to  be  able  to
                       secure legitimate employment;


                   ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs  living  in  the
                       IKR is 70%;


                  iii) P cannot work without a CSID;

                   iv) Patronage  and  nepotism  continue  to  be  important
                       factors  in  securing  employment.  A  returnee  with
                       family  connections  to  the  region  will   have   a
                       significant advantage in that he would ordinarily  be
                       able  to   call   upon   those   contacts   to   make
                       introductions to prospective employers and  to  vouch
                       for him;

                    v) Skills, education and experience.  Unskilled  workers
                       are at the greatest disadvantage, with the decline in
                       the construction  industry  reducing  the  number  of
                       labouring jobs available;

                   vi) If P is from an area with a marked  association  with
                       ISIL, that may deter prospective employers.

14. AAH was promulgated after the  Judge's  decision.  That  case  does  not
amend the country guidance concerning internal armed conflict  in  Salah  Al
Din. AA(Iraq) [2017] tells me that  there  is  internal  armed  conflict  in
Salah Al Din, which is the appellant's  home  area.  The  respondent  argues
that the violence there has diminished,  but  I  am  not  persuaded  that  I
should depart from country  guidance.  The  appellant  cannot  return  to  a
contested area.

15. AAH and the respondent's own country  policy  and  information  document
dated March 2017 indicate that IKR is struggling to cope with an  influx  of
refugees. The appellant is a young man of fighting age  who  comes  from  an
area which had been dominated by ISIL The appellant  does  not  have  skills
which would make him attractive to  an  employer,  and  has  no  connections
within IKR. The appellant does not have a CSID. AAH tells me that he  cannot
board a plane in Baghdad and that travel  overland  will  be  dangerous  and
unduly harsh. The appellant does not have the assistance of  family  in  IKR
so that his accommodation options are "limited".

16. The background materials and caselaw  tells  me  that  the  unemployment
level amongst IDP's in IKR is 70%. There is no evidence placed before me  to
indicate  that  the  appellant  has  education,   skills,   experience   and
attributes which would place him within the top 30% who  obtain  employment.
It is therefore more the likely appellant  will  face  unemployment.  As  an
unemployed person who does not  originate  from  IKR,  his  legal  right  to
remain within IKR will expire 20 days after arrival.

17. It is most likely that the appellant will be  returned  to  life  as  an
unemployed, homeless, illegal resident. The  inevitable  illegality  of  his
residence reduces  the  already  slim  chance  of  finding  employment.  The
assisted voluntary return grant is nothing more than a short-term  solution.
When the money runs out, the appellant faces homelessness.

18. Within three weeks of return it is most likely that the  appellant  will
be an unemployed, homeless, man with no legal right to remain in IKR.  UNHCR
say that the situation in IKR is a serious humanitarian crisis. It  must  be
unduly harsh to expect the appellant to relocate from an  area  of  internal
armed conflict to a life of destitution as an illegal immigrant.

19. Relying on the background materials and the country guidance caselaw,  I
find that the appellant  is  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  because
there is no viable alternative option of internal relocation.

20. As I find that the appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection,  by
analogy I find that return  will  breach  his  article  3  ECHR  rights.  My
analysis of the facts as the Judge found them to be tells me  that  (as  the
appellant is entitled to Humanitarian protection and as return would  breach
his article 3 rights) there are very significant obstacles to  reintegration
in Iraq.  The  appellant  therefore  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.

21. There is no challenge to the Judge's  credibility  findings.  The  Judge
rejected the appellant's account of a fear of the Hashid  Shabi  group,  and
rejected his account of his father's involvement with the Ba'ath party.  The
appellant's asylum appeal cannot succeed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  25  August  2017  is
tainted by material errors of law. I set it aside.

I substitute my own decision.

The appellant's asylum appeal is dismissed.

The appellant is entitled to Humanitarian Protection.

The appeal is allowed on article 3 & 8 ECHR grounds.







Signed
               Date  10 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



