
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/09735/2018 (P)


                            the immigration Acts


|Determined without a hearing         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|under rule 34                        |On 9 July 2020                        |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between



                                   A P M M

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)


Appellant

                                     and




               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


Respondent



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the original appellant. No  report
of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings. The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this  order,
with reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   By my decision granting permission signed on 11 March 2020 and sent  to
     the parties under cover of a notice dated  16  March  2020,  the  Upper
     Tribunal notified the parties of its proposal to set aside the decision
     of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal D.P.  Herbert  OBE  and  remit  the
     appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a Judge of  that  Tribunal  other
     than Judge Herbert to re-make the decision on the  appellant's  appeal.
     The reasons for the proposal were set  out  in  the  decision  granting
     permission.

2.   In my decision granting permission, the parties were informed that  the
     Upper Tribunal will proceed to issue a decision to give effect  to  its
     proposal unless the parties objected, with reasons, by 4 pm on the 14th
     calendar day after the date of the Tribunal's notice.

3.   To date, no response has been received from the appellant or  from  the
     respondent.

4.   Permission was granted in relation to grounds 1, 3  and  4,  i.e.  that
     the judge arguably erred in law by applying the wrong standard of proof
     in assessing the applicant's credibility  and  that  he  arguably  made
     errors  of  fact  and  other  errors  in  assessing   the   applicant's
     credibility.

5.   Permission was refused on  ground  2.  As  I  explained  in  giving  my
     reasons for refusing permission on  ground  2,  the  applicant's  claim
     under Article 3 of the ECHR stands or falls with his asylum  claim.  It
     was not argued before Judge Herbert that  his  appeal  was  capable  of
     succeeding under Article 2 even if his asylum claim failed.  There  was
     no mention at all of Article 8 in the skeleton argument that was before
     Judge Herbert, nor did the applicant mention in his witness  statements
     any facts that could form the basis of an Article 8 claim.

6.   In all of the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision of  Judge
     Herbert involved the making of an error on a point of law such that the
     decision to dismiss the appeal falls to be set aside. I  set  it  aside
     the decision of Judge Herbert to dismiss the appeal.

7.   For the reasons given at paras 3-5 above and in my decision  notice  of
     March 2020, this appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
     Judge of that Tribunal other than Judge Hebert to re-make the  decision
     on the appellant's appeal,  such  remittal  being  on  the  merits  and
     limited  to  the  following:  the   applicant's   asylum   claim,   his
     humanitarian protection claim and his related Article 3 ECHR claim.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set aside. This case is remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for the decision on the appellant's appeal to be re-
made on the  merits  but  limited  to  the  appellant's  asylum  claim,  his
humanitarian protection claim and the related Article 3 claim,  by  a  judge
other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Herbert.


Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  Date: 15 June 2020
