
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09137/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13 April 2018                        |On 17 April 2018                 |
|                                              |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                    [M L]
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Jones , instructed by Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver promulgated 27.11.17, dismissing on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    8.9.17, to refuse his protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    18.1.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 13.4.18 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found an error of law in the making
    of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside and  remade  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in
    accordance with the directions set out below.

 5. I agree with the preliminary view of Judge Robinson that  there  is  no
    merit in the first ground of  appeal,  which  asserts  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself with regard to corroborating  evidence.  I  do  not
    accept the submission that the judge placed an undue expectation on the
    appellant to adduce  evidence  to  support  his  factual  claim.  I  am
    satisfied that it was open to the judge at [33]  to  reject  the  claim
    that the appellant left in a hurry and to point  out  that  he  brought
    with him a contact number for his mother and also for her landlord.  He
    had spoken with his mother by telephone after arriving in  the  UK  and
    last spoke with her 3 months after his arrival, by which  time  he  had
    been questioned in the Screening Interview and had  already  instructed
    solicitors to act on his behalf. He failed to explain why  he  had  not
    asked for supporting documentation to evidence the adverse attention of
    the police, or his father's death certificate. On  the  facts  of  this
    case it was entirely reasonable to expect the appellant to have  sought
    supporting documentation.

 6. The second ground of appeal is more problematic. It is clear  from  the
    documentation in the case that the appellant  had  been  consistent  in
    asserting membership of the Phat Giap Hoa Hao Thuan Tuy, also known  as
    Pure Hoa Hao Buddism, a  proscribed  religious  sect.  This  is  to  be
    distinguished from a branch of the faith that is sanctioned in Vietnam.
    I understand that 'Thuan Tuy' refers to the 'Pure' branch of the faith.
    The  appellant  explained  the  distinction  at  [6]  of  his   witness
    statement.

 7. At [25] the RFR made the concession that the appellant was  a  follower
    of the Hoa Hao religion. Unfortunately, the RFR  does  not  make  clear
    whether his claim to follow Pure Hoa Hao was accepted rather  than  the
    sanctioned branch of the faith. I  note  that  the  appellant  was  not
    questioned on the difference in his Asylum Interview. For  the  purpose
    of the appeal  before  me,  Mr  Nath  adopted  the  position  that  the
    Secretary of State did not accept the appellant was an adherent of  the
    Pure branch of the faith. However, it is far from clear to me that

 8. From the judge's handwritten notes forming the Record  of  Proceedings,
    it is difficult to decipher whether there were any  submission  on  the
    distinction between the Pure and the sanctions branches of  the  faith.
    On one view, that may be that because of the concession made at [25] of
    the RFR it was assumed that aspect of the appellant's  claim  had  been
    accepted. However, at [34] Judge Oliver notes that it was  argued  that
    there was no dispute that the appellant followed Pure Hoa Hao Buddhism.



 9. In any event at [34] the judge went on to express his opinion that such
    a submission was not an accurate  representation  of  the  respondent's
    position in the RFR. It was pointed out that the  concession  made  was
    because the appellant's knowledge of the faith's core principles. Judge
    Oliver did not challenge the concession but  did  not  accept  that  it
    amounted to a concession that the appellant  was  an  adherent  of  the
    unsanctioned branch of the faith. The  judge  then  stated,  "For  this
    reason he has not established that he faces persecution  or  section  3
    ill-treatment on return." It is not clear from  the  papers  before  me
    whether the judge indicated to the two representatives before him  that
    he intended to  draw  such  a  distinction  in  what  he  accepted  the
    concession amounted to. At [35] the judge made clear  the  significance
    of the finding, stating, "... it  is  the  exaggeration  of  his  claim
    beyond membership of the sanctioned Hoa Hao sect which I find not to be
    credible." The finding was thus crucial to the outcome of the appeal.

10. The problem stems from a lack of clarity in the concession as to  faith
    made by  the  Secretary  of  State.  It  remains  unclear  whether  the
    appellant's claimed membership of the Pure  branch  of  the  faith  was
    accepted. On the other hand, if it were not, I would have expected  the
    RFR to draw that distinction, as it was crucial to the factual basis of
    the appellant's claim.

11. Taking all of this into account, I find that  at  the  very  least  the
    judge may have misconstrued the concession made  by  the  Secretary  of
    State. The  appellant  and  his  representative  should  have  had  the
    opportunity to address the judge on the meaning of the concession  made
    at [25] of the RFR and to call for the Secretary of  State  to  clarify
    its concession. I cannot be satisfied that the matter was resolved with
    procedural  fairness  to  the  appellant.  In  the  circumstances,  the
    decision cannot stand and must be set aside to be remade afresh.

12. It would be  very  helpful  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  the
    remitted appeal for the Secretary of State to  clarify  in  advance  of
    that hearing what was or is intended to be conveyed by  the  concession
    made at [25] of the decision, and the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  issue
    suitable directions to that end.

13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of those issues.

14. In all the circumstances, I remit this appeal for a  fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, I do so on the basis that this is a case which
    falls squarely within the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
    appellant of a fair hearing and  that  the  nature  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal
    to be re-made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
    in rule 2 to deal with cases fairly  and  justly,  including  with  the
    avoidance of delay, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh.



Conclusions:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated





Consequential Directions

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross;

17. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

18. The ELH is 3 hours;

19. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Oliver and Judge Robinson;

20. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

21. An interpreter in Vietnamese will be required;

22. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal purported to make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal has yet to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


