
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/09539/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 December 2020                           |On 26 February 2021           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOUT


                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel, instructed on Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 18  November  2019  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson which refused the  appellant's  asylum
    and Article 3 ECHR claims.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born in 1948.  She has  visited
    the UK for many years to see three of her  children  who  are  resident
    here. The appellant last came to the UK on 24 October 2016 as a visitor
    and overstayed her leave.

 3. On 8 May 2017 the appellant claimed asylum.  Her claim was  refused  on
    19 September 2019. She appealed against that  refusal  and  her  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson on  4  November  2019.  As
    above, he dismissed the protection claim in a  decision  issued  on  18
    November 2019, at the same time allowing the appellant's Article 8 ECHR
    appeal.

 4. The appellant appealed the refusal of her protection claim to the Upper
    Tribunal and in  a  decision  dated  31  January  2020  the  First-tier
    Tribunal granted permission to appeal.  The hearing of the  appellant's
    error of law challenge was then delayed as a  result  of  the  COVID-19
    pandemic and came before us on 16 December 2020.

The Protection Claim

 5. The appellant's core claim was that she would be at risk on  return  to
    Zimbabwe from relatives  of  her  second  husband,  AB,  and  from  the
    authorities as AB's relatives were connected to ZANU  PF,  the  Central
    Intelligence Organisation (CIO) and the police.

 6. The appellant set out that she separated from AB in  1995  but  he  had
    allowed her and their two children, S and A to carry on living  in  the
    house in Belgravia. AB transferred ownership of a valuable property  in
    Harare to the two children in 2011 but with a  clause  indicating  that
    the appellant was permitted to reside in the house until her  death  or
    remarriage. The appellant lived in the house after the children grew up
    and left but as it was too large for her  and  expensive  to  run,  she
    rented it via an agency and the tenants  turned  the  property  into  a
    restaurant.  Members of AB's family,  including  EC  and  JB  began  to
    harass her, accusing her of allowing MDC activities to  take  place  at
    the property in Belgravia. EC was the nephew of AB, who  was  a  Deputy
    Intelligence Office in the  CIO  and  was  a  war  veteran.  JB  was  a
    Superintendent in the police. They also had powerful connections in the
    government and she was contacted directly by a minister, C,  about  the
    use of the property.

 7. In December 2015 the caretaker of the property informed  the  appellant
    that AB's son from a previous marriage, CB, had gone to the  restaurant
    and forced the tenants to leave and then held a ZANU-PF youth meeting.

 8. After AB died in January 2016, his relatives increased the pressure  on
    the appellant  to  give  them  the  original  deeds  to  the  property,
    maintaining that it belonged to them. The appellant  could  not  comply
    with their demands as the property belonged to her children who were no
    longer in Zimbabwe and she had only a copy of  the  deed  of  transfer.
    AB's relatives maintained that the deed of transfer was not valid as AB
    had not had capacity when it was made. The tenants of the property were
    also harassed by AB's family and because they knew that the family  was
    connected to ZANU-PF, the CIO and the police, agreed with their demands
    to pay them the rent rather than the appellant.

 9. On 30 April 2016 EC and CB went to the appellant's  home  and  demanded
    that she surrender the original deeds. The appellant was only  able  to
    show them a copy of the deed of transfer. She was very  concerned  that
    they had found her even though she had not told them where  she  lived.
    In August 2016 EC told the appellant that she and S and A had to attend
    a meeting at the High Court on 1 September 2016 and  were  required  to
    bring with  them  the  original  title  deeds  of  the  property.   The
    appellant was told that if she did not attend she "would  die  for  the
    house".  Neither the appellant nor S and A wanted to attend the hearing
    and, fearing  mistreatment,  the  appellant  left  Zimbabwe,  initially
    staying with another daughter in South Africa.

10. The appellant considered that the court claim was unfounded  but  given
    that AB's family had the backing of ZANU-PF and the CIO, she was afraid
    to defend the claim.  She knew of cases where lives had  been  lost  in
    inheritance disputes in Zimbabwe.   It  was  her  belief  that  if  she
    returned to Zimbabwe she would have no choice but  to  stay  in  hiding
    because she would be found again by AB's family and harmed or would  be
    persecuted by ZANU-PF because the family  had  made  false  allegations
    about her supporting the MDC. She therefore used her entry clearance to
    come to the UK and claimed asylum.

The Refusal Decision dated 19 September 2019

11. In the  refusal  decision  dated  19  September  2019,  the  respondent
    accepted the appellant's  account  that  she  had  been  threatened  on
    numerous occasions because  of  the  property  dispute  with  her  late
    husband's family.  It was also accepted that the family of AB had  made
    allegations against her, maintaining that the property was  being  used
    for MDC and opposition activities. The respondent  also  accepted  that
    AB's family  had  strong  connections  to  ZANU-PF,  including  with  a
    government minister, C, that EC worked for the  CIO  and  was  involved
    with the war veterans and that JB was a Superintendent in the police.

12. The respondent accepted that these matters  supported  the  appellant's
    subjective fear of mistreatment on return but did  not  find  that  her
    fear was objectively well-founded. The appellant was  not  a  political
    person. The country evidence indicated  that  there  was  significantly
    less politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe and that someone having
    no significant MDC profile would not be likely to face difficulties  on
    return.   The  country  guidance  case  of  CM  (EM  country  guidance:
    disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT  00059  (IAC)  indicated  that  the
    appellant could return to a medium density area of Harare  or  Bulawayo
    where she would not suffer adverse attention from ZANU-PF even  if  she
    had a significant anti-government profile. Any risk on return was  also
    reduced as C, the minister who had been involved with AB's  family  had
    left  the  government  after  President  Mnangagwa  took  power.   This
    indicated that it was less likely that ZANU-PF could be  influenced  to
    act against the appellant.  The family  of  AB  had  effectively  taken
    control of the property and this reduced any motivation to harm her  on
    return. It was not accepted that the appellant faced a risk as  a  lone
    woman or that she would be unable to seek  protection  if  a  risk  did
    arise.

First-tier Tribunal Decision dated 18 November 2019

13. In the decision of 18 November 2019, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Monson
    noted in  paragraph  44  that  the  respondent  "has  made  significant
    concessions in the RFRL with respect to the appellant's explanation for
    claiming asylum."  He went on to state:

         "It is not open to me to go behind these factual concessions and  I
         do not propose to do so.  However, I am not required  to  find  the
         appellant credible on matters which fall outside the scope  of  the
         concessions, and which go to the disputed issue of whether her fear
         of persecution on return is objectively well-founded."

14. The judge went on in paragraphs 45 to 52 to find that  the  appellant's
    evidence appeared to refer to two  different  properties  and  not  one
    property.  He found in paragraph 52:

         "52.     The upshot of the above is that it has not been  shown  to
             the lower standard of proof that the Appellant's  children  by
             AB are the legal owners of  the  ...  property;  or  that  the
             original Title Deeds to this property are in their control  or
             in the control of the Appellant, as opposed to  being  in  the
             control of the relatives of AB who took over the  property  in
             2016."

15. Having made this adverse finding, the judge continued:

         "53. In any event, on the Appellant's account, the  relatives  have
             got what they wanted.  They have control of the property,  and
             they have been receiving rent from  it  since  February  2016.
             Since there is no credible documentary  evidence  that  either
             the Appellant or her two children have a legal claim  to  this
             property, there are not substantial grounds for believing that
             the relatives would be unable to sell  the  property  if  they
             wished to do so.

         54.  There are also not substantial grounds for believing that  the
             family of AB would perceive  the  Appellant  as  returning  to
             Zimbabwe in order to fight to get the property back.  Firstly,
             the Appellant did not put up a fight for  the  property  while
             she was there, and secondly, as her legally qualified daughter
             confirmed in her oral evidence, she  does  not  have  a  legal
             claim to it anyway.

         55.  For the above reasons, there is not a real risk of harm to the
             appellant  on  return  to  Zimbabwe  on  account  of  a   past
             inheritance dispute.  There are also not  substantial  grounds
             for  believing  that  the  Appellant  faces  a  real  risk  of
             persecution or serious harm on account of being  perceived  as
             being opposed to ZANU-PF or  the  government.   The  Appellant
             was not accused by AB's family of being  opposed  to  ZANU-PF.
             The accusation was that she has  mismanaged  the  property  by
             allowing her tenant to host opposition party meetings  at  the
             premises.

         56.  On one version of events, the property is still let by [EC] to
             the same tenant.  If so, this underscores the  fact  that  the
             relatives did not genuinely care  about  the  tenant   hosting
             opposition meetings at the premises, but were just using  this
             as an excuse to justify their seizure of the property."

16. The First-tier Tribunal therefore refused the asylum and Article 3 ECHR
    claims. The appeal under Article 8 ECHR was allowed as there were  very
    significant obstacles to reintegration where it was accepted  that  the
    appellant's subjective fear would lead to her living alone in hiding in
    order to avoid the family of AB and adverse interest from ZANU-PF.

Appellant's Grounds

17. The appellant brought three main challenges  to  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The  first  ground  maintained  that  the  adverse
    finding on the facts of the appellant's claim was not open to the First-
    tier Tribunal where her account had been accepted by the respondent and
    was no longer in dispute. The second challenge was to  the  finding  of
    there being no ongoing risk from the relatives of AB. The third  ground
    maintained that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  when  assessing  the
    country evidence.

18. The first ground argued that the judge had made an  error  of  fact  in
    finding that there were two  properties  involved  in  the  appellant's
    account and that this undermined her claim of past and future harm from
    the family of AB.  This had never been  a  matter  in  dispute  at  any
    point, in the respondent's refusal letter or at  the  hearing.  It  was
    unfair of the judge to make this finding without allowing the appellant
    an opportunity to address any concerns where the appeal  had  proceeded
    on the basis that her account was credible.

19. The grounds also maintained that the judge  did  not  provide  adequate
    reasons for concluding that there would be no further risk of harm from
    AB's family on the basis that they were now in control of the  property
    and they would not perceive her return to Zimbabwe as a bid to  reclaim
    the property.  The decision  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant feared EC who, rather than becoming less powerful had  become
    ambassador to Sudan under the Mnangagwa  regime.  JB  remained  in  the
    police and CB  remained  connected  to  ZANU-PF.   The  claim  involved
    imputed political opinion and not merely a  property  dispute,  as  the
    judge appeared to conclude.

20. The grounds also maintained that the judge failed to consider  material
    aspects of  the  country  evidence.   EC  remained  in  a  high-ranking
    position within the Zimbabwe regime, had  been  in  the  CIO  and  this
    raised a risk that the appellant would be stopped  at  the  airport  on
    return.  The respondent's Country Policy Information Note (CPIN)  dated
    February 2019 showed that the CIO continued to monitor Harare  Airport.
    The CPIN also showed that someone merely perceived as  political  could
    be at risk, paragraph 2.4.22 stating:

         "During the January 2019 demonstrations, there  have  been  reports
         that security services used excessive force on protestors and those
         in the vicinity.  Those perceived to have been in opposition to the
         government at this time have  faced  harassment,  arrest  and  ill-
         treatment including assaults, gunshot related injuries and at least
         eight deaths.  Further direct  targeting  of  the  opposition  (and
         perceived opposition) including NGOs continued  after  the  initial
         violence, through house raids, arrests and detentions."

    The First-tier Tribunal had  also  erred  in  failing  to  address  the
    extensive evidence on how widows and women in general  are  treated  in
    Zimbabwe, the materials referring specifically to mistreatment  because
    of property disputes after the death of a husband.

Error of Law Decision

21. Following the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  and  in  response  to
    directions from the Upper Tribunal, in a written  submission  dated  18
    November 2020, the respondent made the following concession:

         "There is a material error of law in the findings of  Judge  Monson
         and a misinterpretation of the appellant's evidence with regards to
         addresses in Zimbabwe."

22. At the hearing on 16  December  2020,  Mr  Walker  clarified  that  the
    respondent accepted that the decision disclosed a material error  on  a
    point of law as the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  an  impermissible
    adverse finding against the appellant. The judge  had  found  that  the
    claim concerned two  properties,  not  one,  when  the  respondent  had
    accepted the appellant's claim that there had  dispute  over  only  one
    property and that the appellant had been threatened  when  AB's  family
    had tried to secure ownership of that property. The appellant  was  not
    given any opportunity to address any concerns on the point. The adverse
    factual finding undermined the assessment of risk of return. Mr  Walker
    submitted that the  First-tier Tribunal decision should be set aside to
    be remade on the basis of the appellant's account being accepted at its
    highest, in line with the respondent's position in the refusal  letter.



23. We found that the respondent's concession was made correctly. The First-
    tier  Tribunal,   without  affording  the  appellant  to  address   any
    concerns, made adverse findings against the appellant on  matters  that
    had been accepted by the respondent. These adverse findings  undermined
    the assessment of risk on return from AB's family and  the  conclusions
    drawn from the country evidence. We found that the decision disclosed a
    material error on a point of law such that it had to be set  aside  for
    the assessment of risk on return to be  remade  on  the  basis  of  the
    agreed facts.

24. We therefore proceeded to hear submissions on risk on return  from  the
    representatives and reserved our decision.

Re-making of the Asylum and Article 3 ECHR claim

25. The appellant claims to be a refugee  whose  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would breach the  provisions  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    Article 3 of the ECHR.  We reminded ourselves that the  burden  was  on
    the appellant to show substantial grounds for believing that she  would
    face a real risk of persecution on  return  for  a  Refugee  Convention
    reason or torture or inhuman and degrading treatment.

26. As before, the respondent does not dispute the appellant's claim or her
    subjective fear of the family of AB and the authorities. We noted  that
    her  fear  is  not  only  from  the  family  themselves  but  from  the
    authorities where the family, falsely, created a profile for her  as  a
    supporter of the opposition, their  strong  links  inside  the  ZANU-PF
    regime and the security services enabling them to  do  so.  Albeit  the
    allegations were made because the family wished to obtain ownership  of
    a valuable property, they  leave  the  appellant  as  someone  with  an
    imputed political opinion as a supporter of the MDC. The  risk  to  her
    from such a profile is a real one given the status of the family of AB,
    even though the allegations were false.

27. We also find that the evidence is sufficient to show that the appellant
    will face ongoing hostility from the family  of  AB  on  return.  Their
    harassment of her in the past was over a period of years and  escalated
    to the extent that her life was threatened. The family has not obtained
    the original title deed of the property and the history shows that they
    were not satisfied with merely being in receipt of the  rental  income,
    commencing court proceedings to  gain  ownership  and  threatening  the
    appellant with physical  harm  if  she  did  not  co-operate  in  those
    proceedings. The family remain in powerful positions and with links  to
    the security organisations including the CIO and war veterans. EC is in
    an even more senior position within the ZANU-PF regime,  having  become
    ambassador to South Sudan. As indicated  in  paragraph  2.4.13  of  the
    respondent's CPIN dated February 2019, "there is a lack  of  clear  and
    cogent evidence that the government  has,  in  practice,  fundamentally
    changes the political environment or how it treats those opposed to the
    state". It did not appear to us that the change  of  President  and  of
    some members of the ZANU-PF government showed that  the  family  of  AB
    were less able to harm her on return. They remain  able  to  use  their
    positions to harass  and  threaten  the  appellant  themselves  and  to
    promote her profile as an active MDC supporter.

28. We also found  that  the  country  evidence  showed  that  the  country
    situation remained poor. The US Department of State's Country Report on
    Human Rights Practices for 2019 issued in March 2020 sets out:


         "Significant human rights issues included:  unlawful  or  arbitrary
         killings of civilians by security  forces;  torture  and  arbitrary
         detention by security forces;  harsh  and  life-threatening  prison
         conditions; political prisoners; arbitrary or unlawful interference
         with  privacy;  serious  problems  with  the  independence  of  the
         judiciary; the worst  forms  of  government  restrictions  on  free
         expression, press, and the internet, including violence, threats of
         violence,  or   unjustified   arrests   or   prosecutions   against
         journalists,  censorship,  site  blocking,  and  the  existence  of
         criminal libel laws; substantial interference with  the  rights  of
         peaceful assembly  and  freedom  of  association;  restrictions  on
         freedom  of  movement;  restrictions  on  political  participation;
         widespread acts of corruption; crimes involving violence or threats
         of violence targeting women and girls; and the  existence  of  laws
         criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual  conduct  between  adults,
         although not enforced.


         Impunity remained a problem. The government took very few steps  to
         identify  or  investigate  officials  who  committed  human  rights
         abuses, and there were no reported arrests or prosecutions of  such
         persons."




         "The government often refused to abide by  judicial  decisions  and
         routinely delayed payment  of  court  costs  or  judgments  awarded
         against it in civil  cases.  Judicial  corruption  was  widespread,
         extending beyond magistrates and judges. For example, NGOs reported
         senior  government  officials  undermined  judicial   independence,
         including by giving farms and homes to judges.


         Magistrates heard the vast majority of cases. Legal experts claimed
         defendants in politically  sensitive  cases  were  less  likely  to
         receive a fair  hearing  in  magistrates'  courts  than  in  higher
         courts.  In  lower  courts  justices  were  more  likely  to   make
         politicized decisions due to the use of threats and intimidation to
         force magistrates, particularly rural magistrates, to rule  in  the
         government's favor."

         "Corruption in both the public and private sectors  persisted.  The
         country continued to experience both petty  and  grand  corruption,
         defined respectively by Transparency International Zimbabwe  as  an
         "everyday abuse of entrusted power  by  low-  to  mid-level  public
         officials" and "an abuse of high-level power by political elites."


29. The 2019 Foreign & Commonwealth Office (FCO) Report issued in July 2020
    sets out:

         "The human rights situation in Zimbabwe deteriorated in  2019.  The
         human rights monitoring group,  Zimbabwe  Peace  Project,  recorded
         2,761 human rights violations in the course of the year.  This  was
         more than a 10% increase on their figures for 2018."

         "In addition, the Zimbabwean  government  had  yet  to  fulfil  its
         commitment to implement in  a  meaningful  way  the  Commission  of
         Inquiry's recommendations following the violence on 1 August  2018,
         when  members  of  the  Zimbabwean  Armed  Forces  opened  fire  on
         protesters killing 6 and injuring many more. The Commission made 24
         recommendations, including that the police urgently complete  their
         investigations to enable the prosecution of those  responsible  for
         all alleged crimes committed."


         "2019 witnessed backsliding  on  political  freedoms  in  Zimbabwe.
         Using  legislation,  the  Zimbabwe  Republic  Police  (ZRP)  issued
         prohibition orders against demonstrations by the opposition and  by
         some civil society and teachers' groups. Where protests went ahead,
         the ZRP responded  heavy-handedly,  including  with  beatings.  The
         Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum reported 67  abductions,  including
         of doctors, artists and  civil  society  activists,  and  21  civil
         society and opposition activists were charged  with  subversion  on
         unclear grounds. None of the trials of the arrested  activists  had
         begun  by  the  end  of  the  year.  In  November,  the  Zimbabwean
         government replaced the repressive 'Public Order and Security  Act'
         with the 'Maintenance of Peace and Order Bill'. This change was  an
         improvement in some  respects,  particularly  the  requirement  for
         presidential assent before the army  could  be  deployed  to  quell
         disorder. However, we had yet to see meaningful  implementation  of
         the new legislation."


         "Zimbabwe experienced high rates of  gender-based  violence.  There
         were  reports  of  physical  and  sexual  violence  against   women
         perpetrated  by  the  security  forces,  particularly  during   the
         protests in January, and when the security forces were deployed  in
         response to Cyclone Idai in March."


30. Against that background, we found that the family of AB,  still  either
    working for the ZANU-PF  regime  or  retaining  links  with  the  state
    security apparatus, remain in a position to cause serious harm  to  the
    appellant on return. The country evidence refers to abuse of power  and
    impunity for members of the regime at different levels. The  harassment
    concerning the disputed property is likely to reoccur together with the
    tactic of imputing an opposition profile to the appellant.  The  family
    were able to locate her in the past when she had sought to avoid  them.
    It has already been accepted that the appellant would be forced to live
    in hiding on return as a  result  of  her  subjective  fear.  The  very
    specific adverse interest in the appellant, the closeness of the family
    members of AB to the  ZANU-PF  regime  and  to  the  security  services
    indicated to us that, as before, the appellant would be unlikely to  be
    able to relocate to avoid them or those they sought to use in order  to
    harm her. The country evidence on the abuse of power by members of  the
    regime at all levels,  the   degree  of  impunity  and  corruption  and
    politicisation of the legal system indicated to us that  the  appellant
    would be unlikely  to  be  able  to  seek  protection  and  would  face
    significant difficulty in avoiding serious adverse  interest  from  her
    husband's relatives, additionally so given her profile as a lone, older
    woman.


31. For all of these reasons we found that the appellant had shown that she
    would be at risk of serious harm if  returned  to  Zimbabwe,  would  be
    unable to relocate or seek sufficient protection to avoid that harm and
    that her claims under the Refugee Convention and Article 3 of the  ECHR
    must succeed.


Notice of Decision

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside for the appeal on asylum  and  Article  3  ECHR
    grounds to be remade.

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal on  Article
    8 ECHR grounds shall stand.

34. We remake the appeal and her asylum  and  Article  3  ECHR  claims  are
    allowed.


Signed: S Pitt                               Date: 25 February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

