
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
PA/09004/2018

                                                 PA/09225/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3rd April 2019                        |On 12th April 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                    M H R
                                     H R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Sellwood, Counsel instructed by Fountain
Solicitors    (Walsall)
For the Respondent:  Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by twin brothers, both of  whom
    are citizens of Afghanistan.  They had  made  protection  claims  which
    were refused by the Secretary of State and their appeals in respect  of
    those decisions came before Judge E M M Smith sitting at Birmingham  on
    17th August 2018.  He dismissed their appeals in a decision promulgated
    on 23rd August 2018.

 2. The basis of the Appellants' claim  was  that  they  were  at  risk  in
    Afghanistan as a result of their mother working for the Red  Cross  and
    both she and the family as a whole being targeted by the Taliban.

 3. Permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Keeffe  on
    the basis that it was arguable that the judge had made  factual  errors
    in his Decision and Reasons.

 4. Before me Miss Everett on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  accepted
    that the decision was tainted by material errors of law and  should  be
    set aside in its entirety.  Among those errors are, firstly,  that  the
    judge made an adverse finding in relation to Section 8.  The  Secretary
    of State had in one of the brother's  refusals  accepted  there  was  a
    reasonable explanation for not having claimed previously, but then  the
    judge found that they could and should have claimed  asylum  in  France
    and there was no reasonable explanation why they had  not.   The  judge
    came to that conclusion because they had a brother in  France  who  had
    claimed asylum.  However, that brother was not in fact in France at the
    relevant time, so that was a factual error.

 5.  Secondly,  the  judge  made  findings  on  the   basis   of   internal
    inconsistencies between the brothers' evidence.  In particular he found
    they were inconsistent as to when their mother had been  injured  in  a
    rocket attack.  The judge found that one brother had said that  it  was
    when he was 16 years old and the other when  he  was  very  young.   He
    based an adverse finding on that inconsistency.   However,  looking  at
    the evidence there was no such inconsistency in that  one  brother  had
    said it was around sixteen years ago and the other one when he was very
    young.

 6. Thirdly, the judge made adverse findings on the basis  of  how  letters
    from the Taliban came to be in the brothers' possession.  Those letters
    were produced in evidence.  The judge  had  speculated  as  to  whether
    those letters had in fact been provided by their parents as opposed  to
    their sister.  That was speculation and an error.

 7. Fourthly, at paragraph 32 of the Decision and Reasons, again  regarding
    the letters from the Taliban, the judge finds  that  the  brothers  had
    been inconsistent about how they had obtained those  letters,  when  in
    fact there  was  no  such  inconsistency.   Both  said  that  they  had
    contacted their sister whose husband had arranged for a friend to  send
    them the letters to the brothers in the UK.  The judge had clearly made
    his findings based on the oral evidence rather than taking all  of  the
    evidence, including the screening and  asylum  substantive  interviews,
    into account.

 8. Fifthly, at paragraph 36 of  the  Decision  and  Reasons,  one  of  the
    reasons the judge gave for not accepting the Appellants  were  at  risk
    was because he had rejected the suggestion that the rocket  attack  was
    linked to their mother working for the Red Cross.  In  fact,  they  had
    never claimed that rocket attack had anything to do with her work,  but
    rather it was a random attack.

Notice of Decision

 9. For all those reasons, Miss Everett accepts that the decision  contains
    material errors of law.  I therefore set  it  aside  in  its  entirety.
    Because there has to be a  de  novo  hearing  on  all  matters,  it  is
    appropriate to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing
    and the appropriate Tribunal centre is Birmingham.

10. On the basis that this is a protection claim I also make  an  anonymity
    direction.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed [pic]                            Date 8th April 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin





