
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09637/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2019                              |On 28 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 2 July 1992 and is a male citizen of Iraq. By
    a decision dated 19 July 2018,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application for international protection.  He  appealed  to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  17
    September 2018, dismissed the appeal.  He  now  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There is a single ground of appeal. The  appellant  was  found  by  the
    judge [49] to be a genuine convert to  Christianity.  The  judge  found
    that the appellant would be able to return to the  Independent  Kurdish
    Region (IKR) where, as a Christian convert, he does not face  the  real
    risk of persecution or ill-treatment contrary to Article  3  ECHR.  The
    appellant challenges the judge's finding on  the  basis  summarised  by
    Judge Kebede in her grant of appeal:

    Arguably, the judge failed to  consider  material  country  information
    relating  to  converts  to  Christianity,  focusing   solely   on   the
    information relating to those born into the faith. All grounds  may  be
    argued.

 3. At the initial hearing at Bradford on  12  March  2019,  the  appellant
    attended. He was not legally represented. I was careful to explain  the
    procedures of the Tribunal to him and I gave him an opportunity to  put
    his case in full to me. He spoke English and I was  satisfied  that  he
    understood what I and Mr Mills, who appeared the  Secretary  of  State,
    said in court.

 4. I find that the appeal should be dismissed. The grounds of appeal  rely
    on country material dealing with the treatment of converts  from  Islam
    to Christianity (i.e. apostates). The  name  'Iraq'  is  used  in  that
    material without distinguishing those areas of Iraq in the  control  of
    the government in Baghdad and those  which  form  part  of  the  former
    territory of Iraq now known as the IKR. It is clear that the judge drew
    a distinction between the treatment of converts inside and outside  the
    IKR. At [67], he wrote;

         "Overall, therefore,  taking  the  country  background  information
         before me in the round, I conclude the that the position in general
         in relation to Christian converts in the IKR is that they will  not
         face treatment which amounts to persecution or  serious  harm  from
         the state or  by  non-state  actors.  I  find  that  this  includes
         evangelical Christians who proselytise." [the judge's emphasis]

 5. The grounds complain that the judge confused the position  of  converts
    with those who were born into the Christian  faith.  What  the  grounds
    ignore is the distinction made by the judge between  the  treatment  of
    Christians generally, both those born into the faith and  converts,  in
    the IKR and elsewhere in Iraq. This distinction was of vital importance
    in this appeal because of the findings which the judge  made  at  [71].
    The judge accepted that the appellant  would  be  removed  to  Baghdad.
    However, he rejected the appellant's claim that he could not access his
    CSID. On the contrary, the judge found that he would be  able  to  rely
    upon his family to reunite him with his CSID and passport 'so  that  he
    will be able to travel onto the  IKR  from  Baghdad  without  any  real
    delay.' That findings not been challenged in grounds of appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. It means that the appellant will not be exposed to real
    risk in Baghdad (see AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944). It also means that
    the  judge's  findings,   specifically   dealing   with   converts   to
    Christianity and relating only to the  IKR  are  legally  sound,  being
    based upon a rational analysis of the country material. I find that the
    judge has reached a conclusion in this appeal which  was  available  to
    him on all the evidence that he has not erred in law  for  the  reasons
    advanced in the grounds of appeal or at all.




Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 13 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

