
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09261/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2018                          |On 6th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     MZR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, of Lincoln's Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  5th
    September 2017 refusing his application for asylum in the  UK.   First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baldwin  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated  on  2nd  July  2018.   The  Appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  claimed  to  have
    arrived in the UK on 6th November 2006 with a two year working  holiday
    visa granted on 24th August 2006.  He was encountered on 8th  September
    2016, questioned and detained, and on 29th  November  2016  he  claimed
    asylum based on his claimed involvement with  the  Bangladesh  National
    Party (BNP) in Bangladesh.  The Appellant claimed that  he  had  joined
    the party in 2003 in Bangladesh and that he was involved in protests in
    October 2006 and left Bangladesh on 6th November 2006.  He claims  that
    a First Information Report (FIR) was issued in  his  name  in  2007  in
    connection with an allegation that he burned a vehicle during  protests
    on 26th October 2006, charges which he claims are false.  The Appellant
    further claimed that he has been involved in sur place activities  with
    the BNP in the UK.

 3. In the reasons for refusal letter the Secretary of State accepted  that
    the Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  However, the  Secretary  of
    State did not accept that the Appellant is a member of the BNP or  that
    he was involved in events in October 2016 in Bangladesh as claimed. The
    Secretary of State also stated that the FIR  which  the  Appellant  had
    submitted had been referred to Ralon for verification and were found to
    be non-genuine.  The Secretary  of  State  considered  the  significant
    delay before the Appellant claimed  asylum.   The  Secretary  of  State
    rejected the Appellant's claim that he is a member of the BNP, that  he
    has been persecuted for being a member of the BNP and that  the  police
    have a case against him. The respondent rejected the Appellant's  claim
    that he has a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  his  political
    opinion in Bangladesh.



Error of Law

 4. The Grounds of Appeal are lengthy and the grant of permission to appeal
    too is lengthy.  Mr Ahmed submitted a ten-page  skeleton  argument  for
    the hearing which largely repeats the Grounds of Appeal.  Although  the
    grounds are lengthy Mr Ahmed focused on a number of  those  grounds  at
    the hearing which narrowed them somewhat.

 5. However I deal with the grounds as they are set out in the  application
    for permission to appeal.  In the first ground it is contended that the
    judge appears to have found the Appellant's witness,  Mr  Raja,  to  be
    credible.  It is contended that Mr Raja's evidence goes to the heart of
    the Appellant's case that the Appellant is the treasurer of the Greater
    London branch of the BNP.  It is contended that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge erred in not giving due weight to Mr  Raja's  evidence.   In  the
    Rule 24 response and at the hearing Mr Bramble submitted that the judge
    properly took into account Mr Raja's evidence.

 6. The judge dealt with Mr Raja's evidence in the following way. He  noted
    at paragraph 17 that Mr Raja said that he was the secretary general  of
    Greater London branch of the  BNP  and  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    promoted to treasurer, attended and participated in its programmes  and
    was a dedicated and  passionate  activist.   The  judge  addressed  the
    evidence of Mr Raja at paragraph  28  where  he  states  "Mr  Raja  may
    possibly have been duped into believing the Appellant was passionate in
    his BNP leanings when he was in Bangladesh but he was honest enough  to
    concede that he had never met the  Appellant  before  2008/2009".   The
    judge went on to say that Mr Raja would have been someone to  whom  the
    Appellant could have asked advice about asylum and said:

         "If Mr Raj genuinely believed the Appellant would be at  real  risk
         in Bangladesh it would be astonishing if he  had  not  advised  him
         long ago to claim asylum - yet there is no suggestion that he  ever
         did so.  It would seem highly  unlikely  that  the  Appellant  ever
         mentioned to him before he claimed asylum that he had  fears  about
         returning to Bangladesh.  That is a further reason for doubting the
         genuineness of the core of the Appellant's claim."

 7. In my view the judge clearly dealt with the evidence from Mr Raja.  The
    judge clearly considered the evidence from Mr  Raja  in  light  of  the
    judge's findings that the Appellant has recently become  involved  with
    the BNP following his arrest and detention.  In my view the conclusions
    reached by the judge in relation to Mr Raja demonstrate that he did  in
    fact consider that evidence and reached conclusions open to him on  the
    basis of that evidence.  The submission that the judge failed  to  give
    due weight to the evidence of Mr Raja is misplaced.  The weight  to  be
    attached by the judge to a piece of evidence was a matter for the judge
    himself.

 8. Paragraph 3 of the grounds assert that the judge  failed  to  give  due
    weight to the video and photographic evidence.  However the judge dealt
    with those matters at paragraph 28 and reached conclusions open to  him
    in relation to the video and photographic evidence.

 9. Paragraph 5 of the grounds contend that the Appellant's  activities  in
    the UK and his wish to continue to express his  political  opinions  in
    Bangladesh would give rise  to  a  real  risk  of  future  persecution.
    However the judge expressly considered  this  at  paragraph  29  where,
    after considering all the evidence, the judge said that it would not be
    easy for the Bangladeshi authorities to identify the Appellant visually
    or to make connections through his name given that the  Appellant  made
    it clear that there was no other incident in  Bangladesh  on  which  he
    could rely.  The judge said:

         "I do not believe for one moment that the Appellant  would  sustain
         his recent burst of UK political activity in  Bangladesh  and  that
         that would not be out of fear but, rather, because the timing of it
         strongly suggests that the Appellant was simply looking for another
         way in which he might be allowed to stay in the UK." [29]

10.  Therefore,  at  paragraph  29  the  judge  looked  at  the  individual
    circumstances of this Appellant as found by him and considered  whether
    his circumstances would put him at risk.  This approach  is  consistent
    with the background evidence relied upon by Mr Ahmed at the hearing. He
    referred to the Country of Origin Information Report at page 116 of the
    Appellant's bundle and in particular to 1.4 of the Country  Information
    and Guidance on Bangladesh: Opposition to the Government February  2015
    which was before the judge which states:

         "Membership or perceived support of groups opposed to  the  current
         government does not of itself give rise to a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution  in  Bangladesh,  but  may  do  so  depending  on   the
         individual circumstances of the applicant."

11. It  is  contended  at  paragraph  6  of  the  grounds  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself in relation to  the  letter  from  the  Appellant's
    advocate at paragraphs 25 and 26 of the determination.  It is contended
    that Mr Matin is a qualified lawyer in Bangladesh and that the contents
    of his letter are consistent with the  background  evidence  submitted.
    Paragraph 7 goes on to say that the judge was wrong to doubt  a  member
    of the bar in Bangladesh.

12. However the judge took into account  the  evidence  from  Mr  Matin  at
    paragraphs 24, 25 and 26 of the decision.  This is in  the  context  of
    the Secretary of State's assertion that checks had been  undertaken  in
    relation to the FIR report on behalf of the Secretary  of  State.   The
    judge compared the evidence from Mr Matin with the  evidence  from  the
    Secretary of State as  to  the  registration  of  the  FIR  report  and
    decided, for the reasons set out in paragraph 25, that he preferred the
    evidence of the Secretary of State  and  was  satisfied  that  the  FIR
    submitted by the Appellant was  not  genuine.   The  judge  pointed  to
    further deficiencies in Mr Matin's letter, in particular noting that Mr
    Matin did not state when the Appellant first sought his help  and  that
    the Appellant himself had failed to state in his interview that he  had
    apparently retained a lawyer since 2007.  In  my  view  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider all of this evidence and to reach the  conclusions
    he did in relation  to  the  letter  from  the  Appellant's  lawyer  in
    Bangladesh.

13. At the hearing Mr Ahmed contended that the judge erred in his  approach
    to the evidence from Mr Matin in the context of the background evidence
    at page 74 of the Appellant's supplementary bundle  which  states  that
    around 50,074 cases have been filed against  1,191,449  BNP  activists.
    He contended that it is for this reason that  the  local  police  would
    deny that any case had been lodged against the Appellant.   However  in
    my view the judge engaged with this issue at paragraph 25 and reached a
    conclusion  open  to  him  having  considered  the  evidence  from  the
    Secretary of State and from Mr Matin.

14. It is asserted at paragraph 8 of the grounds that the  judge  erred  in
    his approach to social media at paragraphs 24 and 26 of  the  decision.
    However the judge dealt with that issue at paragraphs  28  and  29  and
    concluded that the  Appellant  could  not  be  identified  through  the
    photographs or a video.  This was a conclusion open to the judge on the
    basis of the evidence.

15. At paragraph 10 of the grounds a number of apparent factual errors  are
    identified.  It is stated that the judge was mistaken at  paragraph  24
    in saying that the Appellant had been unable to name the MP and Lord he
    had met.  At the hearing Mr  Ahmed  pointed  to  a  photograph  of  the
    Appellant with Lord Qurban at page 59 of the Appellant's  bundle.   The
    criticism made by the judge of the Appellant's evidence  was  that  the
    Appellant had not given the name of the MP and the Lord in  his  asylum
    interview.  Mr Ahmed was unable to point  to  anywhere  in  the  asylum
    interview where the Appellant had named the MP or Lord.  Therefore  the
    judge made no factual error at paragraph 24 in relation to this  issue.



16. It is contended that at paragraphs 20, 26 and 28 of  the  decision  the
    judge appears to have concluded that the Appellant submitted recent and
    post-asylum claim evidence whereas it is contended that the photographs
    submitted were from 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018 and that the  video
    contains demonstrations which took place in 2015, 2016, 2017 and  2018.
    It is contended that the Appellant became a member of the UK  BNP  well
    before he claimed asylum.

17. However at the hearing before me Mr Ahmed accepted  that  many  of  the
    photographs in the bundle are not dated.  The photographs in the bundle
    have written commentary made by the Appellant.  In any event  there  is
    no objective verification for even those which are  dated  to  indicate
    that the  events  occurred  on  the  dates  claimed.   The  judge  also
    obviously considered a number of general credibility findings,  so  for
    example at  paragraph  27  when  considering  the  Appellant's  alleged
    political activity in the UK,  the  judge  considered  the  Appellant's
    delay in claiming asylum and the circumstances in  which  he  made  his
    claim.  The judge found at paragraph 28:

         "I do not believe for one moment that he became involved in any way
         politically in the UK until comparatively recently,  though  it  is
         possible he had started to prepare the ground for making the  claim
         before  his  detention   propelled   him   into   getting   himself
         photographed and filmed as much as he possibly  could  during  2017
         and the first few months of 2018."

    It is clear therefore that the judge did not make a definitive  finding
    that the Appellant only became involved with political activity in  the
    UK after claiming asylum.  It is clear the judge considered that it may
    have  been  for  a  period  of  time  before  his  arrest.   In   these
    circumstances in my view the judge did not make any material  error  in
    considering this issue.

18. Paragraph 13 of the grounds advances a number of further alleged errors
    in the decision.  These relate  to  the  treatment  of  the  background
    evidence.  However the judge made clear findings that the Appellant was
    not credible and accordingly the background evidence was  not  relevant
    in this context.

19. At the hearing Mr Ahmed contended that the judge had erred at paragraph
    28 where he said about the evidence of the  Appellant's  activities  in
    the UK "At no time can one hear him giving a speech and his most active
    role would appear to have been using a megaphone on occasions to  shout
    out one or two words for fellow demonstrators  to  return".   Mr  Ahmed
    submitted that this was an error of fact based on  the  photographs  in
    the Appellant's bundle and supplementary bundle which he claims  showed
    the Appellant  making  speeches.   However  the  photographs  show  the
    Appellant as part of a crowd and in my view  none  of  the  photographs
    conclusively show that the Appellant was making speeches. Accordingly I
    has not been established that that the judge made an error of  fact  at
    paragraph 28 as claimed.

20. At the hearing Mr Ahmed also contended that the judge erred in  finding
    that the Appellant's post as treasurer for the Greater London  area  is
    not a public-facing one [26] whereas in his submission attending public
    meetings would involve a public element.  However I also note  that  at
    paragraph 26 the judge said that if the Appellant did indeed  hold  the
    post of treasurer for the Greater London area that such a post  is  not
    public-facing and would appear  to  be  largely  a  venue  booking  and
    bookkeeping role.  The judge went on to say:

         "Furthermore, the Appellant has provided no letter-headed notepaper
         recording his function, something  one  can  reasonably  assume  he
         would  need  in  order  to   write   to   members   about   overdue
         subscriptions, booking venues etc.   Nor  has  any  minute  of  his
         appointment been provided."

    The judge found that the Appellant was unable to offer any  explanation
    for his failure to provide any corroborative evidence  in  relation  to
    his role.  In my view these conclusions were open to the judge  on  the
    evidence and no material error of fact has been disclosed.

21. At the hearing Mr Ahmed further submitted that the Appellant had  given
    evidence in relation to the position  he  held  in  Bangladesh  and  he
    relied upon paragraphs 71 to 72 of the Appellant's bundle,  this  is  a
    translation of a document relating to Bangladesh Jatiotabadi Chatrodal,
    which he claims names the Appellant as general secretary.  He contended
    that the judge failed to take this  piece  of  evidence  into  account.
    However the judge did refer to this evidence at paragraph 24  where  he
    noted that there  was  no  evidence  of  the  Appellant  being  general
    secretary  of  the  local  student  wing  in  Bangladesh  "beyond   the
    handwritten list of people in the local group he said had been  defunct
    now for a decade".  That refers to the handwritten list at paragraph 73
    of which the document  at  paragraphs  71  and  72  is  a  translation.
    Accordingly that criticism has not been made out.

22. As set out above in my view none of the grounds put forward  have  been
    made out.   The  judge  addressed  all  of  the  evidence  and  reached
    conclusions open to him on that  evidence.   The  grounds  disclose  no
    material error of law.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 2nd November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 2nd November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
