
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09998/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2019                     |On 20 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                H M W (Iraq)
                           [anonymity order made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Popal, Counsel, instructed by HS Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of  Iraq  from  Tuz  Khurmatu  (also
    called Duz-Khurmatu) in the Salah al-Din governorate.  He appealed with
    permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on  1  March
    2018 dismissing his appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal  to
    grant him refugee  protection,  humanitarian  protection  or  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.   The  background
    to the appeal is set out in my error of law decision.

 2. On 11 July 2017, the Court of Appeal  handed  down  a  judgment  in  AA
    (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    944, replacing all existing country guidance on Iraq.  Further  country
    guidance was given after the First-tier Tribunal decision in AAH (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation) (CG) [2018] UKUT 212  (IAC),  on  26  June
    2018.  It is common ground that there was evidence  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal concerning fighting in Tuz Khurmatu, the area from  which
    the appellant claimed to originate.  The evidence of  conflict  in  Tuz
    Khurmatu was overlooked in the decision and that is a material error of
    fact at the level of an error of law.

 3. By a decision sent to the parties on 27 December 2018, I set aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to that limited  extent,  and  gave
    directions for further submissions to  enable  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    consider to whether the appellant's home area of Tuz Khurmatu is  in  a
    contested area of Iraq, and if so, whether he can lawfully be  returned
    to that area or has an internal relocation option in  another  part  of
    Iraq.  The parties were directed to engage with  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in  AA  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  833  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC), promulgated on 26 June 2018.

 4. I indicated that on receipt of those submissions,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    would decide whether the decision in this appeal could be remade on the
    papers and submissions before it, or whether a further oral hearing was
    required.

 5. Having read  the  evidence  and  submissions  which  the  parties  have
    advanced, I do not consider that it is necessary to convene  a  further
    oral hearing and I proceed to remake the decision.

Country guidance:  the AAH decision

 6. The Upper Tribunal gave country guidance on 26 June 2018 in AAH  (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation) (CG) [2018] UKUT 212  (IAC).   So  far  as
    relevant to the present appeal, that guidance was as follows:

         Section E of Country Guidance annexed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  is  replaced  with  the
         following guidance:

         1.   Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
         to obtain a new CSID, whether P is able to do so, or do so within a
         reasonable time frame, will depend on the individual circumstances.
         Factors to be considered include:

             i)   Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
             information about the location  of  his  entry  in  the  civil
             register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or  an
             expired CSID would  all  be  of  substantial  assistance.  For
             someone in possession of one or more of  these  documents  the
             process should be straightforward. A laissez-passer should not
             be counted for these purposes: these can be issued without any
             other form of ID being available, are not of any assistance in
             'tracing back' to the family record and are  confiscated  upon
             arrival at Baghdad;

             ii)  The location of the relevant civil registry office. If it
             is in  an  area  held,  or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
             operational?

             iii) Are there male family  members  who  would  be  able  and
             willing to attend the  civil  registry  with  P?  Because  the
             registration system is patrilineal  it  will  be  relevant  to
             consider whether the relative is from the mother  or  father's
             side. A maternal uncle in possession of his CSID would be able
             to assist in locating the original place  of  registration  of
             the individual's mother, and from there the trail  would  need
             to be followed to the place that her records were  transferred
             upon  marriage.  It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that   a
             significant  number   of   IDPs   in   Iraq   are   themselves
             undocumented; if that is the case it  is  unlikely  that  they
             could be of assistance. A woman without  a  male  relative  to
             assist with the process of  redocumentation  would  face  very
             significant obstacles in that officials  may  refuse  to  deal
             with her case at all.

         2.   There are currently no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
         Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United  Kingdom  are  to
         Baghdad.

         3.   For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
         possession of a valid CSID or  Iraqi  passport,  the  journey  from
         Baghdad to the IKR, whether by  air  or  land,  is  affordable  and
         practical and can be made  without  a  real  risk  of  P  suffering
         persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment  nor  would  any
         difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.

         4.   P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
         IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.

         5.   P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
         between Baghdad and the  IKR  by  land  without  a  CSID  or  valid
         passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including  two
         checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of  the  airport.  If  P  has
         neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a real risk of P being
         detained at a checkpoint until such time as the security  personnel
         are able to verify P's identity. It is not reasonable to require  P
         to travel between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability  of  P
         to verify his identity at a checkpoint. This normally requires  the
         attendance of a male family member and production of  P's  identity
         documents but may also be achieved by  calling  upon  "connections"
         higher up in the chain of command.

         6.   Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
         granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,  and
         registering presence with the local mukhtar, P would  be  permitted
         to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal impediments or
         requirements. There is no sponsorship requirement for Kurds.

         7.   Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during
         the security screening process must be assessed on  a  case-by-case
         basis. Additional factors  that  may  increase  risk  include:  (i)
         coming from a family with  a  known  association  with  ISIL,  (ii)
         coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii) being  a  single
         male of fighting age. P is likely to be able to evidence  the  fact
         of recent arrival from the UK, which would dispel any suggestion of
         having arrived directly from ISIL territory.

         8.   If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
         require that family to  accommodate  P.  In  such  circumstances  P
         would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as
         to lead a 'relatively normal  life',  which  would  not  be  unduly
         harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for   decision-makers   to
         determine the extent of any assistance likely to be provided by P's
         family on a case by case basis.

 7. That guidance binds the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal will
    not depart therefrom without significant new evidence.  The most recent
    evidence taken into account in AAH was press releases from  Rudaw,  and
    reports from Human Rights Watch and  UNHCR  all  of  which  were  dated
    January 2018.

Evidence accompanying the appellant's submissions

 8. I  have  had  regard  to  the  evidence  attached  to  the  appellant's
    submissions.  The appellant's submissions  are  supported  by  a  small
    supplemental bundle, including some new evidence  and  some  which  was
    available below.  The appellant relied on the  UNHCR's  September  2018
    Iraqi Protection Update, reporting an increase in  organised  crime  in
    Tuz Khurmatu, including kidnapping for ransom,  with  as  many  as  400
    people thought to be  missing.   UNHCR  considered  that  there  was  a
    growing fear of a rise in ethnically motivated violence, affecting  the
    residents of Tuz Khurmatu and displaced families from the area.

 9. The appellant also relied  on  extracts  from  the  Danish  Immigration
    Service's LandInfo report on Northern Iraq in  November  2018  entitled
    Northern Iraq: Security situation  and  the  situation  for  internally
    displaced persons (IDPs), incl. possibility to  enter  and  access  the
    Kurdish Region of Iraq (KRI).  That report identified in 'a substantive
    proliferation  of  militias  and  armed  groups  that  are  not   under
    government control' the Salah al-Din governorate and  in  Tuz  Khurmatu
    village, located near the Kirkuk-Baghdad  road,  a  three-way  division
    between Shi'a, Sunni and Turkmen populations, such that 'the  level  of
    violence in this village is very high'. A map on page 15 of the  report
    showed Tuz Khurmatu as being just inside the contested area.

10. At [207] of the Danish LandInfo Report, it recorded that following  the
    Anfal in October 2017, over  148,000  persons  fled  Tuz  Khurmatu  and
    Kirkuk, and most had not yet returned.  It  was  easier  to  return  to
    Kirkuk than to Tuz Khurmatu, but many still did not trust the  security
    situation in the area and were staying away.

11. Section 1.1.4 of the  Danish  LandInfo  Report  states  that  based  on
    interviews in Erbil and Sulaymaniyah, in November 2018, ISIS/Daesh  was
    weak and no  longer  in  control  of  any  area  in  the  Salah  al-Din
    governorate. There were some reports of Kurds living  in  Tuz  Khurmatu
    being forced to leave, and of houses and shops burned down there.   The
    PMUS (Peshmerga) were controlling the suburbs and surrounding  villages
    outside Kirkuk city, including Tuz Khurmatu, and would decide  who  was
    allowed entry to the city on the basis of their own security screening.
      There were reports of KDP members and the Asayish being  the  subject
    of Peshmerga violations in Kirkuk and Tuz Khurmatu.    49%  of  Kurdish
    families had not returned to Tuz Khurmatu due to the lack  of  services
    and social housing.

12. Tuz Khurmatu  continued  to  be  a  'sensitive  case  with  conflicting
    reports' with a very high level of violence and  displacement  of  some
    Iraqi Kurdish families after October 16, 2017 (paragraph 76);  minority
    groups in Tuz Khurmatu and  Salah  al-Din  felt  threatened  (paragraph
    119).  At [200], the Danish LandInfo report says this:

         "200.    Asked about targeting of civilians,  the  source  answered
         that there is a general fear of ISIS in  the  civilian  population.
         When ISIS attacks, people  flee  to  Sulimania.  The  source  named
         especially that fake checkpoints are a reason  for  concern.  There
         have been many incidents on the Kirkuk-Baghdad  road,  where  there
         were civilian casualties. For instance,  a  car  with  four  family
         members was stopped on the road and all four were killed. A tourist
         bus  was  attacked  in  the  town  Tuz  Khurmatu  in  Salah  al-Din
         Governorate resulting in the deaths  of  some  of  the  passengers.
         Truck drivers have been kidnapped for ransom, such events  happened
         around March  for  example,  the  car  with  four  family  member's
         accident happened March 11, 2018. The source noted that  the  Iraqi
         authorities always blame ISIS. However, it is not always clear  who
         the perpetrators of these kinds of incidents are, because there are
         numerous armed groups present with different  agendas.  The  source
         referred to an example that took place on 12 March this year  where
         a family consisting of a mother and father, three children and  the
         father's brother who all were killed in a fake  checkpoint  outside
         Sadiyah. The perpetrators  were  dressed  in  Iraqi  uniforms.  The
         source stated that common for all attacks  is  that  there  are  no
         insights in the  investigation  of  the  perpetrators.  Kidnappings
         happen for ransom, and many armed groups engaged in crime could  be
         responsible for such actions."

13.  That is a classic Article 15(c) situation: the  circumstances  in  Tuz
    Khurmatu in March 2018 would have amounted to indiscriminate or 'blind'
    violence, but on the other hand, at [207] the report states that 'it is
    easier to return to Kirkuk than to Tuz Khurmatu' and the appellant does
    have family in that area.

14. The appellant also produced a  report  dated  December  2018  from  the
    Crisis Group called Reviving UN Mediation on Iraq's  Disputed  Internal
    Boundaries which at C on page 15 of the report confirms that:

         "The district of Tuz Khurmatu (often referred to simply  as  "Tuz")
         in Salah al-Din governorate directly north of Baghdad has  suffered
         more violence than other disputed areas in the immediate  aftermath
         of the October 2017 takeover by the Iraqi army and Hashd. This  may
         be because the area has suffered violent interethnic and  sectarian
         clashes since 2003 involving  Sunni  Kurds  and  Sunni  and  Shiite
         Turkmen, as well as Sunni Arabs.

         Tuz is a northern transportation hub, located on the Baghdad-Kirkuk
         highway. Like Kirkuk, its centre is Turkmen in  origin,  while  its
         countryside to the north and east is  predominantly  Kurdish,  with
         Arab tribes in the south  and  west.  The  Amerli  sub-district  is
         largely Shiite Turkmen in the town  but  the  area's  villages  are
         predominantly Sunni Arab, while Suleiman Beg sub-district is mainly
         Sunni Arab. Post-2003 election results have shown that Tuz district
         is highly diverse, with no single ethnic group holding a  majority.
         ...

         During 2003-2017, the city of  Tuz  saw  frequent  clashes  between
         Kurdish parties, mainly the PUK, which maintained security control,
         and Turkmen parties. ...Kurds and Turkmen both claim  that  Tuz  is
         originally theirs. It's not up to history to  decide,  though.  The
         reality is that today, apart from all the Kurds  here,  many  Sunni
         Arabs in Tuz want the city to become part  of  Kurdistan.  This  is
         because in that case they expect to be treated the  way  Kurds  are
         treated [under the KRG] .... The local Kurdish authorities did  not
         treat Sunni Arabs well before 16 October [2017]. The Peshmerga  [of
         the PUK] destroyed many Sunni Arab villages after  liberating  them
         from ISIS in Amerli. This was a mistake. But now  Sunni  Arabs  are
         suffering even more under Hashd domination. ...

         The local Shiite Turkmen politician said: "We already have a power-
         sharing arrangement in Tuz, so there  is  no  need  to  discuss  it
         again. All ethnic components are represented in district government
         and local government". Yet security dominance by a single group - a
         minority in the district and even more so in the governorate - is a
         recipe for continued violent conflict."

15. At page 20, under the heading IV. Views on reviving the UN  process  on
    the territories, the report states that in parts of Kirkuk  governorate
    and around Tuz Khurmatu, there are  '...significant  gaps  in  security
    coordination that ISIS and other insurgent  groups  exploit'  but  that
    Baghdad (i.e. the Iraqi government) has a clear interest in reaching  a
    settlement concerning Kirkuk.   In a  press  report  from  Rudaw  Media
    Network, a media outlet in Iraqi Kurdistan, which publishes in Kurdish,
    English, Arabic and Turkish, all on line, a  24  December  2018  report
    entitled ISIS Attack Village, kidnap three near Tuz Khurmatu  described
    Tuz Khurmatu as 'located within the disputed areas where security  gaps
    between Iraqi and Peshmerga  forces  have  allowed  ISIS  militants  to
    operate'. Rudaw and other reports from 2017 confirmed the situation  of
    the October 2017 Anfal as it affected Tuz Khurmatu.

Medical evidence

16. A medical report from Dr Saleh Dhumad MBChB MSc MRCPsych CBT,  prepared
    on 26 May 2018, assessed the appellant as having post-traumatic  stress
    disorder and recorded that he was taking 20 mg citalopram prescribed by
    his general medical practitioner.  The British Nursing Formulary  (BNF)
    indicates that 20 mg daily is the minimum adult dose of citalopram.

17. Dr Dhumad attached Appendices containing his curriculum vitae, extracts
    from ICD-10 and the Istanbul Protocol principles.  Dr Dhumad's  opinion
    (described by  him  as  his  'impression')  was  that  the  appellant's
    clinical presentation was 'compatible with the  experience  of  intense
    fear of expected threat to life' and consistent  with  a  diagnosis  of
    severe depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.  Having regard to
    the Istanbul Protocol, I attach limited weight to that assessment since
    the witness did not describe the appellant's mental  health  issues  as
    'highly consistent' with or 'diagnostic' of the account given to him.

18. Dr Dhumad noted that the appellant was not receiving any  psychological
    therapy and had  no  psychotic  symptoms.   His  risk  of  suicide  was
    moderate although it might increase if he were to fear that he would be
    returned to Iraq.  The report purported  to  consider  the  appellant's
    credibility, but that is not a matter for medical evidence.



Appellant's submissions

19. For the appellant, HS Legal Solicitors Ltd served  written  submissions
    on 15 January 2019 but they do not appear to have  reached  Mr  Jarvis.
    The submissions on AAH begin at [14]  of  that  submission.   HS  Legal
    remind the Tribunal that the appellant has no Iraqi documents, nor does
    he know the reference, page or  volume  number  where  his  Iraqi  CSID
    information is recorded.   He  has  no  Iraqi  passport  and  has  been
    outside Iraq since 2003, losing, on their submission, all contact  with
    his family and friends in Iraq.

20. The appellant also relies on Dr  Dhumad's  evidence  about  his  mental
    health problems and on Article 3 ECHR, but permission to appeal was not
    granted on that basis and the direction  for  further  submissions  was
    limited to Article 15(c) and internal relocation.

Respondent's submissions

21. Mr Jarvis, who settled the  respondent's  submission,  did  so  without
    sight of the evidence and arguments of the appellant. The  respondent's
    submissions were late, but I have had regard to them, since  the  delay
    is said to have been caused by waiting for the appellant's submissions.
     The respondent relies  on  his  November  2018  CPIN  on  Iraq.    The
    relevant passages are quoted in the respondent's submissions, including
    a graph showing declining levels of  civilian  fatalities  in  the  six
    worst-affected Governorates:  Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah, Salah al-
    Din and Baghdad.  The decline is steep,  and  the  respondent  contends
    that it has fallen below the level which would engage Article 15(c).

22. Mr Jarvis did not accept that in Kirkuk there remained a  risk  at  the
    Article 15(c) level to the appellant and  noted  that  the  appellant's
    paternal uncle lives in Chamchamal, about 50 miles from  Tuz  Khurmatu,
    and could assist the appellant to get a CSID if necessary. He relied on
    the respondent's Iraq CPIN version 8.0 of October  2018.   There  is  a
    more recent version of the CPIN, version 9.0 of February 2019, but  the
    passage relied upon appears in both documents.

23. At 2.5.13 in version 9.0, the respondent cited a letter of 5  September
    2018 from Dr Salih Hussain Ali, the  Iraqi  ambassador  to  the  United
    Kingdom, indicating that  contrary  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
    guidance in AAH, a returnee to Baghdad can travel onward by land or air
    in Iraq on a laissez passer, without a CSID or valid passport, and that
    all civil  status  records  from  all  governorates  are  available  in
    Baghdad.  Mr Jarvis contends, therefore, that I should depart from  the
    country guidance in AAH  and  conclude  that  the  CSID  is  no  longer
    necessary.

24. Mr  Jarvis  further  contended  that  the  appellant  had  an  internal
    relocation to Chamchamal, where his uncle and his paternal cousins  all
    lived: his evidence was that his paternal uncle and family lived  in  a
    rented property  there,  and  that  two  of  the  appellant's  paternal
    cousins, the uncle's daughters,  were  married  and  lived  near  their
    father.

25. The appellant would not be destitute in the short time he would have to
    spend in Baghdad while he replaced his CSID  or  made  arrangements  to
    rejoin his paternal uncle and cousins in  Chamchamal.   The  respondent
    relied on the evidence of Dr Fatah,  recorded  at  [42]  of  AAH,  that
    sponsorship requirements were not currently being enforced in  the  IKR
    and procedures would be dictated  by  the  security  situation  on  the
    ground.

Analysis

26. The decision as to risk in the home area, Tuz Khurmatu in this  appeal,
    is fact-specific, applying AAH.   Having  regard  to  all  the  country
    evidence set out above, and the exodus from Kirkuk and Tuz Khurmatu  in
    2017, I accept that there  was  in  October  2017  and  for  some  time
    thereafter an Article 15(c) risk in the appellant's home  area  of  Tuz
    Khurmatu.  However, the respondent's evidence and also that advanced by
    the appellant show improvement.  Even  if  the  risk  in  Tuz  Khurmatu
    remains sufficiently high as to engage Article 15(c), the evidence does
    not suggest that such is the case 50 miles away  in  Chamchamal,  where
    the appellant's paternal uncle is living with his family.

27. For the purposes of this decision I am prepared to accept that  despite
    the improvements generally in Salah  al-Din,  there  may  still  be  an
    Article 15(c) risk in Tuz Khurmatu, at least for a time.

28. However, this is an appellant with a patrilineal relative  living  near
    Kirkuk who could assist him to obtain a CSID after his return, or  even
    before.   The argument on his behalf that he has lost  touch  with  his
    uncle and his cousins is inconsistent with  his  evidence  about  their
    circumstances in in Chamchamal, where his uncle and three cousins  live
    in a rented house, and two more married cousins live nearby.  I  remind
    myself that CSID information is derived from the paternal line and that
    the appellant's uncle is his father's brother.  Even if  the  appellant
    cannot remember the details of where his family information  is  to  be
    found, it is much more likely than not that his paternal uncle has that
    information and would be able to help him obtain a CSID, assuming  that
    one is still required for internal travel from Baghdad to Chamchamal.

29. As stated in AAH, the uncle would be under an obligation to assist  the
    appellant and I remind myself that Upper Tribunal Judge  Bruce  in  AAH
    found that:

         "3.  For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
         possession of a valid CSID or  Iraqi  passport,  the  journey  from
         Baghdad to the IKR, whether by  air  or  land,  is  affordable  and
         practical and can be made  without  a  real  risk  of  P  suffering
         persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment  nor  would  any
         difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh. ...

         8.   If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
         require that family to  accommodate  P.  In  such  circumstances  P
         would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the family so as
         to lead a 'relatively normal  life',  which  would  not  be  unduly
         harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for   decision-makers   to
         determine the extent of any assistance likely to be provided by P's
         family on a case by case basis."

30. On the evidence before me, therefore, even if there is an Article 15(c)
    risk in Tuz Khurmatu, the appellant could obtain a CSID and be taken in
    by his  paternal  uncle  in  Chamchamal.   He  has  a  viable  internal
    relocation option away from Tuz Khurmatu and accordingly, the  standard
    for international protection is not met and  the  appeal  falls  to  be
    dismissed.

31. Even if the medical report from May  2018  had  been  relevant,  it  is
    almost a year out of date and there is no  up  to  date  evidence.  The
    appellant  was  receiving  no  treatment  except  for  a  low  dose  of
    citalopram.  I am  not  satisfied  that  the  opinion  evidence  in  Dr
    Dhumad's report reaches the high standard required for Article  3  ECHR
    breach.    The contents of this report  cannot  materially  affect  the
    outcome of the appeal.

DECISION

32.      For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by dismissing
    the appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                  Date:     18 March 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
