
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09040/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 4 September 2020              |On 15 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                      O
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Faryl, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms. R. Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  appeals  with  permission
         against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (hereinafter
         referred to as the "FtTJ") who dismissed her protection appeal in a
         decision promulgated on the 21 November 2019.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 4 September 2020, by means of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via  video.  There
         were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Ms Faryl and Ms Petterson  for  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

Background:

      5. The immigration history of the appellant is set out in the decision
         letter and the earlier decision of Judge Moxon.

      6. The appellant applied for a multi-entry visit visa  to  the  United
         Kingdom in 2007. That application was refused, and she withdrew her
         appeal in 2009 by which time she submitted a further application in
         2008 which was refused on 30 September 2008.

      7. A further application entry  clearance  by  way  of  a  multi-entry
         business Visa was made by her in 2009 but that was refused also  on
         2 September 2009. She made a further application on 5 October  2019
         and this was granted on 12 October 2019 valid until April  2010.  A
         further application for a business Visa  was  granted  in  2010  to
         expire on 25 March 2012.

      8. She applied for multi-entry visit visa on 21 March  2014  but  that
         was refused on 8 April 2014, but she was granted to visit  visa  on
         11 June 2014 to expire on 11 June 2016.

      9. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 25 May 2016 and claimed
         asylum two years later on 24 January 2018.

     10. In her claim to the Secretary of State it was stated that she was a
         pastor, writer and publisher and having started as a youth minister
         in 2002. In or  about  April  2007  the  appellant  claimed  whilst
         travelling from Nigeria to  Ghana  she  was  kidnapped  by  unknown
         youths, her money was taken, and they demanded a  ransom.  However,
         after being held for 12 hours she was able to escape.  She  further
         detailed that she was kidnapped in July 2012 but was also  able  to
         make her escape.

     11. Between July and September 2015, the appellant stated that she  had
         joined the "Indigenous People of Biafra" (hereinafter  referred  to
         as "IPOB"). She claimed to have a role related to finance and  also
         "bringing youth together"  to  make  them  good  citizens.  It  was
         claimed that she started to receive threatening phone calls at  the
         end of 2015 and in April 2016 when driving over  from  church,  the
         five men with guns were following her.

     12. It was further claimed  that  since  she  had  entered  the  United
         Kingdom she had been involved in IPOB since late 2016 and  in  2018
         was appointed as media personnel and had covered protest in  London
         in April and May 2018.

     13. The basis of her claim was that if returned Nigeria  she  would  be
         killed by the government and authorities because she  was  a  high-
         profile activist with IPOB.

     14. In a decision letter of 25th of July 2018, the  respondent  refused
         her claim for asylum. In  that  decision  the  respondent  noted  a
         number of inconsistencies within the  appellant's  factual  account
         and also in relation to her account of involvement in IPOB.

     15. The appellant appealed that decision and her appeal came before the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moxon) in October 2018.  In  a  decision
         promulgated on 1 November 2018 Judge Moxon dismissed her appeal. It
         is not necessary at this stage to set out his detailed reasons  for
         dismissal of her claim but the judge reached the conclusion that he
         was  not  satisfied  that  she  had  any  affiliation,  or  imputed
         affiliation with IPOB or that she had  ever  been  a  pastor  or  a
         reverend. He did not accept either that there was  any  footage  or
         images of the appellant at IPOB  events  which  was  accessible  or
         would not be deleted prior to return to Nigeria. The  FtTJ  made  a
         finding of fact on the evidence that the Nigerian government  would
         not identify her in any event due to  the  lack  of  any  political
         profile in Nigeria.

     16. Permission to appeal that decision was refused on 6  December  2018
         and also by the Upper Tribunal on 7 March 2019.

     17. The appellant then submitted further submissions to  the  Secretary
         of State on 11 July 2019.

     18. Those further submissions were refused by the Secretary of State in
         a decision letter dated 10th of September 2019.

     19. This led to a second appeal before the FtT in November  2019  (FtTJ
         Frantzis) and is the decision under challenge in these proceedings.



     20. The appellant's claim is summarised in the decision of the FtTJ  at
         paragraph 9.  The Appellant claimed  to  be  a  member  and  active
         supporter of IPOB. IPOB was designated a terrorist organisation  in
         Nigeria  as  of  20th  September  2017.  It  is  claimed  that  the
         Appellant's face was publicised attending an  IPOB  event  on  19th
         April 2018 and that the event was aired live in Nigeria. The  claim
         was  made  that  the  Appellant's  involvement  with   IPOB   would
         reasonably likely to be known to the Nigerian authorities and would
         lead to her arrest,  detention  and  ill  treatment  on  return  to
         Nigeria. The Appellant also asserted that the  Nigerian  Government
         monitored the activities of IPOB in the diaspora and  as  such  her
         membership and support for IPOB shall  be  known  to  the  Nigerian
         State

     21. In a decision promulgated on 21 November 2019  the  FtTJ  dismissed
         her appeal on all grounds.

     22. Permission to appeal was sought but was refused by  Resident  Judge
         Phillips on 31 December 2019.

     23. An application was made to the Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
         appeal and permission was granted  on  28  January  2020  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Allen who stated as follows:

             "although clearly there are difficulties  in  the  appellant's
             case, I consider that on balance the grounds  identify  points
             of sufficient weight  to make  appropriate  permission  to  be
             granted."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     24. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     25. Ms Faryl, Counsel on  behalf  of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the
         written  grounds  of  appeal.  There  were  also  further   written
         submissions dated 15 May  2020  which  she  had  prepared  for  the
         hearing.

     26.  There  were  also  written  submission  filed  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent dated 7 May 2020.

     27.  I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

The submissions on behalf of the appellant:

     28. Mrs Faryl began her submissions by relying on the grounds  and  the
         written submissions dated 15 May 2020.

     29. The original grounds submit that the judge misdirected  herself  in
         fact at paragraph 27. Whilst it is accepted that  the  majority  of
         articles edited by the appellant  bears  the  name  x  ,  the  FtTJ
         omitted to consider her own  published  article  with  her  picture
         clearly placed side-by-side with the  leader  (respondent's  bundle
         page 190 - 191). Whilst that copy was not legible, the Tribunal was
         provided with clean copies. The lack of reference to this piece  of
         evidence is a significant failure and  should  have  regarded  this
         published article alongside the articles edited in the name of x.

     30. It was further submitted that the FtTJ failed to make any  findings
         as to whether the Nigerian government were  capable  of  monitoring
         the Internet or unable to  recognise  published  pictures.  It  was
         submitted that  the  Nigerian  authorities  did  have  capacity  to
         monitor the Internet.

     31. It was submitted that the judge wrongly  applied  the  guidance  in
         Devaseelan and failed to give adequate reasons for "heavy reliance"
         on the previous findings and failed to give  adequate  reasons  why
         she disbelieve the appellant's claim (paragraphs 3, 4, 5, 6 of  the
         original grounds).

     32. Ground 4 was entitled "procedural unfairness" and it was  submitted
         that the criticism of the expert  report  was  "vague  and  not  in
         accordance with the law" and there was no record  that  the  expert
         was questioned by the respondent  all  the  judge  as  set  out  at
         paragraph 27. The judge acted unfairly in failing to  disclose  her
         concerns to the representative.

     33. It was submitted that the judge rejected her membership of IPOB but
         would appear to have accepted her association and participation  in
         IPOB activities in the UK albeit opportunistic.  It  was  submitted
         that the judge should have gone further to consider the implication
         of her participation as per the Nigerian criminal code.

     34. It was submitted there were no findings that the appellant did  not
         believe the oath taken on the date "he" joined IPOB.

     35. It is further submitted that a deportee or failed asylum seeker  is
         handed over to the Nigerian police for  further  investigation  and
         the judge did not consider the principles in RT (Zimbabwe).

     36. The renewed grounds assert that it was difficult for the  appellant
         to adduce evidence to substantiate activities in Nigeria  and  that
         her  account  of   events   was   traumatic   and   therefore   any
         inconsistencies which may have arisen was due to that.  Nonetheless
         her account was corroborated by the treatment of IPOB  members  and
         supporters in Nigeria.

     37. It is further submitted that the appellant's status within IPOB  or
         intentions were immaterial as it  was  accepted  that  IPOB  was  a
         prescribed organisation in Nigeria and are targeted  regardless  of
         their status.

     38. It was further submitted that improper weight  was  placed  on  the
         appellant's expert report and questioning  her  expertise  was  not
         justified and therefore the judge failed to give any weight to  the
         report.

     39. It was submitted that the fact that no evidence was adduced  as  to
         the circumstances of IPOB supporters returned to  Nigeria  did  not
         demonstrate that she would not be in danger on  return.  There  are
         violations against IPOB members in Nigeria.

     40. In her oral submissions, Ms Faryl submitted  that  the  substantive
         issue before the Tribunal was whether the appellant,  a  member  of
         IPOB, writer/editor and campaigner activist will be  identified  as
         such and therefore be at risk on return to Nigeria. The  respondent
         at paragraph 22 of the decision letter did not  contest  that  IPOB
         affiliation may give rise to a risk.

     41. The appellant had an expert report which stated that both high  and
         low profile pro-Biafran activists will be persecuted in Nigeria  as
         the security forces have been empowered  to  monitor  their  online
         activity.

     42. The appellant had relied upon the evidence of L who could vouch for
         the appellant and that the appellant had written articles. However,
         the judge noted that the appellant's case was that  "vast  majority
         of the articles of those she has edited not written".

     43. Also, at [28] the FtTJ noted that L referred to  the  appellant  as
         one of our media personnels"  as  opposed  to  providing  any  more
         definition. It is asserted on behalf of the appellant  that  it  is
         likely that  L may have misunderstood or use the  two  terms,  edit
         and write, interchangeably a matter which is not difficult to do is
         to edit means to prepare written material. In any event as noted by
         the FtTJ whilst the vast  majority  of  the  articles  were  edited
         others were written (and not edited by the appellant.

     44. Thus, it is submitted on behalf of the  appellant  that  an  editor
         would fall into the category of "media personnel".

     45. It is submitted that if there had been any need  for  clarification
         by the judge in relation to the evidence of L, the FtTJ should have
         sought that clarification (relying on the decision in B (DR (Congo)
         [2003] UKUT 12. Whilst in that case the Tribunal refer to  evidence
         from the appellant,  it  was  submitted  that  that  would  include
         evidence of a witness like L.

     46. In her oral submissions Ms Faryl submitted that  a  key  issue  was
         whether the appellant was an active member  of  IPOB,  and  it  was
         unclear whether the judge accepted the appellant was such an active
         member. She referred to the evidence of Mr N who was not present at
         the hearing, who was head of IT. In her oral submissions, she  drew
         the Tribunal's attention to paragraph 29  of  the  FtTJ's  decision
         where the judge stated "overall,  I  accept  that  Mr  N's  factual
         assertion supports  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  editor  and  I
         consider this in the round having afforded the appropriate weight."
         She contrasted this with the finding made at [31] where  the  judge
         stated "stepping back and  considering  all  of  the  evidence  the
         round, for the reasons I've given I am not satisfied the  appellant
         has been promoted to editor." Therefore, she  submitted  the  judge
         had made a material error of law because the judge failed to make a
         clear finding as to whether the appellant was a member of IPOB.

     47. Ms Faryl also relied upon paragraph [34]  of  the  FtTJ's  decision
         where the judge stated that he accepted, based on the evidence of L
         and the  photographic  evidence  that  the  appellant  attended  12
         demonstrations  and  events  organised  by  IPOB.  The  judge  also
         accepted  at  that  paragraph  that  the  appellant  assisted  with
         televising and streaming IPOB related events. Therefore, having set
         out that conduct the judge should have found that the appellant was
         a member or active member of IPOB.

     48. The second issue identified by Ms Faryl in her oral submissions was
         whether  the  appellant  would  be  identified  by   the   Nigerian
         authorities. She submitted  that  the  appellant  had  a  "prolific
         presence in the UK as a writer/editor and activist  on  pro-Biafran
         issues" and that most of her work featured the shortened name as  x
         rather than her surname but that the appellant  was  likely  to  be
         identified by her surname  on  return  and  that  was  the  logical
         approach to take rather than the approach taken by the judge  which
         was described as "splitting hairs" when considering the  pseudonym.
         The articles taken together with the photographs of  the  appellant
         taken at various locations was evidence to demonstrate  that  there
         was a real likelihood that the appellant could be identified  as  a
         pro- Biafran activist.

     49. Ms Faryl directed the Tribunal to the report prepared by Mr N  ( at
         42 in the bundle) which provided  commentary  on  the  footage  and
         images of the appellant at IPOB events and gave an account  on  the
         ability of the government to identify the appellant at IPOB  events
         and stated at [44] "from appendix on into the web  link  show  that
         the appellant is  an  active  member  and  principal  officer  that
         participates in IPOB events. These web links cannot be  permanently
         deleted or removed... Further he said, "I believe there is  no  way
         the  contents  could  be  deleted  by  default  say  prior  to  the
         appellant's return to Nigeria."

     50. Therefore she submitted in relation to the  identification  of  the
         appellant the evidence of Mr N  is  that  the  appellant  could  be
         easily identified by a simple  search  on  any  search  engine  and
         therefore it would disclose pictures of the appellant and it  would
         not matter if she used a pseudonym.

     51. Ms Faryl submitted that if the Nigerian  authorities  were  looking
         into her background for any reason she would  be  identifiable  and
         would be  categorised  as  a"  terrorist"  given  that  IPOB  is  a
         prescribed organisation.

     52. In her oral submissions she drew the Tribunal's  attention  to  the
         report of the special rapporteur dated 2 September 2019 at  p69  of
         the appellant's bundle. At paragraph 7- 9  was  reference  made  to
         increased numbers of attacks and killings over the last five  years
         and at paragraph 14 it  was  stated  "in  yet  other  eco-political
         systems of violence, the security  response  is  dangerously  quasi
         prospective,  with  individuals,   communities   and   associations
         actively targeted for what they may have done decades ago,  or  for
         what they may do or may become, rather than for what they are doing
         or have done (e.g. members of the IM N, IPOB". At paragraph 47  the
         report stated "since 2015, members of  IPOB  have  faced  arbitrary
         arrests, torture and extrajudicial executions, predominantly in the
         context of demonstrations. Between 2015 and  2016,  it  is  alleged
         that law enforcement officials killed at least 100 IPOB members  in
         different events in Aba (Abia state), and Awka and Onitsha (Anambra
         State). On  29  30  May  2016  during  demonstration  the  Nigerian
         military opened fire on IPOB members and bystanders in Onitsha.  At
         least 60 people were killed and over 70 injured, mainly shot in the
         back. Between 12 and 14 September 2017, IPOB followers gathered  at
         the family home of their leader to take part in a  peaceful  vigil.
         The military operation carried out in the afternoon of 14 September
         2017 is alleged to have resulted  in  the  killing  of  hundred  50
         persons. The IPOB leader went into exile and some  of  its  follows
         remain disappeared since then. Following this  event,  the  Federal
         High Court proscribed IPOB and designated it as a terrorist group."
         Paragraph 50 stated "it is alleged that  not  a  single  conviction
         against  IPOB  members  have  been  secured  since  2015,  due   to
         discontinuance or dismissal of charges. None  of  the  killings  of
         IPOB members and been investigated. On March 8, 2018,  the  African
         commission issued provisional measures  asking  the  government  of
         Nigeria to rescind its decision branding IPOB and  its  members  as
         terrorists as well as the prescription and  not  take  any  further
         action  pending  the   decision   of   the   commission   on   this
         communication. It is stated "I'm not aware of any  steps  taken  to
         implement the AC HR interim decision at the time of  writing  these
         preliminary observations" (para 52;p75).

The submissions on behalf of the respondent:

     53. Ms Petterson relied upon the written submissions dated 7 May 2020.

         By reference to ground 1 of the original Grounds of Appeal it was
         submitted that the FtTJ did consider the clearer copy of the
         article at pages 190-191 of the Respondent's bundle [30].  In
         finding that this evidence did not advance the Appellant's case
         further, the FtTJ considered that the Appellant was not easily
         identifiable from the picture and noted two credibility issues. The
         burden was on the Appellant to show that the Nigerian authorities
         monitored pro-Biafra political activity on the internet.  At [37-
         39], the FTTJ properly considered the evidence before her on this
         issue.

     54. As regards ground 2 of the  original  Grounds  of  Appeal,  it  was
         submitted that the FtTJ focussed on whether - on return to  Nigeria
         - the Appellant would be at real risk of being  identified  by  the
         authorities as the result of her pro-Biafra activities.  She  found
         that there was  not  such  a  risk.   In  considering  whether  the
         Appellant would engage in pro-Biafra activity in Nigeria, the  FTTJ
         was entitled to consider whether the Appellant's commitment to  the
         Biafran cause was sincere [48-50].The FTTJ did not, as  claimed  in
         this Ground, find that only high-profile members  of  IPOB  are  at
         risk of persecution in Nigeria.  The main issue for  the  FtTJ  was
         whether the Appellant was likely to  be  identified  on  return  to
         Nigeria as the result of her activities. The FTTJ did discharge the
         duty on her to give adequate reasons for her findings.  She did not
         treat the decision of the  previous  FtTJ  as  determinative.   The
         FTTJ's findings are not, as claimed  in  this  Ground,  lacking  in
         detail.

     55. In answer to  ground  4  of  the  original  Grounds  of  Appeal  as
         submitted above, the FTTJ did not question Ms Peters' expertise  or
         criticise her report.  There was no procedural unfairness.

     56. In answer to ground 5 of the original  Grounds  of  Appeal  it  was
         submitted  that the FTTJ correctly indicated that  the  Appellant's
         claim under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR stood  or  fell  with  her
         claim under the Refugee Convention [55].The FTTJ  dealt  adequately
         with the Appellant's claim under Article 8 of the ECHR [56].  It is
         clear that the FTTJ did not consider the Appellant's activities  in
         the UK to be an obstacle to her  integration  in  Nigeria  for  the
         purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

     57.  The  FTTJ  considered  whether  asylum  seekers   were   routinely
         questioned by the authorities on  their  return  to  Nigeria  [52].
         There  was  no  evidence  before  her  that  such   returnees   are
         immediately handed over to the police at the  airport  for  further
         investigation, as claimed in this Ground.

     58. It was submitted that the  FtTJ's  decision  is  comprehensive  and
         detailed.  In her assessment of the credibility of the  Appellant's
         account and the risk to her on return to Nigeria [22-53], the  FtTJ
         applied anxious scrutiny  to  the  oral  and  documentary  evidence
         before her, considering all of this evidence in the  round,  before
         reaching her  findings.   The  FtTJ  considered  the  risk  to  the
         Appellant from her claimed role as an editor of  Biafran  sponsored
         publications [23-32] and - as a member of the Indigenous People  of
           Biafra [IPOB] - from her participation in (and live streaming of)
         IPOB events in the UK [33-52].

     59. As a general point, it was submitted that the  renewed  Grounds  of
         Appeal were different to the original Grounds, were rather  general
         and did not engage in specific detail with the FTJ's decision.

     60. By reference to paragraph[3] of the renewed Grounds of  Appeal,  it
         was  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  correctly  -   did   not   require
         documentation  to  corroborate  the  Appellant's  account  of   her
         activities in Nigeria.  The FtTJ assessed the evidence before  her.
         The only points in her decision where the FtTJ held it against  the
         Appellant  that  she  had  not  adduced  documentary  evidence   to
         substantiate her activities were [26] and [32(iv)].  In relation to
         both  [26]  and  [32(iv)],  the  Appellant  could   have   provided
         documentary evidence from the UK.

     61. It was submitted that there was no evidence before the  FtTJ  about
         the  Appellant's   mental   health,   and   which   might   explain
         inconsistencies in her account.

     62. At [15] of the  refusal  decision  dated  10  September  2019,  the
         Respondent  accepted  that  some  IPOB  members  are  subjected  to
         violence in Nigeria.  Further, at [50] of the refusal decision, the
         Respondent  accepted  that  IPOB  members  are  considered  to   be
         terrorists by the Nigerian authorities.  The FtTJ referred to these
         two points at [12].  Having considered the evidence,  however,  the
         FtTJ found that the Appellant had not - as claimed - been  promoted
         to  editor  for  any  pro-Biafra  or   pro-IPOB   sponsored   media
         publication [31]; that - even if she had been promoted as claimed -
         she would not be identifiable on return to Nigeria as a  result  of
         her editing role [32]; that the Appellant did not  have  a  sincere
         commitment to the Biafran cause [48-50]; that the Appellant was not
         at risk of being identified by  the  Nigerian  authorities  as  the
         result of her IPOB activities in the UK  [51];  and  that  -  as  a
         failed asylum seeker - the  Appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  on
         arrival by plane in Nigeria [52].

     63. In answer to paragraph [5] of the renewed Grounds of Appeal it  was
         submitted that given that this Ground refers  to  "her  expertise",
         the Respondent presumes that it is referring to the report of Ms P,
         not that of Mr N.  Although Ms P's  report  of  24  June  2019  was
         addressed to the protection claim of another person [10(iii)],  the
         FtTJ gave it due weight when reaching  her  findings  [37-39]  [47]
         [52].  The FtTJ did not question Ms Peters' expertise or  criticise
         her report

     64. In answer to paragraph [6] of the renewed Grounds of Appeal it  was
         submitted that the FtTJ carefully considered  the  evidence  before
         her about the treatment of IPOB supporters by  the  authorities  on
         their return to Nigeria [38-39] [47].  As noted above, the FtTJ was
         aware that IPOB is a proscribed organisation in  Nigeria  and  that
         some IPOB members are subjected to violence in Nigeria.  In finding
         that the Appellant was not at real risk on return,  the  FtTJ  gave
         adequate reasons.

     65. In her oral submissions, Ms Petterson addressed the  points  raised
         by Ms Faryl.  She  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  had  considered  the
         likelihood of the appellant's activities coming to the attention of
         the Nigerian authorities at paragraphs 38-39. The judge noted  that
         other than that cited by the expert there was no evidence  for  the
         Tribunal of this which was notable "in light of the opinion of  the
         expert that the persecution  of  Biafra  supporters  is  heightened
         since the Proscription Order in 2017.

     66. Ms Petterson also addressed the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant
         would be identified on returned Nigeria at the airport.  The  judge
         dealt with this at paragraph [47] the judge did  not  discount  the
         possibility that the Nigerian embassy  may  have  informers  within
         IPOB in the United Kingdom but did not accept  that  the  appellant
         was someone who the informers would be  interested  in.  The  judge
         noted that whilst the order of 2017 had extraterritorial effect and
         it was indicated that the  military  would  monitor  social  media,
         there was no evidence before the Tribunal  (and  from  the  expert)
         over two years later that those low-level members of  IPOB  in  the
         diaspora are a sufficient interest to be identified,  placed  on  a
         list and rested on return to the airport in Nigeria. Therefore, she
         submitted  the  appellant  would  not  be  identified  on   return.
         Similarly, at paragraph 52 the judge considered the  expert  report
         and forcible returns to Nigeria from  abroad  but  noted  that  the
         expert did not provide evidence as to  any  specific  mechanism  of
         return failed asylum seekers nor in particular of their  processing
         at the airport upon arrival in Nigeria.

     67. Thus, she submitted that the FtTJ taken account of all the evidence
         and that the grounds as advanced on behalf of the appellant did not
         disclose the making of an error on a point of law.

     68. Ms Faryl in her reply submitted that the submissions made on behalf
         of the respondent was silent on the inconsistency in the finding of
         whether the appellant was an active member of IPOB.

     69. She further submitted that at paragraph 47 the judge failed to give
         reasons as to why  the  appellant  would  be  of  interest  to  any
         informer and that given the authorities monitor  social  media  and
         the appellant's profile in the light of the evidence of  Mr  N  and
         L, the judge gave insufficient reasons for reaching the  conclusion
         that she would not come to the  attention  of  the  authorities  on
         return.

     70. Ms Faryl therefore invited me to find that  there  was  a  material
         error of law in the FtTJ's decision.

     71. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.

Discussion:

     72. The appellant's claim is summarised in the decision of the FtTJ  at
         paragraph 9.  The Appellant  claims  to  be  a  member  and  active
         supporter of IPOB. The history is set out in the country  materials
         before the Tribunal. The Biafra war spanned the years between  1967
         - 1970, but groups who sought the revival of Biafra only reappeared
         shortly after Nigeria returned  to  democracy  in  1999  (following
         periods of military rule). They formed splinter groups  to  support
         the Igbo ethnic group and pro-Biafra sentiments which gave rise  to
         movements such as Masscob for the restoration of Biafra through non-
         violent means. Other groups were formed which included Radio Biafra
         and IPOB; the latter being founded in 2011. Most pro-Biafra  groups
         are either aligned with or subsumed under IPOB.  Their  leader  was
         arrested in 2015 and not released on bail until 2017 which  led  to
         protests in parts of SE Nigeria. IPOB was  designated  a  terrorist
         organisation in Nigeria as of 20th September 2017.

     73. As set out in the decision letter at [15] the  respondent  accepted
         that some IPOB members are subjected to  violence  in  Nigeria  and
         that IPOB was a proscribed organisation.

     74. In respect of the appellant's factual claim, it  had  been  claimed
         that the Appellant's face was publicised attending an IPOB event on
         19th April 2018 and that the event was aired live in  Nigeria.  The
         Appellant in her witness statement asserted that she is one of  the
         editors  of   the   Biafra   Telegraph,   Biafra   Times   and   is
         "Admin/Moderator in Biafra Television  (BTV)"  and  that  her  name
         features prominently in many published articles. As such, the claim
         was  made  that  the  Appellant's  involvement  with   IPOB   would
         reasonably likely to be known to the Nigerian authorities and would
         lead to her arrest, detention,  and  ill  treatment  on  return  to
         Nigeria. The Appellant also asserted that the  Nigerian  Government
         monitored the activities of IPOB in the diaspora and  as  such  her
         membership and support for IPOB shall  be  known  to  the  Nigerian
         State. Such membership and support are against the law.

     75. I have given careful  consideration  to  the  grounds  advanced  on
         behalf of the appellant, both the written grounds and  those  given
         by Ms Faryl before the Tribunal. In  general  terms,  the  original
         grounds  comprise  of  a  number  of  assertions  and   unevidenced
         challenges to the decision of the FtTJ. For example, at paragraph 3
         it is asserted that the judge made " a repeated error on the expert
         despite the CV placed before the judge". That is not  reflected  in
         the decision of the judge at all and it  is  plain  that  the  FtTJ
         properly accepted the report. At paragraph 2  it  is  asserted  the
         judge misdirected herself with respect to refugee law and it had no
         regard to the fact that the claim could succeed even if  she  acted
         in bad faith or was not a  good  witness  citing  the  decision  in
         Danian. However, the judge expressly considered  this  in  detailed
         findings of fact at paragraph 47 - 53. Many of them can properly be
         categorised as disagreements with the decision reached but  do  not
         go demonstrate any error of law reached in the judges' decision. Ms
         Faryl  has  provided  further  written   submissions   which   have
         summarised below which she submits set out her "key points". I have
         summarised them above.

     76. In so far as it is argued in the original  grounds  that  the  FtTJ
         failed to apply the principles in Devaseelan that  is  plainly  not
         made out when considering the decision of the FtTJ.

     77. The FtTJ noted that the appellant's case before the previous  judge
         was that she had been involved with  IPOB  in  the  United  Kingdom
         since late  2016  and  in  January  2018  was  appointed  as  media
         personnel covering protests in London in April and May 2018.

     78. Judge Moxon made the following findings of fact on the evidence  in
         October 2018:

             (i)  whilst the photographs and video footage  show  that  the
             Appellant has attended at least two demonstrations  in  London
             in 2018 (April and May 2018), the footage of  her  as  a  news
             anchor is rudimentary, as  are  the  on-screen  graphics  that
             could have been easily manufactured (paragraph 58);

             (ii)  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant   had   an
             affiliation, or an imputed affiliation, with the IPOB: she had
             fabricated an account to pursue  an  unmeritorious  claim  for
             asylum (paragraph 61).

             (iii)    he did not accept that there is any footage or images
             of the Appellant at IPOB events that is publicly accessible or
             would not be deleted prior to  return  to  Nigeria  (paragraph
             62).

             (iv)  the  reliability  of  the  documents  produced  by   the
             Appellant had been subjected  to  detailed  challenge  by  the
             Respondent in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  and  it  was
             surprising that the Appellant had not sought to address  those
             challenges within her written or oral evidence (paragraph 57);

             (v)  the evidence of L was undermined  by  the  fact  that  he
             introduced evidence  not  within  his  earlier  statements  or
             accounts, namely that during a  demonstration  in  London  the
             Appellant had been photographed  by  Nigerian  officials.  His
             attempts to explain why the evidence was not included  earlier
             was an effort to mislead (paragraph 59b.)

     79. At paragraph 19 the FtTJ set out the principles of the decision  in
         BK (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1358 which  summarised  the
         guidance provided by the Tribunal in the case  of  Devaseelan.  The
         FtTJ went on to summarise the  factual  findings  of  the  previous
         judge and then highlighted the evidence that had  not  been  before
         Judge Moxon and expressly  described  that  evidence  at  paragraph
         [21]. Thus, the FtTJ identified the  key  evidence  which  was  not
         before the previous FtTJ [19-21] and then considered  whether  this
         evidence should lead her to reach different findings of  fact  [22-
         53].

     80. There is no merit in the submission that the FtTJ failed  to  apply
         the principles in Devaseelan or that the judge heavily relied  upon
         the previous findings as asserted in the original grounds.

     81. I now turn to address the principal submissions relied upon  by  Ms
         Faryl. She submitted that the substantive issue before the FtTJ was
         whether the appellant as a member of IPOB and  writer,  editor  and
         campaigner and  activist  and  would  be  identified  as  such  and
         therefore be at risk on return to  Nigeria.  In  this  context  she
         submitted the appellant had relied upon an expert report that  high
         and low  profile  pro-Biafran  activists  would  be  persecuted  in
         Nigeria as the security forces had been empowered to monitor  their
         online activity (I refer to her oral submissions).

     82. She properly highlighted that the respondent at  paragraph  22  did
         accept that some IPOB members in Nigeria were subjected to violence
         and that at paragraph 50 it was accepted that  IPOB  had  become  a
         proscribed organisation in 2017. That had been noted by the FtTJ in
         her decision at [12].

     83. There is no dispute that the issue that the FtTJ  was  required  to
         resolve was whether in fact the appellant's activities carried  out
         in the United Kingdom were such to give rise  to  a  real  risk  on
         return. Whilst Ms Faryl's submissions are predicated on  the  basis
         that she was a "writer, editor and campaigner and  activist"  those
         were precisely the issues that the FtTJ was required to consider in
         her analysis of the evidence before the Tribunal.

     84. Turning to that, Ms Faryl submitted that a "key issue" was  whether
         the appellant was an active member of  IPOB,  and  it  was  unclear
         whether the judge accepted the appellant was such an active member.
         She referred to the evidence of Mr N who was  not  present  at  the
         hearing, who was head of IT. In her oral submissions, she drew  the
         Tribunal's attention to paragraph 29 of the FtTJ's  decision  where
         the judge stated "overall, I accept that Mr N's  factual  assertion
         supports the appellant's claim to be editor and I consider this  in
         the round having afforded the appropriate weight."  She  contrasted
         this with the finding made at [31] where the judge stated "stepping
         back and considering all of the evidence the round, for the reasons
         I have given I am not satisfied the appellant has been promoted  to
         editor." Therefore, she submitted the judge  had  made  a  material
         error of law because the judge failed to make a clear finding as to
         whether the appellant was a member of IPOB in the light of those  2
         paragraphs.

     85. Having considered the decision of the FtTJ, I am satisfied that the
         judge did not err in law in the way submitted by Ms Faryl.  Indeed,
         in my judgement the FtTJ undertook a clear analysis of the evidence
         relating to the appellant's association with IPOB and the  specific
         role/position she claimed in relation to that organisation  and  in
         the context of her attendance at demonstrations. That is plain from
         the findings of fact set  out  at  paragraphs  [22  -  52]  of  her
         decision.

     86. The FtTJ recited the earlier findings of Judge Moxon  at  paragraph
         20-he had reached the conclusion that he was not satisfied that she
         had an affiliation with IPOB (or imputed affiliation) or  that  she
         had been appointed  as  media  personnel  and  had  fabricated  her
         account to pursue an unmeritorious asylum claim. The judge then set
         out the further evidence  presented  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
         summarised  at  paragraph  [21  (i)-(iv)]  which  included  further
         evidence relating to her asserted  role  in  the  media  and  which
         included evidence from  L (who gave evidence before  the  Tribunal)
         and Mr N who had provided a report (5 July 2019) but  who  did  not
         give oral evidence. The judge also had the expert report  of  Ms  P
         (dated 24 June 2019) and whilst that report was  addressed  to  the
         protection claim of another person and not the appellant  (see  [10
         (iii)]  and  thus  did  not   consider   the   particular   factual
         circumstances of this appellant,  the  judge  considered  and  gave
         weight to that report when undertaking her analysis of  the  issues
         of risk on return. Insofar as the  original  grounds  of  challenge
         assert that the  FtTJ unfairly criticised the report  ,  and  acted
         unfairly in not disclosing her concerns, that is plainly  not  made
         out  on  the  evidence  nor  has   Ms  Faryl  identified  any  such
         procedural unfairness undertaken by the judge in  her  analysis  of
         the report. Indeed, as the respondent  submits  the  FtTJ  did  not
         question Ms P's expertise but was entitled to consider the contents
         of the report in the context of the appellant's claim (see  grounds
         4 of the original grounds entitled "procedural unfairness").

     87. There is no error in the FtTJ's assessment on the  basis  submitted
         by Ms Faryl. In my judgement the  FtTJ  plainly  proceeded  on  the
         basis that the appellant had an  association  with  IPOB,  and  her
         analysis of the evidence  went  to  the  issue  of  her  role,  her
         profile, identification by the Nigerian authorities and  associated
         risks on return.

     88. Whilst Ms Faryl  relies  upon  two  particular  paragraphs  in  the
         decision, paragraphs [29] and [31], they  should  not  be  read  in
         isolation but in the  context  of  the  FtTJ's  assessment  of  the
         evidence concerning the appellant's role at paragraphs [22  -  31].
         Within those paragraphs, the FtTJ gave careful consideration to the
         evidence,  both  documentary  and  oral,  as  to  the   appellant's
         association with IPOB and her role as an  editor.  The  judge  gave
         adequate and sustainable reasons based on the evidence to reach her
         omnibus conclusion, at  [31] that she was not  satisfied  that  the
         appellant had been "promoted to editor for any pro- Biafra or  IPOB
         sponsored media publication (whether online or broadsheet)".

     89. Those reasons can be summarised as follows:

               1. The appellant's current role and  her  title  was  unclear
                  which undermined the credibility of her case;  in  October
                  2018 the appellant (on her own case) had no specific  role
                  within IPOB and not one of any  prominence  as  editor  of
                  online or other  hardcopy  news  publications.  Thus,  any
                  change in a position must have come about in the  last  12
                  months. However, the  judge  observed  that  the  list  of
                  articles edited by X cited by Mr N  at  appendix  1  began
                  with articles edited in June 2018 and therefore  prior  to
                  the appeal hearing before Judge Moxon. The judge therefore
                  found that her evidence was inconsistent,  both  with  her
                  case having been  promoted  to  editor  since  the  appeal
                  hearing and also with her genuine fear of  reprisal  based
                  upon this article on the basis that it had not been raised
                  before Judge Moxon.  The  judge  also  observed  that  her
                  finding was supported by an article  on  page  89  of  the
                  bundle purporting to show her in a  journalistic  role  in
                  2018 when that evidence did not appear to  feature  before
                  Judge Moxon nor  had  she  elsewhere  claimed  that  she'd
                  spoken with a team of by Afrin  journalists  in  September
                  2018 which is the  subject  of  a  newspaper  article  (at
                  [34]).

               2. The evidence as to her formal title in a current role  was
                  contradictory and again did not assist in establishing her
                  credibility. The judge identified the differences  between
                  the evidence of  L and that of Mr O and in particular that
                  in relation to the evidence of Mr O  it  was  a  role  she
                  appeared to no longer hold based upon his  evidence  dated
                  26 days after her supposed appointment to  it.  The  judge
                  identified that only Mr N and Mr O refer to the  appellant
                  having an "editorial role" and the other evidence did  not
                  refer to her having a defined role at all (see [25]).

               3.  In  that  context,  the  judge  considered  that  if  the
                  appellant held an editorial role,  it  was  reasonable  to
                  expect  evidence  of  correspondence  with  writers/and/or
                  other editors or with  publications  themselves  regarding
                  the articles the appellant is said to have edited but that
                  "no such evidence was put before the Tribunal" (at [26]).

               4. The judge  considered  the  name  of  the  editor  of  the
                  articles which had been claimed to have been edited by the
                  appellant and observed that the name was different to that
                  of the appellant. The judge considered the explanation for
                  the difference in name but  having  considered  that,  the
                  judge found that there was "no clear reason  why  she  had
                  chosen to edit under the short name when purporting to act
                  in a professional capacity".  The  judge  also  took  into
                  account her evidence  and  cross-examination  regarding  a
                  knowledge of the names of journalists that she worked with
                  and found that her evidence and that was "vague"  for  the
                  reasons set out at paragraph 27 (i); she was not  able  to
                  answer  and  cross   examination   questions   about   the
                  journalist with whom she worked with by reference  to  the
                  article in the bundle at  page  244;  she  was  unable  to
                  identify correctly the journalist with him  she  said  she
                  was  working  closely  with;  and   her   answers   cross-
                  examination were not those of an "Informed editor".

               5. At [28] the FtTJ consider the evidence of   L  and  whilst
                  the judge considered  that  he  was  genuinely  trying  to
                  assist the Tribunal, his evidence  was  inconsistent  with
                  that of the appellant;  his  evidence  was  that  she  had
                  "written" the articles whereas the  appellant's  case  was
                  the vast majority of those are ones that  she  had  edited
                  not written. The judge also gave reasons  as  to  why  the
                  evidence of  L did not further her claim;  the  judge  was
                  not satisfied that he knew the appellant or  her  position
                  in I pop well enough to vouch for her and whilst  he  knew
                  her  through  her  interaction  at  events  there  was  no
                  evidence that he had any  "independent  knowledge  of  her
                  role outside with his liaising with her".

               6. At [29] the FtTJ made reference to the evidence  of  Mr  N
                  who had provided a report but had not attended for  cross-
                  examination. The judge considered that whilst he  appeared
                  to be the publisher of articles edited by someone  in  the
                  name of X , there  was  no  opportunity  for  the  factual
                  assertions he made at the appellant was in fact  a.k.a.  x
                  to be tested on the basis of how he had liaised with  her,
                  has he met her and therefore  concluded  that  the  weight
                  placed upon his evidence was limited.

               7. At [30] the judge considered the one  article  written  by
                  the appellant in which a  picture  appeared  (page  190  -
                  191). That image was unclear  but  having  been  handed  a
                  clearer copy, the judge found that  she  was  "not  easily
                  identifiable from the picture".  Pausing  here,  I  cannot
                  accept the submission made at paragraph 1 of the  original
                  grounds that the judge misdirected herself in relation  to
                  that evidence. The judge did not  omit  a  reference  that
                  article but expressly considered it at paragraph [30]. The
                  judge took into account the previous finding made by Judge
                  Moxon that the appellant relied upon photographic evidence
                  that  was  easily  manufactured  (paragraph  58   of   his
                  determination)  and  reached  the  conclusion   that   the
                  evidence did not advance her case further. The judge  also
                  importantly noted that whilst it was claimed that her role
                  was a social commentator and  she  had  contributed  to  a
                  publication based in the UK, the  judge's  attention  "was
                  not drawn to any publications based in the UK to which the
                  appellant had contributed".

     90. Having addressed the evidence at paragraphs [24 -  30],  the  judge
         then gave her  omnibus  conclusion  at  [31]  stating  as  follows;
         "Stepping back and considering all of the evidence  in  the  round,
         for the reasons that I have given  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
         appellant has been promoted to editor of any pro- Biafran  or  IPOB
         sponsored media publication (whether online or broadsheet)".

     91. As can be  properly  seen  from  those  paragraphs,  at  [29]   the
         reference made by the FtTJ was that  Mr N's factual assertion could
         be viewed as capable being viewed as support for her  claim  to  be
         editor but on the judge's analysis of all the evidence in the round
         as set out at [31], and including that of Mr N, the judge  did  not
         find that she was satisfied that the appellant  had  in  fact  been
         promoted to any such role. Consequently, there is no  inconsistency
         between paragraphs 29 and 31 as submitted by Ms Faryl.

     92. The second issue identified by Ms  Faryl  in  her  submissions  was
         whether the appellant would be identified  by  the  authorities  on
         return. In support of that submission, she stated that the evidence
         advanced on behalf of the appellant demonstrated  that  she  had  a
         "prolific presence as a writer editor and activist", that  most  of
         her work featured with a short name rather than her full  name  and
         that the evidence taken together along with the photographs of  her
         was sufficient to demonstrate that there was a real likelihood that
         she could be identified as a " pro- Biafran activist. "

     93. Ms Faryl identified the report prepared by Mr N, (page 42) and that
         the appellant could be easily identified by a simple search on  the
         search engine.

     94. That submission fails to  take  account  of  the  detailed  factual
         findings made by the judge and her analysis of the evidence. As set
         out in the preceding  paragraphs,  at  [24  -  31]  the  FtTJ  gave
         adequate and sustainable reasons as to why the judge  rejected  her
         claimed profile as an  editor  and  activist.  Those  reasons  were
         supported squarely by the evidence  including  that  undertaken  in
         cross examination. It is plain from those findings of fact that the
         judge regarded her credibility to be  undermined  by  the  lack  of
         consistency between her evidence and  the  evidence  of  the  other
         personnel involved as to her role, and evidence in support of  that
         role. As at [26] the judge observed that if she held  an  editorial
         role, there would be evidence of correspondence  with  writers  and
         other editors of the publications the appellant was  said  to  have
         edited, but no such evidence is before the Tribunal. Ms  Faryl  has
         not pointed the Tribunal to any evidence to contradict or undermine
         those findings of fact.

     95. The only point raised  in  the  grounds  and  in  oral  submissions
         relates to the shortened name given in  the  articles  said  to  be
         edited by the appellant.  Ms  Faryl  submits  that  the  judge  was
         "splitting hairs"  when  considering  the  pseudonym  used  by  the
         appellant.  I do not consider that that criticism is made out.  The
         judge was entitled to consider on the material before  her  whether
         the articles would necessarily identify the appellant or would lead
         to her identification. This was considered by the judge at [27] who
         found that the appellant was not able to give any clear reason  why
         she had chosen  to  edit  under  that  "shortened  name"  but  also
         identified a number of credibility points at  [27]  (i)-(iv)  which
         undermined her claim.

     96. Furthermore, the FtTJ returned to this issue of  identification  of
         the appellant on the alternative basis that if she was wrong  about
         her role, whether she was identifiable as a "pro  Biafra  activist"
         at [32]. For the reasons given at that paragraph, the judge was not
         satisfied that she would be so identified taking into account  that
         on the articles her name was "markedly different" to her real  name
         and that there was no evidence before her  as  to  how  common  the
         pseudonym was in Nigeria or as abbreviated despite being on  notice
         that this was an issue raised by the  respondent  in  the  decision
         letter. The judge found there was no background evidence to support
         the  assertion  that  the  government  would  place  "two  and  two
         together" given where  the  appellant  came  from  in  Nigeria  and
         addressed the evidence of Mr N that search  engine  keywords  would
         have to be precise and that on his evidence, the appellant had  not
         shown that if the Nigerian authorities were to search for the  name
         used on the articles, such images would identify the appellant. The
         judge also dealt with the appellant's evidence that  she  expressed
         views on Facebook but none of  that  had  been  placed  before  the
         Tribunal and was "notable by its absence" (see [32 (iv)].

     97. Contrary to Ms Faryl's  submissions,  the  judge  did  analyse  the
         evidence of the appellant's attendance  at  12  demonstrations  and
         events organised by IPOB. At [34] the judge accepted  the  evidence
         of L and the photographic  evidence  that  she  had  attended  such
         demonstrations. The judge also accepted that she been  involved  in
         the streaming of events but identified at [35] that  the  "question
         for me is whether, to the lower standard of proof,  her  attendance
         and role places her at a real risk of persecution  on  return."  At
         paragraphs [36 - 45] the judge undertook a detailed analysis of the
         evidence and whether such attendance  would  be  likely  be  either
         monitored by the Nigerian authorities or in fact whether she  would
         be identified.

     98. It has not been demonstrated by either  the  written  or  the  oral
         submissions that those factual findings were not open to the  judge
         to make on the evidence before her or that she failed to take  into
         account the evidence. I have not been taken to any evidence  during
         the course of submissions to undermine those factual  findings.  Ms
         Faryl relied upon the evidence of Mr  N  in  his  report  that  the
         evidence of the IPOB events is available online and that  it  would
         come to the  attention  of  the  authorities.  However,  the  judge
         considered this at [37] in the context of the report  of  Ms  P  in
         that it is plausible that the Nigerian military have been  seen  to
         closely monitor activities of pro-Biafra groups. The source of that
         opinion is an announcement on a website in 2017 that  the  military
         "will now monitor anti-government social media activities". At [38]-
         [40], the FtTJ undertook an assessment of the  evidence,  including
         the country evidence to see if that declaration had  been  followed
         up or carried out with any  adverse  consequences  after  2017.  In
         doing so the judge considered the expert report of Ms P and of  the
         arrest in January 2018 of a journalist and online blogger.  However
         the judge gave reasons as to why  the  appellant  did  not  have  a
         profile of a similar nature- that the journalist was  not  arrested
         at the airport on return but in Nigeria as  his  name  was  already
         known through his journalistic activities and also  that  this  was
         one example but the report at paragraph 31 had not been sourced  by
         the expert.  At [39] the judge found that there had been  no  other
         evidence cited in behalf of the appellant to show  that  online  or
         other monitoring of pro-Biafra groups in the diaspora had  led  the
         adverse consequences on return to Nigeria such that  the  appellant
         would reasonably likely to be identified.

     99. At paragraph [40] addressing the evidence of Mr N, the judge  noted
         that there was no footage shown but also the witness  did  not  say
         that the appellant was identified by name and in the photographs or
         videos and at [41] the judge observed that  she  was  taken  to  no
         evidence to show that the appellant's full name been  published  on
         social media is participating in  the  events;  on  one  event  the
         appellant confirmed she could not be seen on camera, and the  judge
         gave other reasons at paragraphs [42 - 44]  as  to  why  the  judge
         found that  she  would  not  be  identified  as  a  result  of  any
         activities and concluded at [45] the appellant was  a  "face  in  a
         crowd of people". The judge's conclusion at [46] that  it  had  not
         been shown that the government had  the  ability  to  identify  the
         appellant or to cross-reference any pictures  they  may  have  IPOB
         protests or meetings in the UK.

    100. Insofar as the renewed grounds of appeal assert that because  there
         was no evidence adduced as to the circumstances of IPOB  supporters
         returned to Nigeria that this does not mean there was  no  risk  on
         return, in my judgement it was open to  the  FtTJ  to  analyse  the
         evidence including that in the report of Ms P as to whether such  a
         risk existed to this particular appellant. The judge resolved  that
         issue in her comprehensive findings of fact set out above.

    101. A further issue raised in the  original  grounds'  states  that  "a
         deportee or failed asylum seeker is immediately handed over to  the
         Nigerian police for further investigation". No evidence in  support
         of that assertion is cited in the grounds and the  FtTJ  considered
         the evidence as to circumstances of a return at [52] observing that
         the expert report did not  provide  evidence  as  to  any  specific
         mechanism of return or in processing at the airport  upon  arrival.
         There was no evidence as  to  whether  or  not  all  returnees  are
         screened or whether they  would  be  asked  questions  about  their
         activities in the United Kingdom. The FtTJ also addressed  this  at
         [47] by contrasting the lack of  evidence  to  show  those  in  the
         diaspora are of sufficient interest to be identified  and  arrested
         on return and contrasted that with the situation of  those  present
         in Nigeria.

    102. The original grounds also assert  that  the  FtTJ  failed  to  make
         findings regarding the culture of oath in IPOB and failed  to  have
         regard to the principles  in  RT  (Zimbabwe)  and  HJ  (Iran)  (see
         paragraph 7). However the FtTJ at paragraphs [47] -[52] set out her
         analysis of the appellant's evidence and gave reasons as to why she
         had reached the conclusion that she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
         appellant was sincere in her commitment to the organisation and  at
         [50] expressly considered the issue of the oath,  and  that  having
         heard the evidence  she  was  not  satisfied  the  appellant  would
         demonstrate  in  Nigeria,  and  at  [52]  further   considered   RT
         (Zimbabwe)[2010] EWCA Civ 1285.

    103. The FtTJ had the advantage of hearing the oral evidence before  the
         Tribunal. In the well-known case of Piglowska  v  Piglowski  [1999]
         UKHL 27, Lord Hoffmann said this:

             "... the appellate court must bear in mind the advantage which
             the first instance judge had in seeing  the  parties  and  the
             other witnesses. This  is  well  understood  on  questions  of
             credibility and findings of primary fact. But it goes  further
             than that. It applies also to the judge's evaluation of  those
             facts. ..."

    104. In so far as it is asserted in the written grounds that there was a
         lack  of  reasoning  for  consideration  of  the  evidence  in  the
         determination, when considering claims of international protection,
         a judge is required  to  consider  the  core  issues  and  to  make
         findings upon them. Following Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)
         [2014] UKUT 341 (IAC) judges need to resolve the key  conflicts  in
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons  for
         preferring one case to the other so that parties can understand why
         they have lost. Reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a
         whole makes sense, having regard to  the  material  accepted  by  a
         judge: Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85
         (IAC), at [10]. I accept the  submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent that this was a clear and  detailed  decision  in  which
         adequately reasoned findings were made with anxious scrutiny and in
         accordance with the evidence.

    105. The question whether the decision contains a material error of  law
         is not whether  another  Judge  could  have  reached  the  opposite
         conclusion  but  whether  this  Judge  reached  a   conclusion   by
         appropriately  directing  himself  as  to  the  relevant  law   and
         assessing the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

    106.  The judge had the advantage of considering all the evidence in the
         case.   As  the  Supreme  Court  stated  in  Henderson  v  Foxworth
         Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41; [2014] 1 WLR 2600 at [62]:

             "It does not matter, with whatever degree of  certainty,  that
             the appellate court considers that it  would  have  reached  a
             different conclusion. What matters  is  whether  the  decision
             under appeal is  one  that  no  reasonable  judge  could  have
             reached."

    107. For those reasons, I am satisfied that it has not been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision was one  that  was  reasonably
         open to her on the assessment of the evidence.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Dated 10 September 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.

