
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09476/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2019                   |On 11 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    H Q P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr A Khan of Counsel, instructed by Thompson and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office presenting officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of judge Mathews  (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 24 September 2018.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam.  His  asylum  and  human  rights
    claim was refused on 19 July 2018. The appeal was heard  on  29  August
    2018 and dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    He contended that there had been a procedural unfairness which amounted
    to a material error of law as the judge had refused an application  for
    an adjournment which was requested so that the appellant could obtain a
    medical report. The judge then went on to make an  adverse  credibility
    finding against the appellant because he had failed to  supply  medical
    evidence.

 4. It was also contended that the judge had rejected evidence given by the
    appellant's partner without giving any reasons or explanation,  and  it
    was said that this also amounted to a material error of law.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  who
    found it arguable that the judge  had  erred  in  law  in  refusing  to
    adjourn the hearing and thereafter drawing adverse inference  from  the
    lack of medical evidence, and it was also arguable that the  judge  did
    not adequately explain why the evidence of the appellant's partner  was
    rejected.

 6. Following the grant of permission to  appeal  the  respondent  did  not
    lodge a response pursuant to rule 24 of the 2008 Procedure Rules.

 7. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

My Consideration and Conclusions

 8. At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  Mr  Jarvis  advised  that  the
    respondent accepted that the judge  had  materially  erred  in  law  as
    contended in the grounds and that the decision of the FTT should be set
    aside and remade with no findings preserved. Unsurprisingly Mr Khan was
    in agreement.

 9. I find the respondent's concession to be rightly made and although  the
    decision of the FTT has been prepared with care, I find that the  judge
    materially erred  in  law  as  contended  in  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal was granted.

10. With reference to the adjournment, the judge  records  at  paragraph  7
    that the appellant's solicitor had  confirmed  that  funding  had  been
    granted by the Legal Aid Agency on 28 August 2018, the day  before  the
    hearing. However at paragraph 10 the judge records  that  there  is  no
    confirmation  of  funding  being  in  place.  The  judge's  record   of
    proceedings indicates that the solicitor confirmed that funding was  in
    place and this was confirmed by an email. Mr Khan submitted  a  further
    copy of that email from the Legal Aid agency.

11. In refusing the adjournment application  the  judge  records  that  the
    application was not made in writing and no notice  of  the  application
    had been given. There had  in  fact  been  a  previous  application  in
    writing which had been refused by a tribunal caseworker on the  grounds
    that a report had not been commissioned. The principle to be applied in
    considering whether to grant an adjournment, is whether an  adjournment
    is required in order for there to be a fair hearing. In this  case  the
    judge erred in refusing an adjournment on  the  basis  that  there  was
    sufficient evidence to fairly decide the case, but then made an adverse
    finding against the appellant because medical  evidence  had  not  been
    submitted.  The  judge  observed  that  there  had  been   a   previous
    application for an adjournment, but that did  not  preclude  a  further
    application  particularly  because  there  had   been   a   change   in
    circumstances in that after the refusal  of  the  initial  application,
    funding had been granted. In the circumstances it is my view  that  the
    respondent was correct to concede  that  refusing  an  adjournment  was
    unfair, and the medical report may be material, and therefore there has
    been a material error of law.

12. I am also satisfied that the judge materially erred in law at paragraph
    36 in finding the evidence given  by  the  appellant's  partner  to  be
    inadequate. Findings must be supported by adequate reasons so that  the
    parties know why evidence has been accepted or rejected. In  this  case
    no adequate reasons are given.

13. I find that the errors referred to above render the FTT decision unsafe
    and  therefore  it  must  be  set  aside.  It  was  accepted  by   both
    representatives that no findings of fact should be preserved.

14. The decision must be remade. I have considered the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements at paragraph 7.2  and  find  that  the  appropriate
    course is to remit the appeal back to the FTT to be heard afresh.  This
    is because substantial judicial fact-finding is required and it is more
    appropriate for such fact-finding to be carried out by the FTT.

15. The appeal will therefore be heard again by the  FTT  and  the  parties
    will be advised of the venue, time and date in due course.  The  appeal
    is to be heard by an FTT judge other than judge Mathews.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside. The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed  [pic]                           Date 28 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award. The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered
by the FTT.

Signed  [pic]                           Date 28 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
















