

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09682/2019


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22 December 2020                           |On 14 January 2021              |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     AJ
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr Woodhouse of HS Immigration Consultants.
For the Respondent: Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. By a decision promulgated on 1 October 2020 the Upper Tribunal  set
        aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal and gave directions for
        the future hearing of this appeal which is limited to consideration
        of whether the appellant's conversion to  Christianity  is  genuine
        and what risk may arise in relation thereto if returned to Iran.
     2. There are a  number  of  preserved  findings  from  the  First-tier
        Tribunal  decision  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  immigration
        history, family composition in the United Kingdom, attendance at  a
        church in Leeds, and his having undergone ceremonies of baptism and
        confirmation.



Background


     3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 11 July 1975 who
        entered the United Kingdom on 24 February 2001.
     4. Mr Tan in his submissions referred to two earlier appeals in  which
        claims made by the appellant had been rejected  by  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.
     5. In a determination of 9 May 2008, in relation to an appeal  against
        the  respondent's  decision  of  18  September  2007  to   make   a
        deportation order against the appellant, it was noted the appellant
        had claimed he feared persecution from the authorities in Iran as a
        result of it being  discovered  he  was  supplying  and  installing
        illegal satellite equipment. The panel in that case also  noted  at
        [14 - 15]:


        14.  Within the Appellant's first bundle of documents is  a  letter
             from John Marshall, a prison chaplain at HMP  Birmingham.  The
             Appellant was one of three Iranian Christians who sought  help
             in  learning  about  Christian  beliefs.  "[A]  had  become  a
             Christian prior to being in our prison  and  possibly  as  far
             back as when he was in Iran." He found the  Appellant's  story
             of why he  left  Iran  to  be  "very  credible".  He  met  the
             Appellant  once  or  twice  a  week  and  the  Appellant   was
             noticeably thirsty for knowledge of the Christian ways.


        15.  The Appellant has since his release become part of a Jehovah's
             Witness congregation. At the hearing Andrew Seal, an elder  of
             the Oldbury congregation, gave  evidence  on  his  behalf.  No
             statement had been submitted from him prior to the hearing and
             accordingly we rose for 20 minutes to  allow  the  Appellant's
             solicitor time to prepare a  handwritten  statement.  Mr  Seal
             said that his congregation sponsored a  Farsi-speaking  group.
             The  Appellant  started   attending   meetings   four   months
             beforehand and had attended regularly. He had weekly  personal
             Bible study sessions with a member  of  the  congregation  who
             spoke Farsi. He was not however ready to be baptised yet,  but
             this was not unusual. It frequently took some  time  before  a
             person was ready. There are various stages.  Before  a  person
             was considered ready to be baptised an  assessment  was  made.
             Before  this,  the  person  would  have  been  an  "unbaptised
             publisher" for some time and until a person was an "unbaptised
             publisher" they would not be considered as qualified to go out
             with other witnesses from door to door to talk to  members  of
             the public as part of their ministry. The  Appellant  had  not
             reached  this  stage  yet.  He  considered   the   Appellant's
             involvement to be genuine.


     6. In the section of that determination in which the  panel  sets  out
        its findings it is written:


        31.  The Appellant says that he has  become  a  Christian.  At  his
             interviews in September and October 2007 said that he was part
             of the Church of England. Since then however he has sought  to
             claim that he has become a Jehovah's Witness and that on  this
             account he will face persecution upon return to Iran as it  is
             part of his religious obligations to  convert  others  to  the
             faith.


        32.  There are significant and important  differences  between  the
             practices of the Church of England and Jehovah's witnesses. At
             his interviews in October and November 2007, although  he  had
             some knowledge of the Christian faith, he was often  vague  in
             his responses. At the hearing he said that for  some  time  he
             had been looking for all the "true faith" and  there  is  some
             suggestion that his interest in religion, for whatever reason,
             predated his detention although we cannot see  in  the  papers
             before us that, as at the prison chaplain mentions, he claimed
             to have been interested in Christianity in Iran.


        33.  We  have  heard  the  evidence  of  Mr  Seal  and  accept  his
             sincerity. However, his evidence must  be  considered  in  the
             round with the remainder of the evidence  before  us.  In  any
             event we accept his explanation as to why  the  Appellant  has
             not been baptised and do not take this fact  into  account  in
             our assessment of whether he has converted to Christianity.


             ...


        35.  The Appellant claims that his conversion is genuine  and  that
             he is under an obligation  to  tell  others  about  his  faith.
             Despite this, he says that the only member  of  his  family  in
             Iran he has told of his conversion is  his  mother.  He  claims
             that the that he is at risk from  his  family  if  they  become
             aware of his conversion but there is no risk to him if he is in
             the United Kingdom and yet he has not  told  them  of  his  new
             faith. The cousin who gave evidence at the hearing did not know
             anything about the church the Appellant claimed to have joined.
             This is not an example of the Appellant  declining  to  tell  a
             Muslim member of his family about his conversion  for  fear  of
             consequences. His cousin was aware of  his  "Christianity"  but
             not aware of  the  particular  branch.  If  the  Appellant  was
             sincere in his  conversion  and  membership  of  the  Jehovah's
             Witnesses, even if he was not considered to be qualified to  be
             an "unbaptised publisher", we find that he would have told  his
             cousin, a person to whom he claims to  be  close,  of  such  an
             important change in his life.


        36.  We have concluded when looking at the Appellant's evidence  in
             the round, his previous fabricated claim, his first claim  that
             he  was  a  member  of  the  Church  of   England,   his   poor
             understanding  of  the  Christian  faith  as  demonstrated   at
             interview,  his  lack  of  understanding   of   the   important
             differences  between  the  Church  of  England  and   Jehovah's
             Witnesses as demonstrated at interview and the fact that he has
             failed to make it known what he claims are his  deep  and  true
             beliefs to those nearest and dearest to him, that  his  present
             claim to be a Jehovah's Witness is yet a  further  fabrication.
             In any event we are not satisfied that he is reasonably  likely
             to proselytise upon return to Iran. As we have said he has  not
             even try to do this in the United Kingdom,  where  his  actions
             would not meet with  any  adverse  consequences,  even  to  the
             limited extent of telling those close  to  him  about  his  new
             beliefs. He says that his conversion will become known  to  his
             family upon return but we cannot attach any credibility to this
             claim in view of his overall lack of credibility and  the  lack
             of any supporting evidence. We do not consider that  there  are
             any additional risk factors in his case that would prevent  his
             return and in this respect we take into account the  fact  that
             he  is  likely  to  have  left  Iran  illegally.  He  may  face
             questioning in this respect upon return and possibly  a  period
             of detention but we do not consider that the evidence  is  that
             this will amount to a breach of Article 3 or serious harm.


     7. A second decision by another  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
        Judge Davies, was promulgated on 20  November  2014.  This  records
        that following the rejection of the earlier claim in  the  decision
        referred to above further submissions were made by the appellant on
        4 December 2012 and 9 February 2014 which were accepted as a  fresh
        claim and as an application to revoke the  deportation  order  made
        previously.
     8. Judge Davies records at [10] the following:


        10.  It is not necessary to go into that part of the refusal letter
             that deals with the Appellant's evidence relating to his claim
             to fear persecution on the grounds of political opinion as  it
             was made clear at the  hearing  that  the  Appellant  was  not
             pursuing that aspect of his case. In any event if I upheld the
             Section 72 certificate the Appellant would be unable to do so.
             The Respondent considered the Appellant's claim  that  he  had
             converted to Christianity in August 2006 and that he  was  now
             the Church  of  England  denomination  having  found  religion
             whilst in prison. The  Appellant  was  baptised  in  2013  and
             attended a Christian church at St Aidan's, Leeds having  first
             attended there in February 2013. He attended up to the date of
             his interview.


     9. It was also noted in the refusal letter that the appellant  claimed
        to have converted many people to Christianity and stated  he  would
        continue to do so if he was returned to Iran
    10. In addition to oral evidence from the appellant, Judge  Davies  had
        the benefit of oral evidence from church members who  were  subject
        to cross-examination as recorded in that decision.
    11. Judge Davies upheld the Section 72 certificate. In relation to  the
        question of whether the appellant  was  a  genuine  convert,  Judge
        Davies found at [64-73]:


        64.  I conclude applying the standard of proof indicated above that
             the Appellant is not a credible witness and that  his  claimed
             conversion to Christianity is not genuine.


        65.  His evidence with regard to Christianity and his  interest  in
             it contains a number of discrepancies. Having claimed to  have
             become  interested  in  Christianity  initially  in  Iran  the
             Appellant then claims that whilst in  prison  he  resumed  his
             interest  and  became  a  Jehovah's  Witness.   The   previous
             Immigration Judge found that his claim in that  regard  was  a
             fabrication. It is particularly  significant  in  this  appeal
             that the two persons who have attended  the  hearing  to  give
             evidence as to the genuineness of the  Appellant's  conversion
             to  Christianity  were  not  aware  that  the  Appellant   had
             previously claimed to be a Jehovah's Witness.


        66.  It is also significant that the Appellant did not mention this
             to the psychiatrist who has presented a  report  finding  that
             the Appellant has PTSD. None of the witnesses  were  aware  of
             this fact and it is wholly incredible that the Appellant,  who
             they have clearly taken into their  trust,  would  not  reveal
             this information to them. I conclude he has taken the decision
             not to reveal that information because  it  would  present  in
             their minds a doubt as to the genuineness of his  now  claimed
             conversion to Christianity. I conclude that this is a  further
             attempt by the Appellant to deceive people. It is clear to  me
             that the Appellant's overriding intention throughout his  time
             in the United Kingdom has been to prevent his removal from the
             United Kingdom.


        67.  The Appellant's evidence as to the contact he has had with his
             family   again   contains    numerous    discrepancies.    The
             circumstances which led to him committing the offence of false
             imprisonment for which he received a  sentence  of  two  years
             again are incredible.  The  Appellant  claims  never  to  have
             worked in the United Kingdom but was able to  amass  the  huge
             sum of �14,000 to lend  to  the  person  he  had  subsequently
             falsely imprisoned. His claims to  have  borrowed  that  money
             from friends but other evidence indicates that it was obtained
             from his family in Iran. I conclude that the  Appellant  again
             has been untruthful in that regard.


        68.  The Appellant has been untruthful  as  to  whether  he  worked
             prior to his sentence at the Birmingham Crown Court. The judge
             clearly believed that the Appellant did work as he  states  in
             his sentencing remarks. The Appellant's claim that he did  not
             work because he did not  have  permission  but  simply  helped
             friends  is  again  wholly  unbelievable  and  is  a   further
             indication of the Appellant's dishonesty.


        69.  As has been accepted by  the  Appellant's  representative  the
             starting point in this appeal is  the  findings  made  by  the
             Immigration Judge in 2008. It is significant that despite,  in
             those proceedings, claiming to fear  persecution  in  Iran  on
             account of his political opinion that that no longer  plays  a
             part in the Appellant's case even though he  claimed  to  have
             been tortured in Iran.


        70.  The Appellant had  previously  fabricated  a  claim  to  be  a
             Jehovah's Witness and to have a fear of persecution on account
             of his political opinion. Whilst his knowledge of Christianity
             at the previous hearing before an Immigration  Judge  was  not
             good I find that the Appellant has taken a decision to improve
             that knowledge by attending Christian churches  in  Leeds  and
             Darwen. The fact that the Appellant  now  has  more  knowledge
             regarding Christianity than previously does  not  lead  me  to
             conclude he is a genuine Christian convert.  It  leads  me  to
             conclude that he has simply improved his knowledge  to  assist
             in his false claim that he is a genuine Christian.


        71.  It is of particular concern that the Appellant  has  attempted
             to persuade persons connected to the churches he attended that
             he is a genuine convert. The Appellant's evidence  as  to  his
             interest in Christianity is at odds with the evidence given by
             Brother Christopher Martin. The fact that  the  Appellant  did
             not tell Brother Martin of the circumstances of  his  previous
             asylum claim are a clear indication that the Appellant  sought
             to deceive  Brother  Martin.  I  make  a  similar  observation
             regarding the evidence of  Anna  Catherine  Magdalene  and  in
             regard to her evidence I note that  she  has  only  known  the
             Appellant for some four months.


        72.  Whilst I do not doubt the sincerity of the two  witnesses  who
             have given evidence before me and the other persons  who  have
             provided written evidence I conclude that  the  Appellant  has
             sought  to  deceive  them  into  believing  he  is  a  genuine
             Christian convert when that is not the case.


        73.  The Appellant is not a genuine convert to Christianity and  as
             such it is not reasonably  likely  that  he  will  or  may  be
             persecuted account of his religion if he is returned to  Iran.
             As the Appellant now puts  forward  no  other  reason  why  he
             cannot return to Iran his appeal must be dismissed.


    12. Judge Andrew in her decision promulgated on 7  January  2020  noted
        the decisions of the previous judges that  the  appellant  had  not
        rebutted the presumption that he was a  danger  to  the  community,
        meaning the section 72 certificate stood, but  was  persuaded  that
        the appellant had rebutted the presumption  on  the  basis  of  the
        information  available  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  meaning  the
        section 72 certificate must fall. The appellant was therefore  able
        to argue the Refugee Convention matter in this appeal.
    13. It also recorded that the  appellant  married  his  wife,  also  an
        Iranian national, on 21 March 2017. The evidence before  the  Upper
        Tribunal is that this person has been  granted  refugee  status  in
        United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  being  a  genuine  convert  to
        Christianity and the risk she would face on return to Iran.



The law


    14. The current country guidance case relating to  risks  to  Christian
        converts in Iran is PS (Christianity - risk) Iran  CG  [2020]  UKUT
        00046 (IAC) which provides guidance in the assessment of protection
        claims from Iranians who claim to  have  converted  from  Islam  to
        Christianity.
    15. The case sets out the approach in such cases and  states:  Decision
        makers  should  begin  by  determining  whether  the  claimant  has
        demonstrated that it is reasonably likely  that  he  or  she  is  a
        Christian.
    16. If that burden is discharged the  following  considerations  apply:
        (i) A convert to Christianity seeking to openly practice that faith
        in Iran would face a real risk of persecution. (ii) If the claimant
        would in fact conceal his faith,  decision-makers  should  consider
        why. If any part of the claimant's motivation is  a  fear  of  such
        persecution, the appeal should be allowed. (iii)  If  the  claimant
        would choose to conceal his faith purely for other reasons  (family
        pressure,  social  constraints,  personal  preference   etc)   then
        protection  should  be  refused.  The  evidence  demonstrates  that
        private and solitary worship, within the confines of the  home,  is
        possible  and  would  not  in  general  entail  a  real   risk   of
        persecution. In cases where the claimant is found to  be  insincere
        in his or her claimed conversion, there  is  not  a  real  risk  of
        persecution  'in-country'.  There  being  no  reason  for  such  an
        individual to associate himself with Christians,  there  is  not  a
        real risk that he would  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
        Iranian authorities.
    17. Decision-makers  must  nevertheless  consider  the  possible  risks
        arising at the 'pinch-point' of arrival: (i) All  returning  failed
        asylum seekers are subject to questioning on arrival, and this will
        include  questions  about  why  they  claimed  asylum  (a   genuine
        Christian asked about the basis of his claim for asylum  cannot  be
        expected to lie para 111); (ii) A returnee  who  divulges  that  he
        claimed to be a Christian is reasonably likely  to  be  transferred
        for further questioning; (iii) The returnee can be expected to sign
        an undertaking renouncing his claimed Christianity. The questioning
        will therefore in general be short and will not entail a real  risk
        of ill-treatment; (iv) If there are any reasons why  the  detention
        becomes prolonged, the risk of ill-treatment  will  correspondingly
        rise.
    18. Factors that could result in prolonged detention must be determined
        on a case by case basis. They could include but are not limited to:
        a. Previous adverse contact with the Iranian security services;  b.
        Connection to persons of interest to the  Iranian  authorities;  c.
        Attendance at a church with perceived connection to  Iranian  house
        churches;  d.  Overt  social  media  content  indicating  that  the
        individual concerned has actively promoted Christianity.
    19. The Upper Tribunal in PS referred to the framework for  enquiry  to
        be applied to claims based on sexual orientation set  out  by  Lord
        Rodger in HJ (Iran)  and  swapped  the  word  "gay"  for  the  word
        "Christian" to consider the  same  analysis  and  found  it  to  be
        determinative in the case of Christians who openly worship in  this
        country and who would wish to continue to do so in  Iran,  but  for
        their well-founded fear of persecution.

The evidence

    20. The appellant submitted a further bundle in support of  his  appeal
        including an up to date witness statement. His  earlier  statements
        dated 7 March 2018 and 17 December 2019 are also being relied upon.
        In relation to his current situation the appellant writes:

        3.   As I have explained, it was when I was in prison  that  I  was
             introduced to the Jehovah's Witness faith. I have explained in
             my previous statements how  sometime  after  my  release  from
             prison I began to have  doubts  about  the  Jehovah's  Witness
             faith and this led me to stopping practising  that  faith.  It
             has been said that I lied about being a Jehovah's Witness  but
             that is not correct. One thing that Judge Davies questioned in
             2014 was why I  had  not  told  my  church  leaders  about  my
             previous Jehovah's Witness faith and he said it was to deceive
             them. In fact there was no particular reason  for  me  not  to
             mention it to them it was just that I did not tell them. I was
             not trying to hide it because I do not think it is something I
             should hide.

        4.   I continued attending at St Aidan's church in Leeds  for  some
             time after my 2014 appeal was dismissed however  eventually  I
             was forced to leave Leeds because I had  nowhere  to  live.  I
             came to Birmingham around the middle of 2015 and I would  stay
             with different friends in different parts of the city.  Around
             this time I attended different churches depending on where  in
             Birmingham I was staying. This was also around the time I  met
             [N] in Manchester and when I visited her in Rochdale we  would
             go to church together there.

        5.   I was introduced to Smethwick Old Church in April 2016  and  I
             have been a member of the congregation since that time. I  was
             introduced to the church by a fellow Iranians Christian called
             Ali Shah Hosseini.

        6.   The two most important things in my life are my wife  [N]  and
             my Christian faith. Our shared beliefs are an  important  part
             of our relationship and nothing makes me happier than being in
             church with [N]. We were both  extremely  proud  to  have  our
             marriage blessed in the church on 13 May 2017 and it was  very
             special for both of us to share that occasion with the  church
             leaders and congregation.

        7.   During the early days of  Covid-19  outbreak  the  church  was
             forced to close and during that time [N] and I  practised  our
             faith at home. We were both extremely happy  when  the  church
             reopened for services and since that time we have attended the
             services. Of course, things are  a  bit  different  to  before
             because of social distancing and because of this  I  have  not
             carried the cross or helped with serving the  wine  since  the
             church reopened. Being in church makes  me  feel  relaxed  and
             calm. It is a difficult feeling to describe  but  it  is  like
             being at peace. Before the Covid-19  outbreak  we  would  have
             regular Bible study gathering at  Brother  John's  house,  but
             these also have not restarted.

        8.   I live openly as a  Christian  and  I  live  my  life  by  the
             Christian values which are important to me. I believe that the
             values in  Christianity,  kindness  and  forgiveness,  are  an
             important lesson for how to live a positive  life.  I  try  to
             help people and to be there for them; if I see someone who  is
             upset I tried to comfort them. By being kind and  forgiving  I
             have found a calmness within myself and I put this down to  my
             faith.

        9.   I share my faith with people that I meet. My faith  has  given
             so much to me and I want other people to be able to experience
             that too. I continue to  share  my  faith  online  through  my
             Facebook profile. I do this because it is  a  way  for  me  to
             express my faith and share something that is important to  me.
             I hope that people see the things that  I  post  and  that  it
             makes them feel happy and that it makes  them  want  to  learn
             more  about  Christianity.  When  I  talk  to   people   about
             Christianity, I tried to explain how it has helped  me  in  my
             life. I explain how I have been in  difficult  situations  but
             despite that I can find comfort in my faith.

        10.  I cannot return to Iran because my life is in danger because I
             am an open Christian convert. I could never imagine having  to
             hide my faith because it means so much to me. My  entire  life
             is in the UK, my wife my church and my friends. All I want  is
             to be able to live a normal life with my wife. I accept that I
             made a very stupid mistake and it is something that  I  regret
             every day of my life. I have never done  anything  else  wrong
             since that time and I cannot change the past but I am  a  very
             different person now.  I  therefore  ask  that  my  appeal  is
             allowed so that I can practice my faith in peace with my wife.

    21. In his oral  evidence  the  appellant  was  broadly  consistent  in
        relation  to  his  attendance  at  the  various  churches  and  his
        Christian beliefs.
    22. A witness statement has also been filed  by  the  appellant's  wife
        dated 7 March 2018 in which she confirmed she met the appellant  in
        2015 in Manchester and that when she moved to  Birmingham  in  2016
        they moved in together. The statements refers to them  starting  to
        visit church together and attending Smethwick Old Church every week
        and taking part in church activities and attending Bible classes.
    23.  The  oral  evidence  of  the  appellants  wife  corroborated   the
        appellants account of their meeting and the  development  of  their
        relationship,  their  shared  belief  in   the   Christian   faith,
        attendances at services and home prayer, and  restated  her  belief
        that the appellant's conversion  and  following  of  the  Christian
        faith is genuine.
    24. The appellant has also provided  evidence  from  church  officials,
        photographs of attending the church with his wife, and  screenshots
        from his Facebook account.
    25. The evidence from the church includes a letter  from  the  Rt  Revd
        John Packer, Bishop of Ripon and Leeds, dated 2  January  2014  and
        addressed to the appellant following a request  by  the  Revd  Paul
        Payton to grant permission to  the  appellant  to  administer  Holy
        Communion at Leeds All Souls and St Aidan Church, which  was  given
        for a period of five years by the Bishop.
    26. A letter from Fr Paul Payton, the Rector of St  Aidan's  Church  in
        Leeds, dated 18  January  2014,  and  addressed  "to  whom  it  may
        concern" confirms the appellant's attendance  at  that  church  and
        involvement in what are described as "additional, extended  nurture
        events"  and  the  appellant   contributing   enthusiastically   to
        discussion  and  practical  faith-based  activities.   The   letter
        describes the appellant as having "a thirst for learning about  the
        Christian faith and a passion to share this with others".
    27. In relation to the appellant's baptism, Father Payton writes:

"As part of his ongoing nurture,  Ahmad  has  been  baptised  (21/07/13)  by
myself and confirmed (05/12/13) by Bishop  John  Packer,  Ripon  and  Leeds)
according to the rites and ceremonies of the Church  of  England,  important
steps of growth and witness which indicates a sincere  and  grounded  faith.
Ahmed's  commitment  and  sincere  desire  to  be  actively   involved   and
contributing to the life of the church is indicated by  his  involvement  as
an altar server and by being permission by the  Bishop  to  distribute  Holy
Communion as an Eucharistic Minister. His language skills have  allowed  him
to read publicly at our Epiphany Service in January and before Christmas  he
formed part of a working party to clean and make ready  to  church  building
for Christmas.

We are concerned for Ahmad's welfare and the prospects which lie before  him
if he were to be deported.

We unreservedly support him in his desire to remain in this  country  to  be
free to exercise his faith without fear and to make a positive  contribution
to society.

    28. A letter dated 10 November 2016 from the Rev Mark Coleman, Vicar of
        St Chad, St Mary's in the  Baum  and  St  Edmund,  Rochdale  Parish
        Church addressed to the appellant's wife and the appellant confirms
        that Rev Coleman has known them since October 2015 when  they  came
        to worship at his church, St Chad's in  Rochdale.  The  appellant's
        wife lived in Rochdale at that time and became  a  weekly  attender
        with the appellant coming less often but being  a  regular  visitor
        once or twice a month. The letter states the appellant's  wife  was
        baptised on 14 February  2016  and  was  a  valued  member  of  the
        congregation but left to go to Birmingham with the appellant in the
        early summer, perhaps May 2016. This letter appears  to  have  been
        written as a reference to support their application to marry.
    29. There is  also  within  the  bundle  a  letter  from  Brother  John
        Hennings, an Anglican Franciscan friar and priest who came  to  Old
        Church Smethwick in April 2018 and  who  is  a  pastoral  assistant
        working predominantly with asylum seekers and refugees.
    30. Brother Hennings states he has known the appellant since  he  began
        attending the church although less well than other members  as  his
        arrival coincided with the appellant's prolonged period  of  severe
        illness and enforced absence from the duties he had previously been
        performing but that, nevertheless, he found the appellant could  be
        both sincere in his  Christian  commitment  and  developed  in  his
        attendance at worship. The letter confirms the appellant  disclosed
        to him of his own free will at the first opportunity  the  fact  he
        had a criminal record but that with the support  of  his  wife  and
        others he had rebuilt his life and become an upright member of  the
        community for which he earned brother Hennings respect.
    31. From the Smethwick Old Church there are also a number of letters.
    32. The first is  from  the  Rev  Michael  Goss,  who  also  gave  oral
        evidence, who in a letter dated 28 October 2020  confirmed  he  had
        known the appellant since he first began attending  Old  Church  in
        April 2016. Rev Goss is a member and honorary assistant  priest  of
        the church. He states the appellant was introduced to him  and  his
        wife by Ali Shah a mutual friend who is also a long-term member  of
        the church. The letter speaks of the appellant's history  including
        criminal conviction, his baptism, and  refers  to  the  appellant's
        wife. Reverend Goss writes "In all the time we have  known  him  he
        has been a serious and regular member of our church  community  and
        was asked by the vicar, Rev Deb  Buckley,  to  assist  her  at  the
        Sunday Eucharist as a server/cross bearer. Any absences from Sunday
        worship have been due mainly to serious ill-health which  gave  him
        severe pain and discomfort until two  successful  kidney  surgeries
        gave him relief from his symptoms".
    33. The letter also refers to the appellant and his wife  praying  both
        in the church and at home including praying for the needs of  other
        people and refers to the appellant's Facebook site. The tone of the
        letter clearly indicates that in the  mind  of  the  Rev  Goss  the
        appellant is a genuine Christian convert.
    34. A number of letters have also been provided by the Rev Deb  Buckley
        the first dated 3 October 2019.  That  refers  to  the  appellant's
        attendance at the Smethwick  Old  Church  and  his  baptism  at  St
        Aidan's church in Leeds.  Rev  Buckley  writes  that  in  2017  the
        appellant expressed his desire to be confirmed  and  that  after  a
        period of preparation both he and his wife were  confirmed  at  the
        Warley Deanery confirmation service on  9  July  2017.  The  letter
        confirms the regular attendance of the appellant and  his  wife  at
        the church and states they are both  actively  involved  in  church
        life. The appellant is a server and crucify and his wife a  chalice
        assistant.  It is also said that in addition they  are  willing  to
        help out in many other ways. There is reference  to  the  appellant
        attending weekly Bible study sessions with the Rev Michael Goss  at
        the Birmingham Central Library  and  a  statements  that  both  the
        appellant and his wife takes their faith very seriously with  their
        desire to follow the way of Jesus Christ  being  expressed  through
        their involvement with the  church  rota,  their  warmth  and  care
        towards others and their eagerness to be involved in church life.
    35. A second letter, dated 15 December 2019, was  specifically  written
        in support of the appellant's asylum claim on the  grounds  of  his
        Christian conversion.  The letter refers to the date the  appellant
        joined the Smethwick Old Church, the  disclosure  of  his  criminal
        conviction by the appellant, regular attendance at the church  with
        the exception of the period the appellant  had  to  undergo  kidney
        surgery, active involvement in church  life,  repeats  the  opinion
        that both the appellant and his wife take  their  faith  seriously,
        and a statement that in view of Rev Buckley the appellant is a  man
        of integrity whom she would have no hesitation in supporting.
    36. A further letter of 24 October 2020  repeats  the  content  of  the
        second letter.
    37. A further letter was admitted prior to  the  hearing,  pursuant  to
        Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules from the Reverend
        Buckley in which she writes:

To whom it may concern.

Re: [AJ] D.O.B. 11.07.75 of []

I am writing to expand on my previous letter  dated  October  24th  2020  in
order to explain more fully why I believe that [A] is a Christian.

I am aware that asylum seekers can take advantage of the church as a way  of
getting support for their asylum application. I am trusted by the Bishop  of
Birmingham to ensure that,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  this  doesn't
happen. With this in mind, we have implemented a number of  strict  policies
and procedures at Old Church.

These policies and  procedures  relate  to  Baptism,  Confirmation  and  the
nature of the roles that people are able to take  on  in  church.  In  [A's]
case he came to us having  been  Baptized  and  Confirmed  at  a  Church  of
England church in Leeds. This alone, however, is not enough to  convince  us
that a person  is  Christian.  Before  someone  can  take  on  the  role  of
Crucifer, Server  at  communion  or  Communion  Assistant,  myself  and  the
Parochial Church Council, who confirm people in  to  these  specific  roles,
need to believe that the person in question is sincere  about  their  faith.
Discerning this is done over time and through observation  and  conversation
by myself and my ministerial colleagues. The  following  convinced  us  that
[A] is a Christian:

( [A] and [N] pray together at home as well as in church  and  they  request
prayer from the church when  they  need  it,  for  example  when  Ahmad  was
unwell.
( [A] is active on Facebook and is explicit about his faith.
( [A] is hungry to study the Bible and,  given  that  he  had  prepared  for
Baptism and Confirmation in another church,  he  didn't  need  to  seek  out
opportunities to study the Bible with us, but he did. When  attending  study
groups, he  contributes  insightfully  to  discussions  and  asks  pertinent
questions.
( [A] was drawn to take on roles that are integral to  Eucharistic  worship,
which again he wouldn't need to do in order to get support  for  his  asylum
application.
( [A] and [N] got married at the Register Office but they both wanted  their
marriage blessed by Jesus Christ in the presence of  the  friends  they  had
made at Old Church.
( My conversation with [A] about his  faith  journey  during  which  he  was
honest  about  his  conviction.  These  things  convinced,  myself  and   my
colleagues and resulted in the church council approving [A] to the  role  of
crucifer and Server at communion.

I hope this letter is of assistance.

Yours Sincerely,

 Revd Canon Deb Buckley

    38. Both the Rev Michael Goss and the Rev Buckley attended the hearing,
        gave oral evidence, and were cross-examined by Mr Tan.
    39. An issue arose after the conclusion of  the  hearing  in  that  the
        appellant's advocate submitted a further  statement  from  the  Rev
        Michael Goss in an  attempt  to  clarify  an  aspect  of  the  oral
        evidence he gave. As this is post hearing evidence a copy was  sent
        to Mr Tan inviting his observations upon whether he agreed  to  the
        material being admitted and, if so, any comment he wished  to  make
        upon the same. Mr Tan objected to  the  additional  material  being
        admitted on the basis that it did not constitute new  material  but
        was  rather  an  attempt  by  the  Rev  Goss  to  correct  evidence
        previously given when there had been no indication at  the  hearing
        of any difficulties by the witness in recalling the facts presented
        or in giving evidence generally.
    40. It was not considered by me appropriate to reconvene the hearing to
        invite further submissions upon this point as  the  appeal  can  be
        determined on the basis of  the  evidence  given  relating  to  the
        appellant's involvement with the church. The question  of  why  the
        appellant  fled  Iran  is  a  matter  considered  in  the   earlier
        determinations when whatever he claimed to be a real risk  that  he
        would have faced at that time was found to lack credibility.

Discussion

    41.  The  starting  point  in  this  appeal,  in  accordance  with  the
        Devaseelan principles has to be the earlier decisions  referred  to
        above. The Court of Appeal have, however,  reminded  us  that  such
        decisions  should  not  prevent  a  later  judge  from  reaching  a
        different decision if that is justified on the evidence presented.
    42. In this appeal the relevant date at which the evidence  has  to  be
        considered is the date of hearing, in relation  to  which  a  large
        volume of the evidence post-dates the earlier decisions.
    43.  This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  concerns   regarding   the
        appellant's honesty, or lack of it, and suggested motives of making
        claims for the purpose of enabling him  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom, that are not found to be credible, cannot be ignored  when
        considering the weight to be given to the evidence in the round.
    44. Whether a person is a genuine Christian convert  is  one  of  those
        questions which in a perfect world would be answered by the ability
        to look not only into a person's mind but also their heart. In  the
        biblical  sense,  conversion  means  a  turning-described  in  some
        Christian denominations as a 'spiritual turning away  from  sin  in
        repentance and to Christ in faith.   A  true  spiritual  conversion
        radically alters the direction of one's life. A genuine  conversion
        occurs much deeper within the soul of a person. It  is  a  decisive
        break with the old and the embracing  of  new  life  in  Christ  by
        faith. It involves a change  of  mind,  which  is  an  intellectual
        change, and a change of view, a new recognition of God, self,  sin,
        and Christ. It  involves  a  change  of  affections,  which  is  an
        emotional change, a change of feeling, a sorrow for sin  committed.
        It involves a change of will, which  is  a  volitional  change,  an
        intentional turning away from sin and  a  turning  to  God  through
        Christ to seek forgiveness'. But whether that has occurred in  this
        as in any other case where the question is whether a conversion  is
        genuine can only be assessed on the basis of the evidence that  has
        been provided.
    45. Mr Tan highlighted in his submissions the omission in a report from
        a psychiatrist in 2012, relating to the appellant, of  any  mention
        of faith. The appellant accepted he did not mention  his  faith  at
        that time claiming not to have been asked although Mr Tan  did  not
        accept this was a satisfactory explanation in light of  the  author
        of the report referring to the appellant's social circles  and  his
        network which it was submitted would have included church groups.
    46. Mr Tan also referred to the appellant's screening  interview  dated
        2007 in which the appellant declared his  faith  to  be  Church  of
        England which was repeated in his asylum  interview  which  it  was
        submitted contradicts his claim to have been a Jehovah's Witness at
        that time.  Whilst  this  is  noted  the  evidence  of  the  church
        officials from the Old Church referred to individuals not having  a
        clear idea of the  different  Christian  and  other  denominations,
        suggesting confusion between the Jehovah's Witnesses and the Church
        of England was plausible.
    47. Mr Tan submitted that the appellant's  claim  regarding  his  faith
        formed part of his claim in 2008 which was rejected  and  that  the
        current claim disclosed a pattern of repetitive behaviour with  the
        appellant initially claiming to be of interest in Iran which failed
        resulting in that claim being abandoned, with another  claim  being
        made on a different basis which failed, was abandoned,  and  now  a
        further claim being made following the  appellant's  appeal  having
        been dismissed in 2014. Mr Tan submitted the current claim was,  in
        effect, a continuation of the claim dismissed in 2014 relying  upon
        evidence that he had continued to follow his faith since 2014.
    48. It was submitted that the appellant's evidence was that he came  to
        Birmingham in 2015 and started attending the Smethwick  Old  Church
        in 2016 with little evidence of regular church  attendance  in  the
        interim.
    49. Mr Tan's submission that the appellant attended the  Smethwick  Old
        Church yet within weeks asked to be able to help  out  in  services
        which he was able to do within three weeks of having his  name  put
        on the list within the Communion, which contradicted  the  evidence
        given is not made out. Rev Buckley confirmed in her  evidence  that
        the appellant had asked to assist and had his name  placed  upon  a
        list of those willing to help as a result of which he was allocated
        to another member of the congregation who was  already  experienced
        in carrying the cross and assisting in the holy communion whom  the
        appellant  shadowed  until  he  was  accepted  as  being  ready  to
        undertake such tasks himself. The evidence of Rev Buckley was  that
        the period of three weeks after the appellants name  was  added  to
        the list reflected the time after which the  appellant  would  have
        been allocated and worked with a mentor, not the time he would have
        been accepted as being suitable  to  undertake  such  work  himself
        without supervision.
    50. Mr Tan referred to the fact that whilst the appellant had  revealed
        his criminal convictions in the United Kingdom to  the  members  of
        the Smethwick Old Church they were unaware of all the  details  and
        did not know why the appellant had left Iran. The latter  point  is
        specifically tied in with the additional  statement  from  the  Rev
        Goss which has been discussed above. Whilst the appellant  may  not
        have told the church officials the full details of  his  conviction
        he did tell them of the fact he had been convicted,  had  served  a
        period of imprisonment, felt remorse for  what  he  had  done,  and
        wished to live a better life in the future. If  the  appellant  was
        not asked the specific details of the offence, which he suggests is
        the case, this point does not arguably impact adversely  upon  him.
        The fact that having converted to the Christian faith the appellant
        admitted his previous criminality, which in the eyes of the  church
        would have been the commission of a sin, was the point  highlighted
        by both the Rev Goss and Rev Buckley in their evidence. It has  not
        been made out the specific nature of the offence made any  material
        difference either to the act of admission and/or contrition in  the
        eyes of the church.
    51. It was accepted by Mr Woodhouse there was a  gap  in  the  evidence
        relating to the appellant's church attendances as identified by  Mr
        Tan, but it was submitted it was  only  a  small  gap  and  not  as
        significant as Mr Tan submitted. It was  also  submitted  it  is  a
        preserved finding the appellant had attended church in Leeds  which
        meant the chronology to 2014 was fixed. There is other evidence  of
        church attendances as referred to above. It is also the  case  that
        following the dismissal of his asylum claim the appellant lost  his
        NASS accommodation and support and moved to Birmingham with friends
        attending different churches before a friend introduced him to  the
        Smethwick Old Church in 2016.
    52. Reliance was placed by Mr Woodhouse in the  case  of  TF  (Iran)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH 58 in  which
        the court found that church witnesses  who  were  in  positions  of
        responsibility within the church who had observed  the  appellant's
        activities at church and  expressed  their  views  on  the  genuine
        nature of the appellant's conversion based on their experience were
        giving expert evidence.
    53. It is also necessary, however, to note in PZ v SSHD [2018] CSOH  60
        it was found:

        [42]      In the first place, properly  analysed,  in  my  view  Mr
             Taylor was  not  giving  expert  evidence,  in  the  sense  of
             expressing his opinion on a matter recognised as  constituting
             a body of expertise and in which he had skill  or  experience.
             Most of his evidence was as to matters of fact:  what  he  had
             observed about the petitioner's conduct (eg  the  petitioner's
             irregular attendance at the Tron Church) or it was hearsay  as
             to what the petitioner  had  told  him  about  that  or  other
             matters.  Even  his  evidence  about   the   internal   church
             arrangements (the operation  of  bible  studies  and  how  the
             leaders of those prompted or promoted 24 individuals  to  seek
             baptism etc) was factual evidence about the practices  of  the
             Tron Church in relation to baptism. At  most,  Mr  Taylor  was
             asked whether he accepted the genuineness of the  petitioner's
             conversion.  (This  question,  it  seems  to  me,  is   subtly
             different  from  being  asked  whether  in  his  opinion   the
             petitioner's conversion  was  genuine.)  As  noted  above,  Mr
             Taylor did not answer that in the affirmative.  In  his  view,
             the petitioner's conduct (or progress on the journey) was  not
             such that the  petitioner  would  be  accepted  as  ready  for
             baptism, as understood and practised in the Tron Church. While
             that is  Mr  Taylor's  opinion,  and  which  could  hardly  be
             regarded as unequivocally favourable to the petitioner, in  my
             view that is not expert opinion evidence in a Kennedy-relevant
             sense (supra). If there had been a query as to doctrine of the
             Tron Church which were  challenged  or  required  explication,
             then, to that extent, his evidence about this might be  expert
             opinion evidence. However, there was no such issue or evidence
             of that character before the FTT. It follows that the point of
             principle does not really arise on the facts of this case.

    54. In this case it is clear the church witnesses, on the basis of  the
        appellants actions and expressed views, believe him to be a genuine
        Christian convert.  There  is  specific  reference  to  the  though
        process undertaken in coming to that view and the letter  from  the
        Rev Buckley admitted pursuant to Rule 15(2A) gives  strong  support
        to such a conclusion. I do not accept this is expert  evidence  but
        evidence of matters of fact to which proper weight may be given  by
        me.
    55. There is also the point made by Mr  Woodhouse  in  his  submissions
        that to find in the alternative will be to find the  appellant  has
        not only been able to  hoodwink  members  of  the  Church  who  are
        willing to support him in their evidence but also his wife, who has
        also in her evidence expressed her belief that the appellant  is  a
        genuine  convert,  over  a  substantial  period  of  time.   Whilst
        individually personal views may not be sufficient in light  of  the
        previous adverse credibility findings, cumulatively and in light of
        the lower standard applicable to  an  asylum  appeal  I  find  they
        appellant has established that his conversion  to  Christianity  is
        genuine.
    56. Mr Tan submitted that even if this is the case the  appellant  will
        face no real risk on return to Iran as there was no  evidence  that
        anybody had been evangelised by the appellant such  that  they  had
        attended the church and  although  the  appellant  claims  to  have
        evangelised through his Facebook account that was no  more  than  a
        reposting of material to friends already known to the appellant.
    57. There is merit in Mr Tan's submission that  the  appellant's  claim
        that he had had  his  Facebook  account  blocked  on  the  previous
        occasion  was  not  supported  by  any  evidence.  Similarly,   the
        appellant's claim to have received threats through Facebook was not
        supported by  evidence  sufficient  to  establish  the  appellant's
        alleged association between  his  conversion  to  Christianity  and
        promotion of the faith.
    58.  It  was  submitted  the  appellant's  Facebook  profile  does  not
        establish an overt social media presence with the Facebook  account
        be limited to being accessible to friends and  containing  reposted
        material.
    59. Mr Tan also submitted the Smethwick Old Church has no links to  any
        home church in Iran.
    60. The relevant section of the headnote in PS, as noted above, reads:

           i) A convert to Christianity seeking  to  openly  practice  that
              faith in Iran would face a real risk of persecution.
          ii) If the claimant would in fact conceal  his  faith,  decision-
              makers should consider why. If any  part  of  the  claimant's
              motivation is a fear of such persecution, the  appeal  should
              be allowed.
         iii) If the claimant would choose to conceal his faith purely  for
              other reasons (family pressure, social constraints,  personal
              preference  et)  then  protection  should  be  refused.   The
              evidence demonstrates  that  private  and  solitary  worship,
              within the confines of the home, is possible and would not in
              general entail a real risk of persecution. In cases where the
              claimant is found to be  insincere  in  his  or  her  claimed
              conversion, there is not a  real  risk  of  persecution  'in-
              country'. There being no reason for  such  an  individual  to
              associate himself with Christians, there is not a  real  risk
              that he would come to the adverse attention  of  the  Iranian
              authorities.


        Decision-makers  must  nevertheless  consider  the  possible  risks
        arising at the 'pinch-point' of arrival:


           i)  All  returning  failed  asylum  seekers   are   subject   to
              questioning on arrival, and this will include questions about
              why they claimed asylum (a genuine Christian asked about  the
              basis of his claim for asylum cannot be expected to lie  para
              111);
          ii) A returnee who divulges that he claimed to be a Christian  is
              reasonably likely to be transferred for further questioning;
         iii)  The  returnee  can  be  expected  to  sign  an   undertaking
              renouncing his claimed  Christianity.  The  questioning  will
              therefore in general be short and will not entail a real risk
              of ill-treatment;
          iv) If there are any reasons why the detention becomes prolonged,
              the risk of ill-treatment will correspondingly rise.  Factors
              that could result in prolonged detention must  be  determined
              on a case by case basis.  They  could  include  but  are  not
              limited to:
           a. Previous adverse contact with the Iranian security services;
           b. Connection to persons of interest to the Iranian authorities;
           c. Attendance at a church with perceived connection  to  Iranian
          house churches;
           d. Overt social media content  indicating  that  the  individual
          concerned has actively promoted Christianity.



    61. Even if Mr Tan is correct in that the information  visible  on  the
        appellant's Facebook page has been limited  to  named  friends  and
        associates, contrary to the  appellant's  claim  that  he  has  180
        friends on his Facebook account who he does  not  know  personally,
        the real risk for the appellant will arise at the point of return.
    62. It is not disputed that the appellant will  be  questioned  by  the
        authorities in Iran. Whilst his earlier  claims  for  international
        protection based upon alleged difficulties in Iran have been  shown
        to lack credibility his conversion to Christianity based  upon  the
        wealth of material  now  available  has  not.  As  the  appellant's
        conversion and belief in the Christian faith has been found  to  be
        genuine, he cannot be expected to lie about the same solely for the
        purposes of avoiding persecution/harm.
    63. The appellant and his screening interview at question 1.9 dated  11
        September  2007  stated  his  religion  is  Christian  (Church   of
        England). At [2] of his witness statement dated  17  December  2019
        and at [2] of his witness statement of 7 March 2018  the  appellant
        stated that he was born into a practising  Muslim  family  and  was
        taught about Islam since  childhood  which  he  followed  since  he
        became of  age.  At  [4]  of  the  earlier  witness  statement  the
        appellant confirms that he was a strict believer of Islam. The fact
        the appellant has converted from Islam to Christianity will, in the
        eyes of the authorities in Iran, make him an apostate.
    64. The appellant may be instructed to renounce Christianity  to  avoid
        repercussion  but  as  his  Christian  faith  forms  part  of   his
        fundamental identity  and  beliefs  it  will  be  contrary  to  the
        principles of HJ (Iran) to expect him to do so if the sole  purpose
        is to avoid persecution.
    65. The appellant has openly  practised  his  Christian  faith  in  the
        United Kingdom, and it was not made out he would not wish to do  so
        on return to Iran, which creates a further risk for him.
    66. If within Iran the appellant posted Christian messages or texts  as
        he has done in the United Kingdom  on  his  Facebook  account,  the
        greater surveillance of social media within Iran may result in  the
        same being discovered by the Iranian authorities creating a further
        risk. In any event, it is know the authorities in Iran  are  likely
        to ask a returnee whether they have a Facebook account and for  the
        password. The appellant cannot be expected to delete material  from
        that account that reflects  a  fundamentally  held  belief.  It  is
        likely therefore that  the  material  will  be  discovered  by  the
        authorities.
    67. It is therefore on the basis of the decision in HJ (Iran)  and  the
        finding that it is not acceptable for a person to have  to  hide  a
        belief which is genuine and a fundamental aspect of  their  make-up
        solely for the purposes avoiding persecution, as the appellant will
        be required to do, that entitles the appellant to succeed  in  this
        appeal. He is a genuine  Christian  convert  who,  unless  he  acts
        discreetly to avoid persecution, is likely  to  face  ill-treatment
        sufficient to entitle him to a grant of international protection.
    68. Although not strictly necessary  in  light  of  my  finding  above,
        Article 8 ECHR was raised at the hearing in light of the  fact  the
        appellant's wife has been recognised as a refugee from Iran on  the
        basis of real risk she will face as a result of her  conversion  to
        Christianity. If the appellant was returned to Iran the couple will
        be separated. The respondent  has  failed  to  establish  any  such
        separation will be a proportionate interference in the family  life
        enjoyed by appellant and his wife in light of the facts as found.


Decision

    69. I allow the appeal.







   Anonymity.


    70. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 6 January 20201












