
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09841/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd October 2018                          | On 17th October 2018         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                ZT (Pakistan)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jennifer Blair, Counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who has  a  diagnosis  of  bipolar  affective  disorder,
    appeals from the  decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 19 September 2017
    to refuse his protection and human rights claims which, at the  hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal, he pursued on the ground that he  would  be
    at risk in Pakistan due to his disability which would place him at risk
    of  mistreatment,  particularly  given  the  absence  of  a  warm   and
    supportive family, or, in the alternative,  that  he  would  face  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration into  life  and  society  in
    Pakistan on account of his vulnerability  and  the  likelihood  of  him
    being destitute.

 2. Although the First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, I
    consider that the appellant should  be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in  the  Upper  Tribunal  having  regard  to  his  accepted
    diagnosis.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 3. On 9 August 2012 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal as it was arguable that the Tribunal had erred in,
    firstly, undertaking its own research post-hearing - this was  arguable
    because the source was not clearly identified; secondly, in  concluding
    that the appellant did not give evidence  at  the  hearing  because  he
    chose not to be cross-examined and making no reference to  the  medical
    report at B30 where it was stated that  it  would  be  unsafe  for  the
    appellant to attempt to give evidence;  and, thirdly, not engaging with
    the argument  that  as  an  individual  with  a  diagnosis  of  bipolar
    affective disorder the appellant was a member of  a  particular  social
    group at risk of persecution in Pakistan.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 4. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Blair (who appeared below) developed  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    She referred me  to  various  key  documents,  including  her  skeleton
    argument before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter, the asylum interview, the psychiatric report of Dr Jegebe,  and
    the Country Expert report of Mrs Uzma Moeen whose background is that of
    a lawyer in Pakistan.

 5. After hearing Ms Blair's submissions,  Mr  Whitwell  conceded  that  an
    error of law was made out, at least on grounds 1 and 2.

Discussion

 6. The concession made by Mr Whitwell was not determinative of the  matter
    in issue.  But I was satisfied that the  concession  was  appropriately
    made.

 7. Ground 1 relates to the evidence of Ms Moeen, and Ground 2  relates  to
    the evidence of Dr Jegebe.  In  both  cases,  the  Judge  gave  anxious
    scrutiny to their respective reports, and many of his observations were
    pertinent and open to him.  But in each  case,  he  made  one  material
    error:

 8. With reference to Ground 1, the appellant was questioned in his  asylum
    interview about the availability of treatment for  his  condition  from
    the Aga Khan University Hospital in Karachi.  It was put  to  him  that
    the  Aga  khan  University  Hospital  had  various  centres  throughout
    Pakistan and that it offered both in-patient and out-patient  treatment
    for bipolar disorder, including medication.  It was  put  to  him  that
    they also  provided  financial  assistance  to  those  who  needed  it.
    However, the Interviewer did not identify his or her  source  for  this
    information.  The subsequent refusal letter  relied  on  a  Country  of
    Origin Information report in support of the proposition  that  adequate
    treatment would be available to the appellant on  return  to  Pakistan,
    but this report did not rely on specific information emanating from  or
    relating to the services provided by the Aga Khan University Hospital.

 9. In her report, Ms Moeen asserted, among other things, that  there  were
    only 400 trained psychiatrists in Pakistan; that Pakistan  had  one  of
    the  lowest  patient-to-doctor  ratios  in  the  world;  that  90%   of
    healthcare was private and an appointment  with  a  psychiatrist  would
    cost about half the salary of a low-paid  worker;  that  mental  health
    conditions deteriorated because people could not afford treatment;  and
    that  because  mental  health  treatment  was  particularly  expensive,
    mentally ill people might be chained to shrines indefinitely.

10. At paragraph [37] of this decision, the  Judge  held  that  Ms  Moeen's
    blanket assertion about, I infer (see below),  the  inaccessibility  of
    treatment for bipolar disorder was unreliable.  It  was  not  based  on
    evidence, and/or it was not based on well-researched evidence.

11. Apart from the fact that the Judge  unfortunately  left  out  some  key
    words in the sentence at paragraph [37] - with the consequence that  it
    is unclear what assertion  of  Ms  Moeen  was  held  to  be  unreliable
    (although I infer it was on the lines set out above) - it appears  that
    his attack on Ms Moeen's general credibility is based  on  post-hearing
    research.  At paragraphs [30]-[33], the  Judge  refers  to  "background
    information in the public domain" relating to the Aga  Khan  University
    Hospital in Karachi.  He goes on to quote extensively from content that
    he has apparently accessed on the website of the University.

12. I accept, as does Mr Whitwell, Ms Blair's assurances that the  material
    referred to in paragraphs [30]-[33]  did  not  form  any  part  of  the
    evidence that was placed before the First-tier Tribunal.  In  addition,
    the website does not appear  in  a  foot-note  to  Ms  Moeen's  report.
    Accordingly, on the available evidence,  the  Judge  has  impermissibly
    engaged in post-hearing research,  and  the  consequence  is  that  the
    decision is vitiated  by  a  procedural  irregularity.   The  error  is
    material, as it is the post-hearing research which  provides  the  main
    justification for the Judge rejecting Ms Moeen's evidence.

13. With reference to Ground 2, the Judge rightly began his analysis of the
    evidence by considering the report of Dr Jagebe, so as not to fall into
    the trap of  considering  the  medical  evidence  at  the  end  of  his
    credibility assessment, rather than at the beginning.

14. At paragraph [18], he made reference to Dr Jagebe's statement  that  he
    was unable to say whether or not the appellant was fit to give evidence
    at the hearing.  The Judge  went  on  to  give  extensive  reasons  for
    finding that the appellant was in fact medically fit to  give  evidence
    at the hearing, and that, in his view, "the appellant did not  wish  to
    give evidence because he did not wish to be cross-examined."

15. Unfortunately, as is apparent from the Judge's highlighting of  various
    passages in Dr Jagebe's report, he overlooked that Dr Jagebe went on to
    say in his report as follows: "While changes have been made to the dose
    of medication, I do not think it would be safe for [ZT] to  attempt  to
    give evidence at his appeal hearing,  even  with  the  presence  of  an
    appropriate adult.  It is possible that the medication may  affect  his
    ability to process information when it  is  given  at  a  higher  dose.
    There may also be issues as to sedation, or  he  may  experience  other
    untoward side-effects such as dizziness."

16. In short, the Judge  misunderstood  Dr  Jagebe's  evidence.   When  the
    doctor said that he was unable to say whether or not the appellant  was
    fit to give evidence at the time of the hearing, this was  because  the
    nature of his condition was such that his symptoms fluctuated.  At  the
    time when he needed to give evidence he  might  coincide  with  a  good
    phase, but equally he might coincide with a bad phase. Having ruminated
    on the matter, Dr Jagebe came down on the side of caution.

17. Accordingly, it was not open to the Judge to find that the  reason  why
    the appellant had not been tendered as a witness  at  the  hearing  was
    because  he  wished  to  avoid  his  account  being  tested  in  cross-
    examination.

18. Turning to Ground 3, I consider that the Judge  gave  adequate  reasons
    for rejecting the asylum claim as it had originally been  presented  to
    the Home Office. I also consider that the Judge adequately engaged with
    the case on risk on return as it was re-formulated by  Counsel  in  her
    skeleton argument for the hearing.  It was open to him to find - as  he
    did at paragraph [45] - that there were  not  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that the appellant would get himself into trouble in Pakistan
    through words or behaviour that would  be  perceived  as  offensive  to
    religious  laws  in  Pakistan.   In  addition,  since  the  Judge  gave
    sustainable reasons for finding that  the  appellant  had  not  brought
    dishonour to the family as the  result  of  being  arrested,  and  then
    released, on suspicion of rape, it was open to him to find, as  he  did
    at paragraph [50], that the appellant had family in Pakistan from  whom
    he could, by implication, obtain both practical and emotional  support.
    So, I do not consider that Ground 3 is made out.

19. However, the effect of the errors established under Grounds 1 and 2  is
    that the appellant has been deprived of a fair hearing  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, and so the entirety of the decision is unsafe  and  must
    be set aside and re-made.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  such
that the decision must be set aside and re-made.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Hatton  Cross  for  a
fresh hearing before any Judge apart from Judge NMK Lawrence.

None of the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  previous  Tribunal  shall  be
preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 7 October 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge










