
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09710/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 June 2017                       |On 03 July 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                AB (ALBANIA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Priya Solanki, Counsel instructed by Barnes
             Harrild Dyer Sols
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nash, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Swaniker sitting at Taylor House on 18 October 2016)  dismissing
    her appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to
    recognise her as a refugee, or as otherwise requiring international  or
    human rights protection.  The appellant's claim  was  that  she  feared
    persecution and mistreatment from her father, who abused her and  tried
    to force her into a marriage to pay off his gambling debts.   She  also
    claimed to fear persecution by the people who had trafficked  her,  and
    who had forced her into prostitution.  The Competent Authority  reached
    a negative conclusion on the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a  victim  of
    trafficking, and the respondent rejected her asylum claim.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge dismissed her appeal on  all  grounds  raised,  and
    made a finding that her marriage to a Greek national was a marriage  of
    convenience.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. The appellant applied for permission to appeal, advancing a  number  of
    grounds of appeal. Her representatives pleaded that the Judge had erred
    in her approach to the assessment of the appellant's credibility.   The
    Judge had failed to consider the Country Guidance case  of  TV  and  AD
    (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 0092 (IAC).  The Judge's reasons  for
    rejecting the medical report of Dr Thomas were  erroneous.   The  Judge
    should have attached more weight to the expert reports of Dr Thomas and
    Ms Antonia Young than she did.  The Judge found  that  the  appellant's
    marriage was a sham, but the respondent had never suggested that to  be
    the case.

 3. Permission was initially  refused  by  Judge  Osborne.  He  held  that,
    contrary to what was stated in the  grounds,  the  Judge  had  given  a
    careful and well-reasoned decision, and in her reasons  the  Judge  had
    set out the pertinent issues, the law, and the evidence relating to the
    facts of the appeal.  The findings made by the Judge were properly open
    to her on the basis of the evidence before  her.   The  Judge  was  not
    limited to the matters raised in the reasons for refusal  letter.   The
    Judge properly considered all the evidence as a whole.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to give little, if any, weight to the  expert  reports  of  Dr
    Thomas and Ms Young, for the reasons given.  In all the  circumstances,
    the Judge had demonstrated the correct approach to Article 8 and to the
    public interest considerations.

 4. Following a renewed application for permission to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted permission to  appeal  on  11  May
    2017, for the following reasons:

       "It is arguable, as contended in the grounds  of  appeal,  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal has unfairly found a sham EA marriage  when  the
       issue was not raised by the SSHD at the hearing.

       It is also argued that the First-tier Tribunal failed to address the
       submission that the appellant should  be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
       witness.

       All grounds are arguable, albeit that some are stronger than others,
       and some may be no more  than  disagreements  with  robust,  factual
       findings."

The Rule 24 Response

 5. On 30 May 2017 a member of the Specialist Appeals Team settled  a  Rule
    24 response opposing the appeal.  In summary, the respondent  submitted
    that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  directed  herself
    appropriately.  The Judge was plainly aware that submissions were  made
    regarding the appellant being a vulnerable witness.  This  was  a  fact
    which the Judge had taken into consideration.  However, in the light of
    significant discrepancies, inconsistencies and differing evidence,  the
    Judge found that the appellant was not a vulnerable witness as claimed:
    see paragraph 19.

 6. With regard to the Judge's findings on the alleged marriage, the  Judge
    was entitled to have consideration to the evidence and the  credibility
    of the appellant to assess the  claim  as  a  whole,  given  that  such
    evidence had not been presented  previously.   The  appellant  had  not
    challenged the refusal of her EEA application by lodging an appeal,  so
    she was in effect making a fresh  EEA  application  with  the  Tribunal
    acting as an initial  decision-maker.   Accordingly,  all  issues  were
    live, and the burden was on the appellant to establish  each  facet  of
    her case.

The Rule 25 Response

 7. Ms Solanki settled the Rule 25 response on  behalf  of  the  appellant.
    She submitted that the finding made by the Judge at paragraph 19 of her
    decision was ambiguous.  It was arguable that the  Judge  had  accepted
    that the appellant was a vulnerable adult.  It was difficult  to  know,
    as the Judge had not made a clear finding on this issue, in  line  with
    the guidance given in the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010
    - Child:  Vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant  guidance.   The
    Guidance provides, inter alia, as follows:

        "14. Consider the evidence, allowing for possible different type  of
        degrees of understanding by  witnesses  and  appellant  compared  to
        those who are not vulnerable, in the context of evidence from others
        associated with the appellant and  the  background  evidence  before
        you.  Where there were clear discrepancies  in  the  oral  evidence,
        consider the extent to which, by mental, psychological and emotional
        trauma or disability, the age,  vulnerability,  sensitivity  of  the
        witness was an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.

        15. The decision should record whether the  Tribunal  had  concluded
        the appellant (or a witness) is a child,  vulnerable  or  sensitive,
        the effect the Tribunal considered the identified vulnerability  had
        in assessing the evidence before it, and thus whether  the  Tribunal
        was satisfied whether the appellant had established his or her  case
        with relevant standard of proof.  In asylum appeals,  weight  should
        be given to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to
        a state of mind."

The Error of Law Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Solanki developed the  arguments  advanced  in  the  permission
    application and her Rule 25 response.  On behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State, Mr Nash adhered to the Rule 24 response.

Discussion

 9. I consider that the only grounds of challenge which have any merit  are
    those which were singled  out  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer.   I
    consider  that  the  remaining  grounds  amount  to  no  more  than  an
    expression of disagreement with findings that were open  to  the  Judge
    for the reasons which she gave, subject to the two arguable  errors  of
    law identified in the grant of permission.



Marriage of Convenience

10. Since the appellant was advancing a human rights claim under Article  8
    ECHR, the status of her marriage to "VP", a Greek  national  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK, was a relevant consideration.   The  appellant
    relied on the family life which she had established in the UK  with  VP
    as a factor which militated against her return to Albania.  If she  had
    not in truth established family life with VP, because her  marriage  to
    him was a sham, this was highly material to an  assessment  of  whether
    her prospective removal to Albania was proportionate from a family life
    perspective.

11. However, it has never been suggested that the  appellant's  application
    for an EEA residence permit was refused on the ground that her marriage
    to VP was one of convenience.  On the evidence available to the  Judge,
    the sole ground of refusal was insufficient evidence of  VP  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK.

12. The reasoning of the Judge, which  underpinned  her  finding  that  the
    appellant's marriage to  VP  was  a  sham,  was  as  follows:  (a)  the
    appellant had  not  given  a  credible  explanation  for  not  directly
    appealing the EEA decision, rather than relying on her marriage  to  VP
    as "a last-minute adjunct to a substantive asylum appeal"; (b)  VP  had
    not attended the hearing, and had not given a credible explanation  for
    his non-attendance;  (c)   his  excuse  that  his  new  employer,  Fast
    Despatch Transport Limited, would not give him time off work to  attend
    the hearing was contradicted by an employment confirmation letter  from
    Aqua dated 10 October 2016 which represented that VP would  be  working
    at Aqua until 25 October 2016; (d)  the  appellant's  overall  lack  of
    candour and propensity to misrepresent her circumstances to achieve her
    ends; and (e) the speed at which the relationship with VP  appeared  to
    have developed, despite the appellant's claimed experiences of abuse at
    the hands of men in her past, including her own father and Coli.

13. It was open to the Judge to take the view that the above  matters  gave
    rise to a suspicion that the appellant's marriage  to  VP  was  one  of
    convenience, but the Judge erred in law in deciding, of her own notion,
    that the appellant had in fact entered into a marriage  of  convenience
    with VP.  Not only had the issue not been raised by  the  Secretary  of
    State when refusing to issue the appellant with a residence permit,  it
    was also not raised by the Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing.   The
    allegation was never put to the appellant so that she could  rebut  it.
    Moreover, the fact that it had not been raised as an issue  in  advance
    of the hearing meant that a fair hearing on the issue  could  not  take
    place, as the appellant had not been  given  a  proper  opportunity  to
    provide evidence in rebuttal.  Thus,  the  Judge's  approach  was  non-
    compliant with the guidance given by the Court of Appeal  in  Agho  -v-
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1198  and
    contrary to  the  guidance  given  in  Kalidas  (Agreed  facts  -  best
    practice) [2012] UKUT 00327 (IAC), where the Upper Tribunal  held  that
    the Judges should look behind factual concessions only  in  exceptional
    circumstances. If the  scope  of  the  concession  is  unclear,  or  if
    evidence develops in such a way that it is extent and correctness  need
    to be  revisited,  the  Judge  must  draw  that  to  the  attention  of
    representatives. An adjournment may  become  necessary.   It  does  not
    appear that the Judge drew the attention of the representatives in  the
    course of the hearing to a suspicion on her part that the  marriage  to
    VP was a sham.

Deciding whether the Appellant was a Vulnerable Witness

14. Turning to the other arguable error of law identified by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer, there has clearly been non-compliance with the  guidance
    given in the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No.2  of  2010.   The
    skeleton argument which Ms Solanki  prepared  for  the  hearing  on  18
    October 2016  shows  that  she  raised  the  appellant's  status  as  a
    vulnerable adult as a preliminary issue. She specifically requested the
    Tribunal to treat the appellant as a vulnerable adult in line with  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010.  When the Judge came  to
    embark on her findings of credibility  and  fact,  at  paragraphs  [12]
    onwards of her decision, she did not (as would have been best practice)
    begin by asking herself whether the appellant was a vulnerable witness.

15. It was only after she had made some adverse credibility findings, based
    on asserted inconsistencies in the appellant's account, that the  Judge
    turned to address the evidence  contained  in  Dr  Thomas'  psychiatric
    report.

16. The Judge gave cogent reasons for rejecting Dr Thomas' report, and  for
    finding  that  the  reason   for   the   asserted   discrepancies   and
    inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account  were  simply  that  the
    appellant was being untruthful, and not because she was suffering  from
    a  psychiatric  disorder  or  mental  health  issues,  which  made  her
    reluctant to talk about her ordeal because of its traumatic effects  on
    her.

17. However, justice must not only be done, but must be seen  to  be  done.
    There has been a departure from the guidance  given  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Mibanga -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
    EWCA Civ 367.  Although the Judge did not make the egregious mistake of
    leaving  the  psychiatric  evidence  to  the  end  of  her  credibility
    assessment, she only sought to engage  with  the  psychiatric  evidence
    after she had already embarked on making adverse  credibility  findings
    based upon inconsistencies in the appellant's account, in circumstances
    where the inconsistencies in the appellant's account were (according to
    the psychiatric evidence) entirely consistent with her core claim being
    true.

18. There has been a parallel failure to  recognise  that  the  psychiatric
    evidence has some independent probative value, as is illuminated by the
    Court of Appeal in AM, R (on the application of) v  Secretary  for  the
    Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 521.  The Judge was wrong  to  discount
    Dr Thomas' report in its entirety on  the  basis  that  Dr  Thomas  had
    merely accepted  uncritically  the  appellant's  account.   Dr  Thomas'
    professional belief, following an expert examination and assessment  of
    the appellant, constitutes independent evidence of the traumatic events
    described by  the  appellant.   Dr  Thomas  is  a  Consultant  Clinical
    Psychologist of 15 years' post-qualification experience.  She  observed
    that the appellant arrived for the interview in a state  of  heightened
    anxiety and distress, and that she was flustered and  frightened.   She
    shredded several tissues.  She presented to  her  as  someone  who  was
    extremely psychiatrically unwell.   She  presented  with  psychological
    symptoms of a severe major depressive disorder, and symptoms of complex
    PTSD, placing her at considerable psychiatric risk.  Dr  Thomas  stated
    that it was common misperception  that  it  was  easy  to  fabricate  a
    psychiatric disorder.  She said it was actually extremely difficult  to
    do so across time and symptom clusters, with consistency of effect.

19. It was open to the Judge to attach limited weight  to  the  psychiatric
    evidence because, for example, Dr Thomas' opinion was based on only one
    examination:  she  had  not  assessed  the  appellant  "across   time".
    Alternatively, it was open to the Judge to accept  that  the  appellant
    was a vulnerable witness, as indicated by the psychiatric evidence, but
    to find that any "clear discrepancies in the oral  evidence"  were  not
    materially caused by a mental, psychological  or  emotional  trauma  or
    disability.  But her method of resolving the issue of  the  appellant's
    asserted vulnerability (and the  related  question  of  the  degree  of
    weight to be accorded  to  the  psychiatric  report)  was  structurally
    flawed. I am unable to say with any confidence whether,  if  the  Judge
    had followed the correct approach, she would or would not have accepted
    that the appellant was a vulnerable witness; and if  she  had  accepted
    that the appellant was a vulnerable witness, whether and to what extent
    her adverse credibility findings against the appellant with  regard  to
    her protection claim would have fallen away.

Conclusion

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law, such
    that it must be set aside and remade in its entirety, with none of  the
    Judge's findings of fact being preserved.

Directions

21. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House  for
    a de novo hearing (Judge Swaniker incompatible).  None of the  findings
    of fact made by the previous Tribunal shall be preserved.

22. The anonymity direction previously made by the First-Tier  Tribunal  is
    continued.






Signed                              Date  26 June 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



