
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09634/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2019                           |On 29th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                vinothan [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  [~]  1986.   The
    Appellant applied for  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  asking  to  be
    recognised as a refugee based on a claim to having a well-founded  fear
    of persecution in Sri Lanka on the basis of his political opinion.  The
    Appellant has previously had a  fairly  extensive  immigration  history
    having originally arrived in the UK on 3rd September 2010 on a visa for
    the purpose of study.  His claim for asylum was based on a fear that if
    returned he would  be  perceived  to  have  links  to  the  LTTE.   The
    Appellant's application was refused by Notice  of  Refusal  dated  12th
    September 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal O'Brien sitting at Birmingham on 5th  July  2018.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 2nd  August  2018  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on protection grounds and on human rights grounds.



 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  17th
    September.  That application for permission was refused by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Adio on 4th September 2018.  Renewed  grounds  were
    lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 24th  September  2018.   Those  grounds
    contended firstly that there  had  been  a  failure  by  the  judge  to
    properly consider the case law, in particular MP and NT (Sri  Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829 in that it was submitted that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to have any proper regard to the  Appellant's
    evidence that his family were linked to the LTTE.  Secondly,  that  the
    judge had  failed  to  adequately  assess  the  Appellant's  sur  place
    activities and that the judge had erred in law by failing  to  properly
    consider the leading authority of GJ in  the  light  of  the  evidence.
    Thirdly, it was contended that there had been an error in the  findings
    of credibility.

 4. On 19th November 2018 in a very succinct  grant  of  permission,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge  Chalkley  concluded  that  the  grounds  were  properly
    arguable.  It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    his instructed Counsel, Mr Paramjorthy.  Mr  Paramjorthy  is  extremely
    familiar with this matter.  He appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and he is also the author  of  a  document  entitled  "the  Appellant's
    written submissions" which  is  effectively  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting
    Officer, Mr Walker.

Submissions/Discussions

 5. It is the first  two  Grounds  of  Appeal  upon  which  Mr  Paramjorthy
    predominantly relies, but in particular he indicates that the judge has
    failed  to  grasp  the  implications  of  the  Appellant's  sur   place
    activities.  He points out that those sur place activities  postdate  a
    previous decision by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  and  that  the
    key issues to be considered were firstly that the  Appellant  continues
    to be involved with the  TGTE  which  is  a  prescribed  and  therefore
    recognised as a terrorist organisation  and  to  involve  himself  with
    significant post-war separatism, particularly by way of his involvement
    in his sur place activities.  Secondly, that he would be  perceived  in
    this manner when returned to Sri Lanka, and to  that  extent  there  is
    reliance  by  Counsel  upon  the  country  guidance  authority  of  GJ,
    particularly at paragraph 356(7A),  and  thirdly,  that  the  Appellant
    would be asked questions as to what he has been doing  in  the  UK  and
    that he would not be in a position to lie or expected to lie about such
    activities and his TGTE involvement.  To  that  extent  Mr  Paramjorthy
    refers me to Appendix C paragraphs 4 and 15 of  GJ  pointing  out  that
    that Appendix was in fact draughted by a Home Office representative and
    represents the Home Office's policy and stance.

 6. He asked me to give due consideration to paragraphs 36  to  39  of  the
    First-tier Judge's decision.  Those paragraphs address the issue of the
    Appellant's  sur  place  activities  and  at  paragraph  39  the  judge
    considers that the Appellant's involvement with the TGTE in  sur  place
    activities would appear to  be  a  recent  development  and  that  this
    reinforces the impression that such  activities  are  opportunistic  to
    avoid a return to Sri Lanka.

 7. Mr Paramjorthy does not seek to challenge such a finding.  He indicates
    that the problem is to be found specifically in  paragraph  41  of  the
    judge's  decision.   It  is  worth  specifically  referring   to   that
    paragraph:-

         "41. It might be that the Appellant's circumstances are  such  that
             he might appear on a 'watch' list.   However,  I  am  entirely
             satisfied that the Appellant is an  opportunist  and  that  he
             would not continue any  Tamil  activism  upon  return  to  Sri
             Lanka.  Therefore, he would not be at real risk of persecution
             or serious harm."

 8. It is the  submission  made  by  Mr  Paramjorthy  that  the  judge  has
    misapplied the core questions in GJ, in particular as to whether or not
    the Appellant would be perceived as a  Tamil  separatist.   He  accepts
    that he might be considered an opportunist and  that  it  may  well  be
    arguable that his  attendance  was  tactical  in  attending  sur  place
    activities, but there has been a demonstrable failure  to  engage  with
    his involvement  with  what  is  accepted  as  a  prescribed  terrorist
    organisation and the implications  of  what  would  happen  to  him  on
    return, and  particularly  to  how  he  would  be  dealt  with  by  the
    authorities at the airport.

 9. Mr Paramjorthy reminds me that the TGTE is banned in Sri Lanka, so  the
    Appellant would not be in a position to continue sur  place  activities
    if returned, but that the judge has dispensed with considering the risk
    posed by being involved with the TGTE in the UK purely by stating  that
    his actions are opportunist.  He indicates that he considers  that  the
    manner in which the judge has assessed the risk is wrong and  that  the
    judge has failed to address the important questions that would be posed
    to the Appellant on his return.  He further points out that there  were
    certain factual findings made with regard to letters  produced  by  the
    TGTE as to the support given by the Appellant and  a  letter  from  his
    father, none of which are actually challenged by the judge,  or  indeed
    by the Secretary of State which give support to the submissions made in
    support of the Appellant's appeal.

10. Secondly, it is submitted that the judge has  inadequately  dealt  with
    the Appellant's psychiatric problems.  These are addressed at paragraph
    34 of the judge's decision and the judge has concluded that he  is  not
    persuaded that the Appellant suffers from PTSD and to the  extent  that
    he suffers from severe depression  that  is  not  unique  among  failed
    asylum seekers.  Mr Paramjorthy takes me to his skeleton  argument  and
    points out that it is accepted to a certain extent that  the  Appellant
    has psychiatric problems and he points out that there is grave  concern
    as to someone who has psychiatric problems as to how  he  would  relate
    and how he would cope with being questioned at the airport.  He submits
    that  the  judge  has  failed  to  address  this  and  this  in  itself
    constitutes a material error of law.

11. I am considerably assisted by the submissions  made  thereafter  by  Mr
    Walker.  Mr Walker acknowledges  that  paragraph  41  is  unfortunately
    drafted (to use his words) and it does give credence to the Appellant's
    involvement in Tamil activism and  that  the  paragraph  is  not  well-
    reasoned and fails to  give  reasoned  findings  merely  relying  on  a
    conclusion of opportunism.  He concedes that taken  together  with  the
    failure to give due and proper consideration to the psychiatric report,
    that the decision is unsafe and contains material error of  law.   Both
    advocates asked me to remit the appeal for rehearing.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. The manner in which this has been addressed by the advocates before  me
    has  been  of  considerable  assistance  to  me.   Mr  Paramjorthy  has
    addressed the principle  problems  that  the  decision  highlights  and
    points out that the judge may well not have been  wrong  in  drawing  a
    conclusion that the Appellant has been  opportunist  in  attending  the
    activities of the TGTE by way of attending sur place activities in  the
    UK.  That in itself, however, does not suffice  to  defeat  the  claim.
    The judge has failed at paragraph 41 to  make  reasoned  findings  that
    accord with the perceived  manner  in  which  the  Appellant  would  be
    considered on return to Sri Lanka as set  out  in  the  guidance  given
    within GJ and as to the questions that he will be asked at the  airport
    and the manner in which he would be expected to address  them.   It  is
    insufficient merely to state that he is  opportunistic.   Further,  the
    judge has failed to give credence to the factual acceptance of  certain
    parts of the evidence, i.e. the  production  of  the  letter  from  the
    Appellant's father and from the TGTE, albeit that the weight that could
    be given to those letters is one that the judge was perfectly  entitled
    to make.

15. In addition, the judge has failed to give due and full consideration as
    Mr Walker points out to the psychiatric evidence,  and  for  all  these
    reasons the decision is unsafe.  That is not to say that on a rehearing
    of the matter that another judge  fully  reasoning  the  arguments  put
    before him may not come to exactly the same conclusion as the  original
    judge.  What is important however is that the issues  that  would  face
    the Appellant are fully aired and given due  consideration  leading  to
    findings by the judge.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and is set aside.

17. Directions are given hereinafter for the rehearing of this matter:-

      1) On finding that there are material errors of law in the decision of
         the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal is set aside and the matter is remitted to the  First-tier
         sitting at Birmingham on the first available date 28 days hence.

      2) That the rehearing of this matter is to be before any Judge of  the
         First-tier Tribunal other than Immigration Judges Norton-Taylor and
         Immigration Judge O'Brien.

      3) That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

      4) That the estimated length of hearing is three hours.

      5) That there be leave to either party to file and serve a  bundle  of
         up-to-date subjective and/or objective  evidence  upon  which  they
         seek to rely at least seven days  prior  to  the  restored  hearing
         date.

      6) That a Tamil interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

      7) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 24th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 24th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
