
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09189/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                      |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 2 November 2017                  |On 6 November 2017                    |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     FH
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Martin, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his protection claim.

Summary of asylum claim

       2. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia.  He is a marathon  runner,
          who has participated in  international  competitions.   He  claims
          that the authorities regard  him  as  an  Oromo  Liberation  Front
          (OLF) support who has declined to assist the government, and  that
          he has been detained  and  ill-treated  for  reasons  relating  to
          this.

Procedural history

       3. The respondent  refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  for
          reasons contained in a decision dated 15 August 2016.


       4. In a decision dated 6 September  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Mathews accepted that the appellant is an international runner  of
          Oromo ethnicity but  did  not  accept  that  he  was  detained  or
          politically active as claimed, and dismissed the appeal.

       5. Designated Tribunal Judge  Shaerf  granted  permission  to  appeal
          observing that it is arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  made
          factual errors, which infected the credibility findings.

       6. The respondent submitted a rule 24 notice dated 21 September  2017
          in which she submitted that the findings of fact were open to  the
          First-tier Tribunal.

Hearing

       7. Mr Martin relied upon the grounds of appeal and Mr McVeety  relied
          upon the rule 24 notice, albeit that  he  conceded  there  may  be
          problems with the findings at [22].

       8. After hearing from both parties, I reserved my decision,  which  I
          now provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

       9. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  made  three  material
          errors of law.


      10. First, the finding at [21] that the trust placed in the  appellant
          is inconsistent with him not being invited to be a member  of  the
          OLF, fails to take into account the country  background  evidence.
          The apparently undisputed country background evidence  before  the
          First-tier Tribunal indicated that at the relevant  time  the  OLF
          was classified as a terrorist organisation  that  carries  on  its
          activities 'underground', and that  both  members  and  supporters
          face arrest, interrogation, torture  and  extra-judicial  killing.
          This  evidence  supports  the  appellant's   evidence   that   the
          organisation is very secretive and cautious, and as  such  he  was
          not invited to be a formal member, notwithstanding the  extent  of
          his activities.  The First-tier  Tribunal's  contrary  finding  is
          unsupported by any evidence and entirely speculative.

      11. This error is repeated at [26] when the First-tier Tribunal  finds
          the  appellant's  local  prominence  "to  be  at  odds  with   the
          appellant's claim not to be a member".  The  appellant's  evidence
          is that he was a supporter of the OLF but had joined a secret  OLF
          cell group in his local area.  This is  corroborated  by  the  OLF
          Chairman in the UK.  Mr McVeety argued that the claim not to be  a
          member is inconsistent with the claim that he was a  member  of  a
          secret  cell.   However,  in  my  judgment  there   is   no   such
          inconsistency.   Indeed,  the  appellant  consistently  maintained
          that he was a supporter and not a formal member but was  a  member
          of a secret cell as an OLF supporter.

      12. Second, the First-tier Tribunal appears to have misunderstood  the
          appellant's claim that he  distributed  leaflets  at  night.   The
          First-tier Tribunal regarded this to be "strange" at [22]  without
          explaining why.  It is entirely plausible that  leaflets  produced
          by  an  unlawful  organisation,  whose  supporters  are  routinely
          tortured, would be  distributed  at  night  and  on  an  anonymous
          basis, i.e. by  leaving  them  under  the  doors  of  mosques  and
          schools.  The record of proceedings notes that in response to  the
          question "Who were you giving leaflets to?", the  appellant  said:
          "I was not handing them to anyone directly, I was rather  dropping
          them in secret in public places so that people could pick them  up
          later".  Given the  context  within  which  the  OLF  operated  in
          Ethiopia, as Mr McVeety acknowledged, it is difficult to see  what
          is strange about this account.

      13. The First-tier Tribunal also states that "night people  could  put
          up posters, but that was not the nature of the activity  initially
          described by this  appellant".   Mr  McVeety  accepted  that  this
          reasoning is difficult to follow.  He accepted that the  appellant
          has consistently  maintained  throughout  his  interview,  witness
          statement and in oral evidence that he distributed  leaflets,  and
          did not put up posters, and  his  description  of  his  leafleting
          activities has not changed.

      14. Third, the First-tier Tribunal's finding at [26]  that  the  means
          by which the detained student was able to warn  the  appellant  is
          unclear  fails  to  take  into  account  relevant  evidence:   the
          appellant clearly explained that two students were  arrested  with
          material he had provided them with (Q 152)  and  he  was  provided
          with this information not by the students  but  by  their  teacher
          and the cell leader, Alemu (Q 153c and para 6 of  the  appellant's
          witness statement).


      15. I  acknowledge  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave  many  other
          reasons for drawing  adverse  inferences  as  to  the  appellant's
          credibility.   However,  when  making  the  ultimate  finding   on
          credibility at [29] the First-tier Tribunal  made  it  clear  that
          the evidence and "the issues of credibility" were  viewed  in  the
          round and when "taken together...they drive me to conclude that  I
          find the  appellant's  account  lacking  in  credibility  for  the
          reasons  set  out  above".   It  is  difficult  to  separate   the
          credibility findings or  to  properly  understand  which  concerns
          were of particular  influence  on  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr
          McVeety conceded that if I found that  any  of  the  three  errors
          identified  above  were  made  out,  then  it  followed  that  the
          credibility assessment  was  unsafe.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
          errors I have identified above  played  a  material  role  in  the
          overall  credibility  assessment  and   in   the   premises   that
          assessment is infected by errors of law, and must be remade.

Conclusion

      16. The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in  its  approach  to  the
          evidence set out above.  The  errors  I  have  focussed  upon  are
          sufficiently wide-ranging and fundamental to lead me to  the  view
          that the conclusion on credibility is vitiated by  errors  of  law
          and unsafe.  The decision must be remade entirely and de novo.

Disposal

      17. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided
          that this is an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.

Decision

      18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      19. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
2 November 2017

