
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09376/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 July 2017                       |On 14 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     A J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on [ ]  1986.   She
    is a Sunni Muslim.  She arrived in the UK in January 2011 as a  student
    with leave valid until 28 December 2011.  That leave  was  subsequently
    extended until 8 May 2013.  In March 2011, she met her partner.  He  is
    a Sh'ia  Muslim  and  a  Pakistan  national.   They  have  undergone  a
    religious marriage and now have three  children.   In  July  2013,  the
    appellant applied for further leave on the  basis  of  her  family  and
    private life but that was refused on 13  August  2013.   Her  husband's
    subsequent application for leave relying upon Art 8 was also refused on
    8 June 2015.

 3. On 15 June 2015, the appellant was encountered by immigration officials
    and served with removal documents as an overstayer.  On 16 March  2016,
    the appellant claimed asylum.  The basis of her claim is that she is at
    risk from her family in Pakistan because she had married a Sh'ia Muslim
    and her family are  strict  Sunnis.   She  also  fears  inter-sectarian
    Sunni/Sh'ia violence from Sunni  militia  as  a  Sunni  woman  who  has
    married a Sh'ia man.

 4. On 19 August 2016, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  16  November  2016,  Judge  O'Rourke   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  In particular, the  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant would be at risk of  serious  harm  from  her
    family but, in any event, she could safely  and  reasonably  internally
    relocate to live in Karachi where her husband's family lived.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds, in particular that the judge had failed properly  to
    consider the country  information  relating  to  the  risk  of  "honour
    killings" in Pakistan and had been wrong to  find  that  the  appellant
    could internally relocate to Karachi.

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 8 February 2017, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ  Plimmer)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 8. On 8 March 2017, the Secretary  of  State  filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's adverse decision.

The Submissions

 9. Ms Shaw, who represented the appellant, relied upon paras 3, 4 and 5 of
    the grounds of appeal.  First, she submitted that the judge had  failed
    to take into account the entirety of the passage in the CIG, "Pakistan:
    Women Fearing Gender-based Harm/Violence" (2006) at para 26(i)  of  his
    determination.  Whilst he referred to  the  document's  statement  that
    "generally honour killings took place in "rural or  tribal  areas",  he
    had failed to refer to the part that said:   "More  recent  information
    indicates  that  the  risk  of  honour  killings  in  Pakistan  is  not
    restricted geographically or otherwise".  The passage then goes  on  to
    identify more broadly the occurrence of honour killings  including  two
    cases of honour killings in Islamabad.

10. Secondly, Ms Shaw submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account passages in the CIG document at paras 2.4.11 and 2.4.12 dealing
    with the Pakistan authorities inability  or  unwillingness  to  protect
    women from honour killings and that they were often ostracised and  the
    victims of honour killing where 'love marriages' had occurred.  Ms Shaw
    also relied upon para 2.4.11 and 2.4.19 of  the  CIG  cited  at  ground
    3(iii).

11. Thirdly, as regards the risk from Sunni extremists, Ms  Shaw  submitted
    that the judge had failed properly to  take  into  account  the  expert
    report of Dr Giustozzi at paras 13-27.

12. Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's claim under both limbs, namely the risk from her family  as
    a result of her mixed marriage and the general risk to her as  a  Sunni
    woman married to a Sh'ia man.

13. Mr Mills accepted that the judge appeared not to have taken fully  into
    account para 2.4.10 of the CIG in  para  26(i)  of  his  determination.
    However, he submitted that error was not material.  He  submitted  that
    the judge had been entitled to find that the  appellant  had  not  been
    subject to any continuing threat from her family, although she had been
    in contact with them and they had been unhappy after a visit by friends
    to the appellant's accommodation in the UK.  Mr Mills accepted that  in
    a telephone call to her mother subsequently,  the  appellant  had  said
    that her brother had been shouting in the background but there were  no
    letters or direct threats thereafter to the  appellant.   He  submitted
    that the judge was entitled to find that the appellant's  position  was
    not one which was of any continuing interest to her family.

14. Further, Mr Mills submitted that the judge was entitled  to  find  that
    the appellant could, in any  event,  internally  relocate  to  live  in
    Karachi (together with her husband)  with  her  husband's  family.   He
    submitted that the judge was  entitled  to  find  at  para  27(i)  that
    Pakistan was a large country and that Karachi had at least six  million
    inhabitants.  He referred me to Dr Giustozzi's report and  a  table  at
    para 13 of that report which set out the level of sectarian violence in
    Pakistan between 1989 and 2016.  He accepted that 32% of all  sectarian
    attacks took place in Karachi (see para 14 of  Dr  Giustozzi's  report)
    but if the appellant's claim was, as it appeared to be, that she was at
    risk as were all Sh'ia Muslims in Pakistan then the judge was  entitled
    to find that there was no real risk to her.

15. In  her  reply,  Ms  Shaw  placed  reliance  upon  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's evidence had been that there was a threat from her  brother
    and there was an escalation of that threat.  During  the  course  of  a
    second phone call with  her  mother,  her  mother  had  said  that  her
    brothers had reported her (the  appellant)  to  the  police.   Ms  Shaw
    submitted that there was background evidence to show  that  the  police
    might not  provide  protection  and,  as  a  consequence,  the  judge's
    internal relocation finding could not be sustained as he had failed  to
    consider that issue.

Discussion

16. The judge dealt with the risk, if any, to the appellant from her family
    at paras 25-26 as follows:

         "25.      The  'neighbour  incident'.   I  accept  the  Appellant's
             evidence  as  to  the  'neighbour  incident'  and  that  as  a
             consequence her family found out about her  relationship  with
             her partner.  I didn't view any identified inconsistencies  as
             particularly serious and it would  seem  inevitable  that,  at
             some point, bearing in  mind  the  close-knit  nature  of  ex-
             patriate Pakistani communities in UK  that  her  family  would
             have found out.

         26.   Risk  to  the  Appellant  from  her  Family.   Based  on  the
             Appellant's evidence and the objective and expert evidence,  I
             accept that it is entirely likely that her  family  disapprove
             of her relationship, both because it was not arranged by  them
             and because, as an aggravating factor,  it  is  with  a  Shia.
             Whether that approval is to such a degree that it will  result
             in serious harm to her is another matter.   I  don't  consider
             that it will, for the following reasons:

             i.   Both the expert and  objective  evidence  indicates  that
                  'honour'-based violence is generally  a  rural  or  tribal
                  area phenomenon [CIG Pakistan: Women fearing  gender-based
                  harm/violence - 2016 - 2.4.10] and the Appellant's  family
                  are city-dwellers, with cosmopolitan links to the  US  and
                  UK.

             ii.  Despite her family knowing the  true  situation  now  for
                  five  years  and  the  close-knit  nature  of  ex-patriate
                  Pakistani society in UK, not a single threat  or  approach
                  has been forthcoming from the Appellant's  family  against
                  her or her partner.

             iii.     She now has three very young children which  must  be
                  of some influence on her family.

             iv.  She is a previously-divorced woman and therefore, in  the
                  eyes  of  many  Pakistani  Muslims,  due  to  social   and
                  religious  stigma,  of  less  marriage  'value'  than   an
                  unmarried  woman,  therefore  possibly   indicating   less
                  resistance than she asserts to her 'marriage' to Mr Uddin.

             v.   She has never had a direct (even telephone)  threat  from
                  her brother(s), the apparent main  possible  instigator(s)
                  of violence against her and  the  evidence  for  any  such
                  threat is entirely dependent on her oral evidence.  I  do,
                  in this respect consider that her credibility  is  damaged
                  by her failure for four years to bring an asylum claim.  I
                  accept that until 2013, as she had leave to remain,  there
                  was less pressure on her to do so, but that still leaves a
                  two-year period.  The evidence of hers and  her  partner's
                  previous applications indicate that  their  real  concerns
                  are for continued family life in UK, with the economic and
                  other benefits that attracts.  If she really thought  that
                  her and her children's life was in  danger  on  return  to
                  Pakistan, I see no reason for delay, particularly  bearing
                  in mind Mr Uddin's experience of  the  process.   Instead,
                  her and her partner's approach  has  been  procedural  and
                  legalistic, attempting every other avenue possible, before
                  she brought this claim."

17. Mr Mills accepted that in para 26(i), the judge had not had  regard  to
    the full text of the CIG document including that honour  killings  were
    not restricted to rural or tribal areas and also occurred in  the  city
    context.  In that regard, I agree that the judge failed  to  take  into
    account relevant evidence.

18. In addition, I accept Ms Shaw's submissions in relation to the  judge's
    statement set out in para 26(ii) that there  had  not  been  "a  single
    threat or approach" from her family.  Whilst it is true that there  had
    been no direct threat, there was evidence from the appellant  that  her
    brother had, in the background whilst she  was  on  the  phone  to  her
    mother, threatened her and also subsequently it  was  reported  by  her
    mother that her brothers had reported  the  appellant  to  the  police.
    This was, if accepted by the judge, evidence of continuing interest  by
    her family as a result of her inter-faith marriage.  Of course, in para
    26(v), the judge appears to have made an  adverse  credibility  finding
    against the appellant based upon  her  delay  in  claiming  asylum,  in
    particular her failure to raise asylum in her previous applications for
    leave.  However, it was part of the appellant's evidence (as set out at
    para 19 of the judge's determination) that she had an  explanation  for
    the delay and at para 7 of the skeleton argument before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, there is set out citation to the relevant evidence  that  the
    appellant had, in fact, raised the  problem  with  her  family  before.
    That, in  my  judgment,  undermined  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding in para 26(v).  There is, therefore, no proper finding based on
    the evidence about the threats and continuing interest, if any, of  her
    family.

19. Mr Mills submits that the  appellant  cannot  succeed  as  the  judge's
    internal relocation finding in para 27, in effect, overcomes any  error
    in the judge's adverse finding on the risk from the appellant's family.
     The difficulty, in my judgment, with that submission is that  part  of
    the appellant's case was that in  the  course  of  a  second  telephone
    conversation with her mother, her  brother  had  reported  her  to  the
    police.  If that was the fact, then it would be relevant as to  whether
    or not  the  appellant  could  be  traced  to  Karachi  and  whether  a
    sufficiency  of  protection  would  be   provided   by   the   Pakistan
    authorities.  As the judge's findings in respect of  the  risk  to  the
    appellant from her family are flawed, that necessarily has,  therefore,
    an  impact  upon  his  assessment  of  whether  she  could  safely  and
    reasonably internally relocate to Karachi.  That, in my judgment, is in
    itself sufficient to undermine the judge's finding in para 27 and  make
    his error in respect of his findings in paras 25-26 material.

20. In relation to whether the judge properly  assessed  the  risk  to  the
    appellant from Sunni extremists, it is not entirely obvious  that  that
    assessment should be made, as it was by  the  judge,  by  reference  to
    whether the general risk rose to a level to engage  Art  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.  The appellant was not relying upon  the  risk
    of indiscriminate violence arising from an internal armed  conflict  in
    Pakistan.  Further, although the judge set out Dr Giustozzi's  evidence
    in summary at para  20,  the  judge  appears  to  have  treated  it  as
    insufficient in para 27(ii) because it was not supported by any country
    guidance.  The fact  that  there  was,  and  is,  no  country  guidance
    relevant to the assessment of the risk to the  more  general  appellant
    does not necessarily undermine the weight of the  expert  opinion.   In
    the absence of country guidance, background evidence and expert opinion
    are the only tools  available  to  a  judge  in  order  to  assess  the
    situation in a particular country.  As I have  already  indicated,  the
    judge's finding in relation to internal relocation  to  Karachi  cannot
    stand.  In all the circumstances, it would be  wrong  to  consider  the
    issue of internal relocation in isolation of the  risk,  if  any,  from
    Sh'ia militia either in general or because of her mixed marriage.  That
    is not an issue bound up inexplicably with whether  the  appellant  can
    establish an Art 15(c) risk but rather is one of a  number  of  factors
    relevant to the reasonableness of living in Karachi.  In  remaking  the
    decision, the First-tier Tribunal should also consider  that  risk,  if
    any, as part of the internal relocation issue.

21. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of an  error  of  law.   The
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

22. Having regard to the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding  required,
    and applying para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the
    appropriate disposal of this appeal is to remit it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo  rehearing  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    O'Rourke.



                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  11 August 2017







