
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/09177/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 7 March 2019                      |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                DANLING ZHANG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr B Murphy, of Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge Boyd dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds by a decision promulgated on 20 November 2017.

 2. In his application for permission to appeal to the  UT,  the  appellant
    stated this ground:

         "The FtT considered ECHR article 8 at [65].   At  no  time  is  any
         reference made to the provisions of  the  immigration  rules  which
         deal with article 8 ... Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640  makes  clear  that
         this approach is not lawful, "The judge then embarked  on  a  free-
         wheeling article 8 analysis, unencumbered by the  rules.   That  is
         not the correct approach."

         In failing to have regard to the ... rules, failing to identify the
         ... test ... in appendix FM EX.1, the reader is left in real  doubt
         whether the tribunal followed the correct approach ... laid down by
         Parliament in the appendix."

 3. Deputy UT Judge Chapman granted permission (on the above  ground  only)
    on 11 October 2018, observing:

         "... it is arguable that the judge  failed  to  consider  paragraph
         276ADE(vi) or any material provisions relating to article  8  under
         the rules and failed to consider  whether  there  were  exceptional
         circumstances justifying consideration of  article  8  outside  the
         rules.  Whether this would make a material difference ... will be a
         matter for the hearing."

 4. The respondent says in a response under rule 24:

         "... It is difficult to see  how  formal  consideration  of  276ADE
         would have made any difference, when the judge has found no risk on
         return and no breach  of  article  3.   Further,  the  judge  fully
         considered the best interests of the children and found it would be
         reasonable to expect them to leave the UK ... there is no  material
         error."

 5. Mr Murphy submitted that the omissions identified in the grounds and in
    the grant showed the FtT's assessment of the case to be inadequate, and
    that the decision should be set aside, and  possibly  remitted  to  the
    FtT, for a full consideration under reference  to  the  rules,  and  to
    statute (section 117B of the 2002 Act).

 6. Having considered also the submissions for the respondent, I find  that
    the making of the decision of the FtT did not involve the making of  an
    error on a point of law, such that the UT should set it aside.

 7. There is no longer a right of appeal on the grounds that a decision "is
    not in accordance with the law (including immigration rules)".

 8. Nevertheless, consideration of human rights begins with  the  terms  of
    the rules, which are framed with the intention of  complying  with  and
    reflecting  article  8.   The  usual  structure  of  the   respondent's
    decisions is to go through the provisions of the  rules,  and  then  to
    proceed to whether there is anything  exceptional  outside  the  rules.
    That is often also a useful framework for a  tribunal,  but  it  not  a
    straitjacket.  The appellant has not shown that on the facts  as  found
    by the FtT her case matched the requirements of the rules.  She has not
    shown her complaint to be more than formal.

 9. The point in Gulshan was that the FtT judge there had not been entitled
    to embark on a free-wheeling article 8 analysis,  unencumbered  by  the
    rules, which led to the decision  in  favour  of  the  appellant  being
    reversed.  The error of which the  appellant  complains  is  one  which
    tended in her favour rather than against her.

10. The judge may have made an error of form,  but  he  made  no  error  of
    substance.  If his decision were to be remade within a fuller and  more
    accurate legal framework, the outcome would be the same.  No  error  is
    asserted in the findings of  fact,  by  which  the  appeal  could  only
    rationally be dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall
    stand.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      7 March 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
