
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09060/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 June 2019                      |On 21 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     A N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Sanders, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Company
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court. We make this order because  the  appellant  claims  to  be  a
       refugee and publicity could cause him harm.

    2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan against a decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision of  the
       respondent refusing to recognise him as a refugee and  to  give  him
       leave to remain on human rights grounds.

    3. There is a Rule 24 Notice from the Secretary  of  State  seeking  to
       defend the appeal but that  was  not  prepared  by  Ms  Everett  who
       explained, in response to our invitation at  the  beginning  of  the
       hearing, that although there are certain points she would  make  and
       certain challenges in the grounds she would  defend  vigorously  she
       would have difficulty overall expecting to persuade us that this was
       a satisfactory decision.

    4. There are aspects of this Decision and Reasons that concern us.   By
       way of example, there is a critical reference  in  the  Decision  to
       there being no witness statements from members  of  the  appellant's
       family. However, as counsel's  grounds  of  appeal  point  out,  the
       appellant's relatives were said to be a source of opposition to  the
       appellant. To suggest that  they  should  have  provided  supporting
       evidence was as a rather surprising comment.  We do not really  know
       what the judge meant there and whilst it might have been possible to
       have ringfenced that point it concerns us that it was said at all.

    5. We are also concerned about the judge's findings on the expertise of
       Dr Giustozzi.  Dr Giustozzi has often given evidence in  Afghanistan
       cases and has had his  evidence  accepted.   Here  he  was  offering
       himself as an expert on matters in Pakistan and although  the  judge
       is critical it is not clear to us quite what the judge accepted. One
       of the criticisms was that much of what Dr  Giustozzi  said  was  in
       publicly available documents but we are not clear about the  judge's
       evaluation of the evidence in the publicly available documents  that
       she said Dr Giustozzi had relied upon.

    6. Fundamentally this case is about whether a  Muslim  man  could  take
       back to Pakistan his wife who does not follow the Muslim  faith  and
       there has been no clear finding on that fundamental  point.   Whilst
       it may be that the Decision is not as bad as the grounds suggest  we
       agree that this is not a satisfactory decision.

    7. We also agree with Miss Sanders that the findings go to the root  of
       credibility which means there is nothing here that can  be  salvaged
       or preserved and the appellant has not had a proper hearing  of  his
       case.  The proper remedy in these circumstances, as  agreed  by  the
       parties, is that the case be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

    8. We find that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law.  We  allow  the
       appeal to the extent that we direct the First-tier Tribunal to  hear
       the case again.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 18 June 2019                   |



