
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/09149/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5th April 2018                         | On 9th May 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                   mr ATT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Head, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Willcocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam  born  on  13th  May  2000.   The
    Appellant claims to have arrived  in  the  UK  on  27th  February  2017
    clandestinely and claimed asylum on 1st March.  The Appellant claims to
    have left Vietnam on 1st July 2016.  In his witness  statement  however
    his asylum interview  states  he  left  on  1st  September  2016.   The
    Appellant claims to have  travelled  via  Russia,  Latvia,  Poland  and
    France prior to arriving in the UK by lorry in February 2017.

 2. The Appellant's claim for asylum is based on a  purported  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Vietnam on the basis  of  his  membership  of  a
    particular social group, namely that he was an illegitimate child.  The
    Appellant's application for asylum was refused  by  Notice  of  Refusal
    dated 30th August 2017.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Page sitting at Taylor House on 19th October 2017.  In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 16th November 2017 the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on asylum grounds.

 4. On 23rd November 2017 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  On 21st December 2017 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Boyes granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Boyes  noted  that
    the grounds asserted that the judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  reach
    identifiable and clear conclusions in relation to a material aspect  of
    the case.  Judge Boyes considered the grounds were  arguable,  in  that
    the judge might have applied the wrong standard  and  thus  reached  an
    incorrect conclusion, if at  all,  on  whether  the  Appellant  was  an
    orphan.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  For  the  purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the
    appeal process Mr ATT is referred to herein as the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.  The  Appellant  appears  by  his
    instructed Counsel, Ms Head.  Ms Head is  familiar  with  this  matter.
    She appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and she is also the  author
    of a skeleton argument produced to me for this appeal.   The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer,  Ms  Willcocks-
    Briscoe.

Submission/Discussion

 6. Ms Willcocks-Briscoe submits that the judge has not made clear findings
    on  the  principal  issue  as  to  whether  the  Appellant   was   born
    illegitimate and would as a result be at risk on return to Vietnam.  Ms
    Willcocks-Briscoe acknowledges that  the  judge  has  referred  to  the
    appropriate standard at paragraph 6  and  has  thereafter  she  submits
    allowed the appeal merely because there  was  "a  possibility"  of  the
    Appellant being an orphan.   She  submits  that  paragraph  21  of  the
    decision makes no real findings regarding the position of the Appellant
    merely making observations and notes that the  Appellant's  account  is
    doubtful and that the Appellant's evidence was vague.  She submits that
    the judge has failed to make a conclusion in paragraph 21, particularly
    when it is read against paragraph 20.  She submits that the  judge  has
    not engaged with the Secretary of State's position and confuses a grant
    of discretionary leave with asylum.   She  further  contends  that  the
    judge has not applied anxious scrutiny or identified what social  group
    or category the Appellant would fall into.  She relies on the  guidance
    of MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC).   She
    asks me to find that there are material errors of law and to set  aside
    the decision.

 7. Ms Head in response points out that the key issue was  whether  or  not
    the Appellant was without family and that there have  been  no  adverse
    findings made on the Notice of Refusal.  She takes me to  her  skeleton
    argument which I have considered and points out that the Appellant  was
    granted discretionary leave on the basis that he was  an  unaccompanied
    asylum seeking child and that there is a  lack  of  adequate  reception
    facilities open to him on  return  to  Vietnam.   She  points  out  the
    Appellant's mother was a prostitute and resided  with  his  grandmother
    who has  passed  away.   She  reminded  me  that  the  Appellant  fears
    mistreatment on account of his minority and vulnerability  if  returned
    to Vietnam.  She takes me to the decision, pointing out that the  judge
    has made a finding at paragraph 20 that the Appellant is  at  risk  and
    that it is not open to the Secretary of State now to raise the question
    as to whether or not the  Appellant  was  a  vulnerable  child  without
    parents.  Had it been the intension of the Secretary of State to do  so
    then that should have been  raised  in  the  Notice  of  Refusal.   She
    submits that there is no material error in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Judge.

 8. Ms Willcocks-Briscoe submits that the judge is still under  a  duty  to
    identify the basis of the decision and in particular what factors would
    place the Appellant at risk on return if he were to be found to  be  an
    orphan.  She submits that the Notice of Refusal  undermines  the  whole
    basis of the Appellant's account and asks me to  find  that  there  are
    material errors of law, to set aside the  decision  and  to  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for the appeal to be reheard  in
    its entirety.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Relevant Case Law

11. In MK duty to give reasons Pakistan the Upper Tribunal held

    (1)  It is axiomatic that a determination discloses clearly the reasons
         for a tribunal's decision.

    (2)  If a tribunal finds oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or
         unreliable or a document to be worth no weight  whatsoever,  it  is
         necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to
         be supported by reasons. A bare statement that a  witness  was  not
         believed or that a document was afforded no weight is  unlikely  to
         satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

    It is appropriate to apply these principles in this matter.

Findings on Error of Law

12. The approach adopted by the Upper Tribunal in MK  Pakistan -  set  out
    above - is important.  The fundamental principle upon which a Tribunal
    decision is based requires for reasons to be given by  the  judge.   In
    this case whilst having set out the standard of proof the judge in  his
    conclusion has merely stated

         "There remains a possibility that the Appellant is  an  orphan  who
         has been sent here."

13. That does not set out reasons, it is merely a judge's supposition.   In
    such circumstances there is  merit  in  the  argument  adopted  by  the
    Secretary of State.  I agree with the submissions made by Ms Willcocks-
    Briscoe that such a conclusion does not actually amount  to  a  finding
    and  that  it  certainly  does  not  amount  to  a  reasoned   finding,
    particularly  bearing  in  mind  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   had
    previously commented that the Appellant's evidence was vague  and  that
    there was no proper basis for concluding that  the  Appellant's  mother
    was in the UK and that the story that the grandmother had sold a  house
    in anticipation of securing an agent for the Appellant to leave Vietnam
    was "a doubtful coincidence".

14. In such circumstances I agree with the submissions made that other than
    appearing to accept the "possibility" in principle that  the  Appellant
    could be an orphan there is a substantial lack of clear  findings  made
    by the judge.  In such circumstances the such lack of findings and  the
    reliance on there being a mere possibility the Appellant was an  orphan
    renders this decision unsustainable.

15. There are  consequently  disclosed  material  errors  of  law  and  the
    decision is set aside and remitted back for rehearing to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  That of course is not to say that on  a  rehearing  of  this
    matter that a further  judge  will  not  agree  with  the  findings  of
    Immigration Judge Page, and provide sustainable  reasons  for  reaching
    that finding.   That  is  a  matter  for  consideration  on  rehearing.





Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  discloses  a  material
    error of law and is set aside.  Directions are given for the  rehearing
    of this matter below.

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  a  material
         error of law and is set aside with none of the findings of fact  to
         stand.

      2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor
         House on the first available date 28 days  hence  with  an  ELH  of
         three hours.

      3) That the appeal is to be heard before any Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Page.

      4) That there be leave to either party to file and serve an up-to-date
         bundle of subjective and/or objective evidence upon which they seek
         to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

      5) That a Vietnamese interpreter to attend the restored  hearing.   In
         the event that the Appellant's solicitors consider  an  interpreter
         of another language needs to be in attendance they must notify  the
         Tribunal within seven days of receipt of these directions.

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  granted  the  Appellant  anonymity.   No
    application is made to vary that order and the anonymity direction will
    remain in place.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.       .


Signed                              Date: 08/05/2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 08/05/2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
