
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09948/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 July 2020                    |On 6 August 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                    A S O

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Londonium Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer






           Background

        1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
           appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin  on
           5 February 2020 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal
           Judge C Chapman, promulgated on 23  December  2019  following  a
           hearing at Coventry on 19 December 2019.

        2. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on 9 October  1987.
           He entered the UK as a  Tier  4  student  in  October  2010  and
           overstayed when his leave expired February 2015. In April  2015,
           he applied for leave to remain outside the immigration rules but
           this was rejected on 2 July 2015 because the correct fee had not
           been paid. He failed to embark or submit a paid application  and
           on 19 February 2016 applied for leave to remain  on  family  and
           private life grounds. This was refused on 21 July 2016  with  an
           out of  country  right  of  appeal.  On  27  October  2016,  the
           appellant submitted a  judicial  review  application  which  was
           refused on 23 February 2017 and further permission  was  refused
           on 1 August 2017.

        3. On 27 February 2018, the  appellant  claimed  asylum.  This  was
           refused on 10 October 2018 and the appellant  lodged  an  appeal
           with the Tribunal. His appeal was heard on  3  January  2019  by
           First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Anthony  in  his  absence  and  was
           dismissed. Applications for permission to appeal were refused on
           13 February 2019 and 21 March 2019 and he exhausted  his  appeal
           rights on 28 March 2019. Still, the appellant failed  to  embark
           and on 3 July 2019 made further submissions.  These  submissions
           were refused on 20 September 2019 and led to these proceedings.

        4. The appellant claims that  from  2006  to  2010,  when  he  left
           Bangladesh, he was an active member of the student wing  of  the
           BNP. He claims to have been a joint secretary from  the  end  of
           2007 and to have been involved in various  activities  including
           organising  and  attending  meetings  and  demonstrations,   and
           recruiting members to the party. In 2009 he claims to have  been
           one of 50 people who  were  attacked  by  the  student  wing  of
           another main political party, the Bangladesh  Awami  league  and
           the BCL as well as by the police.  Following  this  incident  he
           claims that the police started looking for him and he  left  the
           country and came to the United Kingdom.  He  maintains  that  he
           still supports the BNP and participates in  its  activities.  He
           claims to be at risk from the Awami  League  who  have  been  in
           power since 2009. He claims that there is a warrant  outstanding
           for his arrest.

        5. There was no appearance at the hearing of his current appeal  by
           either the appellant or a representative. A fax received  on  13
           December maintained the  appellant  was  suffering  from  travel
           sickness and could not attend. A GP's  note  dated  12  December
           2019 was adduced. It stated that the appellant "reported to  the
           doctor that he  suffered  from  travel  sickness  and  that  the
           medication he previously used did not appear to be  helping  him
           currently. He was provided with a patient self-help leaflet  and
           a new medication was recommended".

        6. The adjournment request was refused on 16 December 2020  on  the
           basis that the doctor had not certified the appellant was  unfit
           or  incapable  of  attending  the  hearing,  understanding   the
           proceedings or playing a full part therein. It  was  also  noted
           that there was nothing to suggest that the appellant  would  not
           be suffering from travel sickness at a future date.

        7. The appellant then replied to ask that the appeal be  determined
           on the papers. The representatives confirmed  neither  they  nor
           the appellant would attend.

        8. The appellant's representatives were notified that the  Tribunal
           could not decide the appeal on the papers without the consent of
           the respondent but would excuse attendance of the appellant  and
           his representative. The matter then proceeded to  a  hearing  in
           the appellant's absence on  19  December  2019.  The  respondent
           refused to give consent to a paper determination and  the  judge
           heard submissions from the Presenting Officer.

        9. The judge had  regard  to  the  documentary  evidence  from  the
           appellant and the  respondent  and  took  the  previous  judge's
           determination as his starting point. He noted that the appellant
           had also failed to attend the hearing before Judge  Anthony.  He
           took account of the fresh evidence but found that the  documents
           could not be relied on. He had regard  to  the  appellant's  sur
           place activities but found that these amounted to  participation
           in a peripheral role and that there was  no  evidence  that  the
           Bangladeshi  authorities  monitored  protests  or  social  media
           accounts. He considered the country evidence and found that  the
           appellant was not a high profile BNP activist who  would  be  at
           risk. Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

       10. The grounds argue that the judge  placed  undue  weight  on  the
           first judge's determination and unreasonably assessed the  fresh
           evidence in the light of those findings. It is argued that Judge
           Anthony had not  been  able  to  hear  oral  evidence  from  the
           appellant. The grounds also argue that Judge  Chapman  "tacitly"
           accepted that the appellant was a BNP member. It is argued  that
           his case should have  been  considered  in  the  light  of  that
           finding. The remainder of the grounds cite case law at length.




           Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

       11. The matter was listed for a hearing at Field House on  30  March
           2020  but  due  to  the  Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to  take
           precautions against its spread, the hearing  was  adjourned  and
           directions were sent to the parties on 1  May  2020.  They  were
           asked to present any objections to the matter being  dealt  with
           on the papers and to make any further submissions on  the  error
           of law issue within certain time limits.

       12. The Tribunal has received written submissions from both parties.
           Time is extended for the appellant's submissions  and  they  are
           admitted. I now consider the matter.

       13. In doing so I have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
           Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment  of  Osborn  v
           The Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note
           No 1 2020: Arrangements during the Covid-19 pandemic  (PGN)  and
           the Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction  (PPD).  I  have
           regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of
           the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being  "to
           enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly".
           To this end I have considered that dealing with  a  case  fairly
           and  justly  includes:  dealing  with  it  in  ways   that   are
           proportionate to the importance of the case, the  complexity  of
           the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking
           flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable,
           that  the  parties  are  able  to  participate  fully   in   the
           proceedings; using any special expertise of the  Upper  Tribunal
           effectively; and avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with
           proper consideration of the  issues  (Rule  2(2)  UT  rules  and
           PGN:5).

       14. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and to all the
           evidence  before  me  before  deciding  how  to   proceed.   The
           respondent  has  raised  no  objection  to  the   matter   being
           considered on the papers. The appellant argues  that  it  is  of
           utmost importance that his case is presented orally  by  Counsel
           and that he has the opportunity to give oral evidence.

       15. A full account of the facts are set out in the  papers  on  file
           and the issue to be decided  is  a  narrow  one.  There  are  no
           matters  arising   from   the   papers   which   would   require
           clarification and so an oral hearing would  not  be  needed  for
           that purpose. I have had regard to the  appellant's  submissions
           and note that he has in the past had two opportunities to attend
           and present his case or to have a representative present it  for
           him and that on both occasions he failed to attend.  I  consider
           that a speedy determination  of  this  matter  is  in  his  best
           interests given the  length  of  time  the  appellant  has  been
           without any status. I am satisfied that I am able to fairly  and
           justly deal with this matter on the papers before me and  I  now
           proceed to do so.

           Submissions

       16.  The  respondent's  submissions  were  received  first  by   the
           Tribunal. They are dated 20 May 2020. The appellant replied on 1
           June  2020.  I  have  seen  no  earlier  submissions  from   the
           appellant.

       17. The appellant submits that the judge did not attach  due  weight
           to  his  fresh  evidence  and  put  excessive  weight  upon  the
           determination of the previous judge in the context of his asylum
           claim. The remainder of the submissions deal with the  necessity
           of having an oral hearing.

       18. The respondent prepared a rule 24 reply on 18 February 2020.  In
           that  document  she   opposed   the   appellant's   appeal   and
           respectfully expressed surprise at the grant  of  permission  in
           this case. She pointed out that the appellant had  not  attended
           his hearing, a fact that had been overlooked  in  the  grant  of
           permission. It was said that the only  evidence  the  judge  had
           before him that differed from the  previous  Tribunal  was  some
           evidence of sur place activities and letters allegedly from  the
           BNP. It was maintained  that  the  judge  dealt  with  all  this
           evidence in some detail and that  there  was  no  merit  in  the
           complaint that he simply relied upon the previous decision.

       19. In her submissions of  20  May  2020,  in  compliance  with  the
           Tribunal's directions, Ms Jones relies on the rule  24  response
           and maintains that the appellant's grounds  amount  to  no  more
           than an a disagreement with the Tribunal's conclusion.

           Discussion and conclusions

       20. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds  for  permission
           and the submissions made by both parties.

       21. The issue to be determined is whether  the  judge  placed  undue
           weight on the previous determination to the extent that  he  did
           not undertake a proper assessment of the fresh evidence.

       22. The first appeal was heard by Judge Anthony on 3  January  2019.
           On the morning of the hearing an application for an  adjournment
           was made by the appellant's representative (from the  same  firm
           of solicitors as continue to act for  him).  It  was  maintained
           that the appellant was distressed at the refusal of the previous
           day's written adjournment request (to  obtain  evidence  of  his
           party involvement) and so had indicated that he was going  to  a
           hospital Accident and Emergency department. Although  the  judge
           requested   evidence   from   the   hospital   and   gave    the
           representatives time to obtain it, nothing was  forthcoming  and
           the appellant's telephone was reported to be "dead".  The  judge
           considered that the appellant had been  aware  for  many  months
           that he needed to produce documentary evidence  of  his  claimed
           political activities, and she concluded that in the  absence  of
           any   independent   medical   evidence,   an   adjournment   was
           inappropriate. The  appellant's  representatives  then  withdrew
           from the proceedings.

       23. Judge Anthony proceeded to  dismiss  the  appeal  by  way  of  a
           written  determination  promulgated  on  8  January  2019.   She
           identified numerous discrepancies in his accounts and  concluded
           that he could not be believed and that documentary evidence from
           Bangladesh could not be relied on. She concluded that the  claim
           was fabricated and lacking in credibility. In  the  alternative,
           she concluded that even if the appellant had been a member of  a
           political party as claimed, his involvement was at  such  a  low
           level that he had not made out his case to the lower standard.

       24. The appellant's present claim  is  based  on  fresh  documentary
           evidence and what he claims has occurred since the  last  appeal
           hearing. The judge had a witness statement from him as  well  as
           documents from Bangladesh confirming his membership of the party
           before he came to the UK and his  claim  that  he  is  being  is
           sought by the  police.  The  appellant  also  produced  evidence
           regarding further activities in the UK.

       25. I would note that the challenge to Judge Chapman's determination
           makes  no  complaint  about  the  appeal   proceeding   in   the
           appellant's absence.

       26. It is argued for the appellant that  the  judge  misapplied  the
           Devaseelan guidelines and placed so much weight on the  previous
           determination that no proper  consideration  was  given  to  the
           present claim and  fresh  evidence.  This  complaint  is  wholly
           unsubstantiated by the determination which shows  that  in  fact
           the judge  did  properly  follow  the  relevant  principles  and
           undertook a comprehensive  assessment  of  the  new  documentary
           evidence.

       27. The fresh claim is set out  at  paragraphs  18-22  and  the  new
           documents are identified at 22. The law and correct approach  to
           the claim is set out at paragraphs 37-44 and the judge  properly
           self directs at 45. He correctly commences with the findings  of
           the  previous  Tribunal  (at  46)  before  assessing  the  fresh
           evidence.  For  the  reasons  given  at  paragraphs  47-57,   he
           concluded that the documents were unreliable, that the appellant
           had failed on both occasions to attend the hearing of his appeal
           and have his evidence tested, that  the  new  evidence  did  not
           provide anything  significantly  different  such  as  warrant  a
           departure from the previous judge's findings as  regards  events
           in Bangladesh. An assessment of  his  sur  place  activities  is
           undertaken (at 59--67).  Wholly adequate reasons are  given  for
           why the judge concludes that there is nothing in the appellant's
           activities which would put him at risk.

       28. There is nothing in the  complaint  that  the  judge  failed  to
           consider the claim on the basis that the  appellant's  claim  of
           political membership was true.  Both  Judge  Anthony  and  Judge
           Chapman considered whether the appellant would be at risk if  he
           were a member of the BNP as claimed but for sustainable  reasons
           both found that he was involved at a very low  level  and  would
           not be  of  any  interest  to  the  authorities  in  Bangladesh,
           particularly at  the  present  time  so  many  years  after  his
           departure.

       29. No issue is taken with the judge's findings on article 8 grounds
           and they stand unchallenged.

       30. The challenge is  without  any  merit.  It  is  plain  from  the
           appellant's immigration history that he is intent  on  remaining
           here through whatever means possible and  the  findings  of  the
           Tribunals on two occasions that his claim is  a  fabrication  to
           achieve that aim were properly made and are sustainable.




           Decision

       31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  contain  any
           errors of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.




           Anonymity

       32. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.




      Signed


        R. Keki?


      Upper Tribunal Judge


      Date: 29 July 2020
