
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09353/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Teams)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st July 2021                    |On the 3rd August 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

     RAR                                                           Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mozam
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born in 1993. He appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made  on  16  September  2019  refusing  his  claim  for  international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on  17
    December 2019, dismissed his appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge found  the  application  to  be  an  unreliable  witness  but
    accepted [51] that he could not return  safely  to  his  home  area  of
    Kirkuk. However, the judge found that it would not be unduly harsh  for
    the appellant to relocate to another part of Iraq,  in  particular  the
    IKR.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal. First, the appellant argues  that  his
    account was consistent with background evidence  and,  in  consequence,
    the judge should not have found the account incredible.

 4. The first  ground  is  without  merit.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant's account  was  not  inconsistent  with  background  evidence
    regarding the presence of Daesh (ISIS) in his home area and says so  in
    terms [36]. What Ground 1  fails  to  acknowledge  is  that  the  judge
    rejected the appellant's credibility not  because  it  conflicted  with
    background evidence, but because it was internally  inconsistent  [26].
    That conclusion is soundly supported  by  reasons  whilst  the  judge's
    findings regarding the inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence  are
    not directly challenged in the grounds at all.

 5. The second ground focuses on internal  flight.  The  appellant  submits
    that, in finding the appellant is in contact with his  family  in  Iraq
    and can seek financial and other support from them, the  judge  ignored
    evidence that several million Iraqis had been displaced by the  advance
    of ISIS. In addition, the appellant argues that he is unlikely to  find
    accommodation or employment in the IKR.

 6. The judge found that the appellant  was  not  a  reliable  witness.  It
    followed from that finding that it was open to the judge not to  accept
    the appellant's claim that he had lost touch with his family. The judge
    makes the specific finding [44 and  48]  that  the  appellant  was  not
    telling the truth when he claimed that he had fled  from  Iraq  to  the
    United Kingdom without paying money to an agent. She found that it  was
    likely that the appellant's family had paid for an agent and that  they
    would pay again to support the appellant on his return to Iraq and that
    they would also be able to send  his  CSID  identity  document  to  him
    before he leaves the United Kingdom. I find  that  those  findings  are
    entirely sound. In his asylum interview, at Qs122 et seq, the appellant
    confirmed that he had a CSID and had left it in his  village  in  Iraq.
    When asked if it could be sent to him, the appellant replied,  'I  know
    nothing about anyone how can I do so (sic).' I take that reply to  mean
    that the appellant claimed to have no family or friends in his  village
    who could send the card to him; he does not claim that the card is lost
    or out of date or could not otherwise be sent  if  there  was  somebody
    able to send it. Given that the judge has  reached  the  sound  finding
    that the appellant is able to seek and  obtain  family  assistance,  it
    follows that the appellant's only reason for being unable to access the
    card falls away. Moreover, there is no  reason  to  consider  that  the
    judge was unaware of the displacement of Iraqis by the advance of ISIS,
    a factor addressed in the country guidance cases cited by the judge (as
    Mr Howells pointed out, the country guidance  case  SMO,   KSP  and  IM
    (Article  15(c);identity  documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT  400   was
    promulgated 6 days after the First-tier Tribunal had been promulgated).
    The judge has made  findings  specific  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant as she was required to do. Given those specific  findings,  I
    consider that it was open to the judge to  find  that  the  appellant's
    family could send his CSID to him in the United Kingdom and  that  they
    would (as they had in the past) support his financially  and  in  other
    ways on his return.

 7. I also find that  the  argument  that  the  appellant  could  not  find
    accommodation or work in the IKR is, on the particular facts  as  found
    by the judge,  not  tenable.  The  judge  has  directly  addressed  the
    background evidence regarding unemployment in the IKR at [59]. She  did
    not accept that the appellant had done nothing between the ages  of  12
    and 18. Her conclusion that, notwithstanding the  problems  which  face
    all those seeking employment in the IKR may face, the  appellant  would
    find a job is not perverse in the context  of  the  particular  factual
    matrix. As regards accommodation, the appellant's family  contacts  are
    again relevant. At [60], the judge  finds  that  the  appellant  'could
    choose to live with [his family] in another part of Iraq';  the  family
    had the means to fund the appellant's journey to the United Kingdom and
    would be both able and willing to accommodate the appellant  with  them
    if it were necessary to do so to prevent him becoming destitute.

 8. For the reasons I have given, I find that the appellant has  failed  to
    show that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law. Accordingly, his appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


    Notice of Decision

     This appeal is dismissed.



         Signed                                                         Date
21 July 2021
        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





