
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09756/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th January 2018                          |On 27th February 2018         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     b a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Singh of Twinasood Law Practice Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Iraq born on [ ] 1990.   He  entered
    the UK illegally on 4th  March  2016  and  applied  for  asylum.   That
    application was refused for the reasons given  in  an  Asylum  Decision
    dated 31st August 2016.  The Appellant  appealed  and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal (the Judge)  sitting  at
    Birmingham on 28th March 2017.  She decided to dismiss the  appeal  for
    the reasons given her Decision dated 9th  April  2017.   The  Appellant
    sought leave to appeal that decision and on 11th  September  2017  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that he would be at  risk
    on return to the IKR as a Christian convert.  The Judge  dismissed  the
    appeal because although she was satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    convert to Christianity, she found that on his return to Suleminiyah he
    would enjoy the degree of religious tolerance known to  exist  in  that
    area and would not experience any  religious  persecution  there.   The
    Judge also found that the Appellant would  not  be  at  risk  from  his
    father, who according to the  Appellant  had  threatened  to  kill  him
    because of his conversion, because it was not  reasonably  likely  that
    the Appellant's father would be able to find him on his return, and  in
    any event the Appellant could safely relocate elsewhere within the IKR.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Singh argued that the Judge had erred in law as  she
    had not properly assessed the  evidence  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    claim.  He referred to the grounds of  application  and  the  grant  of
    permission and submitted that the Judge's assessment  of  the  evidence
    was not fair and reasonable.  She had given insufficient and inadequate
    reasons for her decision.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    there was no such material error of  law  as  the  Judge  had  directed
    herself appropriately and had made findings open to her on the evidence
    before her.  The Judge had given adequate reasons for her finding  that
    the Appellant was not at risk on return  as  a  Christian  convert  and
    would also not be at risk from his father and family.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.

 7. The Judge found the Appellant to be credible and accepted that he was a
    Christian  convert.   Most  of  the  points  made  by  the  Appellant's
    representative in his Skeleton Argument relate to the  Judge's  finding
    as to  credibility  and  are  therefore  irrelevant.   The  Appellant's
    criticisms of the Judge's decision are only in general terms and amount
    to no more than a disagreement with the decision of the Judge.  I agree
    with the submissions of Mrs Aboni that the Judge made findings open  to
    her on the evidence and gave adequate reasons  for  her  decision.   At
    paragraphs  39  to  42  she  gave  a  comprehensive  analysis  of   the
    possibility of any risk on return  to  the  area  of  the  IKR  and  in
    particular Suleminiyah as a result of  the  Appellant's  conversion  to
    Christianity and the risk to him from his father.  Her finding that  as
    a Christian convert the Appellant is not at risk on return to  the  IKR
    is based upon the objective evidence before her and cannot be  faulted.
    There was no evidence before her that the Appellant's father  or  other
    members of his family would be able to find the Appellant on his return
    to the IKR, and as the of whole  of  the  IKR  is  not  known  for  any
    religious persecution, even as an apostate, the Judge  was  correct  to
    conclude that the Appellant could safely  relocate  in  the  IKR.   For
    these reasons I find no material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 21st February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

