
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09734/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Pursuant to rule 34 of the                  |                               |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules   |On 20 August 2020              |
|2008                                        |                               |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     MZ
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     written submissions provided by Iris Law
For the Respondent:    written submissions provided by Mr C Avery, Senior
                    Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

      1. This is an 'error of law' decision  determined  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, paragraph 4 of  the  Practice  Direction  made  by  the
         Senior President of Tribunals on  19  March  2020  'Pilot  Practice
         Direction: Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal  and
         the Upper Tribunal', and paragraphs 4  -  17  of  the  Presidential
         Guidance Note no 1 2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19 Pandemic,
         23 March 2020.

      2. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Hands (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on 4
         December  2019,  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
         decision dated 17 September 2019 to refuse his protection and human
         rights claim and his claim for humanitarian protection.

      3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal E.M. Simpson on 9 January 2020. The  'error
         of law' hearing was listed for 24 March 2020 but was vacated due to
         the Covid-19 pandemic. On 7 May  2020  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions to the parties expressing its provisional view that,  in
         light  of  the  pandemic,  it  was  appropriate  to  determine  the
         questions (i) whether the judge's decision involved the  making  of
         an error of law and, if so, (ii) whether the decision should be set
         aside, without a  hearing.  On  21  May  2020  the  Upper  Tribunal
         received further submissions from the appellant in respect  of  the
         two questions. Submissions from the respondent, authored  by  Mr  C
         Avery, were received by the Upper Tribunal on 5  June  2020.  These
         submissions were late, but Mr Avery explained that they were caused
         by administrative difficulties in light of the pandemic.  In  these
         circumstances I consider it appropriate to extend time.  On  behalf
         of the respondent Mr Avery accepted that the judge failed  to  make
         key findings in respect of some key aspects of the case. He invited
         the Tribunal to set aside the judge's decision and indicated  that,
         in light of the issues involved, a  remote  hearing  would  not  be
         appropriate. Neither party made submissions in respect of the Upper
         Tribunal's provision view that questions  (i)  and  (ii)  could  be
         appropriately and fairly determined without a hearing.

      4. Having regard to the overriding interest in rule 2 of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with cases justly and
         fairly,  and  having  considered  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
         challenge to the judge's decision (which does not involve the  need
         for further evidence to be considered), and having  regard  to  the
         narrow focus  of  the  legal  challenge  and  the  concise  written
         submissions from both parties, and  having  satisfied  itself  that
         both parties have been given a fair opportunity  to  fully  advance
         their cases, the Upper Tribunal considers it appropriate, in  light
         of the Covid-19 pandemic,  to  determine  questions  (i)  and  (ii)
         without a hearing pursuant to rule 34  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Background

      5. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan. He was 37 years old  at
         the date of the First-tier Tribunal's decision. He entered  the  UK
         on 22 January 2009 with valid leave as a student,  and  this  leave
         was extended to 31 May 2014. An application for  further  leave  to
         remain based on his arranged marriage (to SH, a British citizen and
         the appellant's 3rd cousin) was refused and the  appeal  dismissed.
         He became appeal rights exhausted on 29 February 2016.  He  claimed
         asylum on 26 August 2016 on the  basis  that  he  was  at  risk  of
         persecution from SH's family  (the  appellant  claimed  he  and  SH
         separated in March 2015). The asylum  claim  was  refused,  and  an
         appeal dismissed in a decision dated 5 April 2017.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal judge was not persuaded that the appellant gave a credible
         account  of  his  claimed  fear.  Although  the  appellant   sought
         permission to appeal his application was refused.

      6. In further submissions the appellant claimed that he  was  bisexual
         and faced a well-founded fear  of  persecution  in  Afghanistan  on
         account of his bisexuality. The respondent rejected the appellant's
         claim to be bisexual. The respondent noted the absence of  evidence
         from Rami, the appellant's  alleged  partner,  but  acknowledged  a
         statement from VK, a gay friend  who  used  to  live  in  the  same
         accommodation as the appellant and  who  was  subsequently  granted
         asylum,  maintaining  that  the  appellant  and  Rami  were  in   a
         relationship.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      7. The judge considered written and oral evidence from  the  appellant
         and VK. At [14] the judge noted the appellant's claim to  be  in  a
         relationship with Rami but  observed  that  there  was  no  written
         statement or letter from Rami  and  that  he  did  not  attend  the
         hearing. The judge rejected the  appellant's  explanation  for  the
         absence of evidence from Rami.

      8. At [15] the judge summarised and considered the evidence  from  VK.
         VK claimed that it was evident to him and two other men  living  in
         the same accommodation that the appellant and  Rami  were  gay  men
         even though the appellant continued to deny the  existence  of  any
         sexual relationship. In his oral evidence VK  claimed  he  and  the
         appellant had had sexual relations even  though  they  were  not  a
         couple. The judge stated,

             "I am perplexed by the value  of  this  evidence  as,  if  the
             Appellant was so inclined to have sex with someone who is just
             a friend, then how genuine is  his  love  for  the  person  he
             claims to be devoted to and for whom he has great concern  for
             his safety and well-being."

      9. The judge placed little weight on a  letter  from  an  organisation
         named Rainbow Home and concluded, based on the appellant's lack  of
         engagement with the LGBT community in the  UK  and  his  desire  to
         present as a heterosexual male to his friends, the Muslim community
         and the community at large, that the  appellant  was  not  bisexual
         [19] and that he had fabricated  his  account  to  substantiate  an
         unmeritorious asylum claim [28].

     10. The judge considered (at [20] et seq),  in  the  alternative,  that
         even if the  appellant  was  bisexual,  he  would  choose  to  live
         discreetly and privately in Afghanistan because of social pressures
         and not because he would fear persecution. The judge  reached  this
         conclusion because the appellant had lived as a bisexual man in the
         UK in a discreet  and  private  manner  and  had  kept  his  sexual
         orientation a secret from the Muslim community in the UK  and  kept
         his relationship with Rami secret over several years  ([24],  [26],
         [27]).

     11. In the remainder of his decision  the  judge  considered  that  the
         appellant would not face a real risk of serious  harm  if  he  were
         returned  to  Kabul  (he  continued  to  have  family   living   in
         Afghanistan) such as to engage Article 15(c) of  the  Qualification
         Directive. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.



The challenge to the judge's decision

     12. The grounds of appeal and the further written  submissions  contend
         that the judge conflated the issue of whether the appellant was  in
         a serious relationship  with  the  issue  "whether  he  engages  in
         relationships with men." There were  said  to  be  no  findings  in
         respect of the latter issue. If the appellant had engaged in sexual
         relations whilst in a relationship with another person, this  would
         be a good reason for the non-attendance of his partner,  and  would
         also indicate that the appellant would be  at  risk  on  return  to
         Afghanistan. The judge failed to make findings in respect  of  VK's
         evidence. If those who knew the appellant believed he was gay, then
         he may be perceived to be gay if he were returned  to  Afghanistan,
         and this would  give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of  persecution.  VK
         commented on how the appellant was able to come to terms  with  his
         own sexual orientation, particularly in respect of his  faith,  and
         this evidence was  relevant  not  only  to  whether  the  appellant
         identified as bisexual but also whether he would  be  perceived  by
         others as being bisexual.

     13. The respondent accepts that the judge materially erred  in  law  in
         that he failed to make clear findings on some key  aspects  of  the
         case.



Discussion

     14. The suggestion in the grounds that the appellant's  alleged  sexual
         relationship with VK was the reason for the absence of his  partner
         at the First-tier Tribunal hearing does not  appear  to  have  been
         advanced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge.  There  is   no
         indication that the appellant ever suggested that  Rami  failed  to
         provide evidence because of  the  appellant's  sexual  indiscretion
         with VK. I reject this particular aspect of the grounds of appeal.

     15. I am nevertheless satisfied that the judge  failed  to  make  clear
         findings in respect of VK's assertion that he and the appellant had
         had sexual relations. The fact that the appellant may have  engaged
         in sexual relations with VK does not of course mean that he is  gay
         or bisexual. It would be wrong to equate one's sexual activity with
         one's sexual orientation. But it nevertheless  remains  a  relevant
         factor. The fact that the appellant may  have  been  intimate  with
         someone of the same sex is  a  factor  supportive  of  his  claimed
         sexual orientation and should have been considered in the round.

     16. Nor  did  the  judge  make  any  specific  findings  or  reach  any
         conclusions in respect of VK's very detailed  observations  of  the
         interaction between the appellant and Rami.  For  example,  in  his
         statement VK described how the appellant and Rami did  most  things
         together and that Rami stayed in the appellant's room most  nights.
         There  has  been  no  assessment  of  this  relatively  significant
         assertion. Nor was there any assessment of VK's evidence  regarding
         his view of the appellant's emotional interactions with  Rami.  Nor
         was there any assessment of VK's  description  of  the  appellant's
         reaction when he (VK) confronted the appellant about the nature  of
         his relationship with Rami. Whilst the judge  was  not  obliged  to
         make specific findings in respect of all the evidence  before  him,
         he was obliged to engage with evidence that was clearly material to
         the issue he had to determine. Nor has the judge undertaken a clear
         assessment of VK's credibility as a witness. The judge  noted  that
         VK was firmly of the view that the appellant  was  gay  but  it  is
         unclear whether the judge accepted that  VK's  view  was  genuinely
         held and, if so, there has been insufficient explanation as to  why
         the judge rejected that genuinely held view.

     17. The judge did however consider whether,  in  the  alternative,  the
         appellant would live discreetly for reasons other than  a  fear  of
         ill-treatment even if he was bisexual. This brings to the fore  the
         materiality of the judge's legal error. On the face of it the judge
         gave cogent reasons at  [24]  and  [26]  for  concluding  that  the
         appellant's religiosity and his  desire  to  maintain  a  respected
         position within the  Muslim  community  would  cause  him  to  live
         discreetly as a bisexual man in Afghanistan, and not through a fear
         of  persecution.  I  am  however  persuaded,  albeit  through   the
         narrowest of margins, that the judge's error was material. This  is
         because VK's evidence suggested that,  regardless  of  whether  the
         appellant would want to live  as  a  bisexual  man  discreetly  for
         reasons other than a fear of persecution, he  may  nevertheless  be
         perceived by society as being gay or bisexual. VK described how the
         appellant and Rami were always together and that it  was  "obvious"
         they were in a romantic and sexual relationship. A judge would  not
         of course be obliged to find that, if living  in  Afghanistan,  the
         appellant's conduct would be such that he would be perceived to  be
         gay or bisexual (the appellant had lived  for  many  years  without
         anyone  suspecting  his  claimed  sexual  orientation),  but   this
         evidence nevertheless required exploration. On  the  basis  of  the
         evidence presented by the appellant I  cannot  say  with  certainty
         that the judge's conclusion would have been the same even if he had
         properly explored VK's evidence.

     18. In his written submissions Mr Avery  submitted  that  the  decision
         would need to be set aside and reheard. In my judgment the decision
         should be heard de novo in respect of all issues.

     19. The appellant's representatives submitted that the case  should  be
         remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  afresh.
         The respondent did not  consider  it  appropriate  for  the  remade
         hearing to be conducted remotely and that  a  face-to-face  hearing
         would be more appropriate. The respondent gave no indication as  to
         whether the  case  should  remain  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  be
         remitted. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         Practice Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted  to
         the First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

          a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

          b) the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

     20. I have determined that the  judge's  conclusions  relating  to  the
         issue of the appellant' sexual orientation are unsafe.  The  appeal
         will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so  that  a  new  fact-
         finding exercise can be undertaken. It will be for  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to determine the most  appropriate  mode  of  hearing  the
         appeal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum

Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  Date 16 August 2020
