
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09164/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th April 2018                             |On 17th April 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     p K
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson (Elder Rahimi Solicitors (London))
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision and Reasons of Judge Aujla promulgated on 24th October  2017
    after a hearing on 17th October 2017.  The case was a protection  claim
    by an Iranian Appellant born in 1994.   The  Appellant  had  originally
    come to the United Kingdom as a minor and claimed asylum on  the  basis
    of  political  opinion  and  having  attended   demonstrations.    That
    application was rejected by the Secretary of State but in line with her
    policy the Appellant was given discretionary leave.  He did not  appeal
    the refusal  of  that  asylum  claim.   He  subsequently  made  further
    representations which were accepted as a fresh claim on the basis  that
    he had converted from Islam to Christianity.  That application was also
    rejected and it was his appeal against that refusal which  came  before
    Judge Aujla.

 2. Before Judge Aujla the Appellant was relying not only on his conversion
    to Christianity but on his original claim that  he  had  not  appealed.
    The Judge found he was not at risk on account of his imputed  political
    opinion on the basis of a lack of evidence about that, other  than  the
    oral evidence of the Appellant.  The Judge also found the Appellant not
    to be a genuine Christian convert and therefore not at  risk  for  that
    reason either.

 3. The Appellant challenges that Decision on a  number  of  grounds.   The
    first is that the Judge erred in requiring corroboration in relation to
    the original political opinion claim.  That was an error, although that
    aspect of the claim I am informed is not being relied upon today.   The
    main error is in relation to the Judge's findings in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claimed conversion.  There is a large amount of documentary
    evidence and statements contained in the Appellant's bundle, and indeed
    in the Respondent's bundle, which were not addressed by  the  Judge  at
    all.  A particular aspect I was referred to was  the  Appellant  having
    introduced other people to the church that he attends in the  UK  which
    is not mentioned anywhere in the judgment.

 4. The Judge at paragraph 64 refers to  the  several  witnesses  that  the
    Appellant called, one of whom being a pastor.  However, that  paragraph
    contains no analysis of what the evidence from those witnesses actually
    was, whether they were cross-examined, and if so, what was said.  It is
    simply not mentioned at all.  What they had to say may well  have  been
    relevant as to the Appellant's behaviour, his knowledge of Christianity
    and  whether  or  not  he  proselytised.   The  findings   are   wholly
    inadequate.

 5. The Judge also refers to  the  Appellant  not  having  renounced  Islam
    whilst in Iran.  That point is irrelevant because the  Appellant  never
    claimed to have renounced Islam in Iran.  He claims to  have  converted
    once he came to the UK.  The Judge also refers to  him  not  practising
    his Christian faith in the United Kingdom openly when clearly  he  does
    because he attends church on a regular basis.  In short, the  reasoning
    of the First-tier Tribunal is inadequate to form a conclusion that  the
    conversion is not genuine.  Mr Wilding did not press me to find that it
    was adequate and I therefore allow the appeal to the Upper Tribunal  to
    the extent that the judgment is set aside in its entirety and  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing on all issues.

 6. I would add that Mr Hodson before me indicated that the case  would  be
    proceeding on the basis of the Christian  conversion  rather  than  the
    historic political claim.

 7. As this is a protection appeal I do make an anonymity  direction  which
    in fact continues the direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The appropriate First-tier Tribunal hearing centre is Taylor House.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin











