
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09350/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th November 2020                |On 16th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     ND
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Fazli, instructed by Sohaib Fatimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  As
the appeal raises matters regarding a claim for international protection,
it is appropriate for an anonymity direction to be made.  Unless and until
a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.

   1. The hearing before me on 10th November 2020 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  The
      appellant did not join the hearing.  Mr Fazli confirmed the appellant
      is aware of the hearing and he is happy for the hearing to proceed in
      his absence.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was
      addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as I would
      have been if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I was
      satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the
      open justice principle has been secured; that no party has been
      prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
      right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
      was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in
      accordance with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote
      hearing because of the present need to take precautions against the
      spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote
      hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a
      way that is proportionate to the importance of the case, the
      complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


The Background


   2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan. He claims to have arrived
      in the UK on 13th November 2017.  He claimed asylum on 28th November
      2017.  The claim was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in
      a decision dated 17 September 2019. The appellant's appeal against
      that decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz for
      reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 10th December 2019.


   3. The matters relied upon by the appellant in support of his claim for
      international protection are summarised at paragraphs [3] to [5] of
      the decision of Judge Aziz.  The appellant gave evidence at the
      hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and his evidence is summarised
      at paragraphs [10] to [38] of the decision.  The evidence of the
      appellant's brother, who had come to the United Kingdom and made a
      claim for asylum in 2008, is set out at paragraphs [39] to [43] of the
      decision.  The findings and conclusions of Judge Aziz are set out at
      paragraph [53] to [79] of his decision.


   4. Judge Aziz had noted that the appellant's account of events in 2008
      was consistent with the matters previously relied upon by his brother,
      when his brother had made his claim for international protection in
      2008. Judge Aziz also noted that both the appellant and his brother
      gave consistent evidence regarding events thereafter, and in
      particular, concerning the circumstances in which the appellant had
      been able to re-establish contact with his brother.  Notwithstanding
      the conclusion that the appellant's account has been consistent, Judge
      Aziz stated at paragraph [58], that looking at the claim in the round,
      he did not find it to be credible. He did not find it credible that
      some 11 years after the appellant's father had passed away, the
      Taliban would still have any interest in the appellant, so much so
      that they would have sought to track the appellant down when the
      appellant was living in a different part of the country.  Judge Aziz
      found, in the alternative, that if the Taliban had managed to track
      the appellant down after all those years, it does not make sense that
      the appellant was not taken by the Taliban straightaway, or punished
      for lying to them and escaping from them.  Judge Aziz noted, at
      paragraph [60], that the appellant gave two different accounts as to
      what had happened when the Taliban came looking for him in Puli
      Khumri, in November 2015. In his asylum interview the appellant
      claimed that his mother had told the Taliban that the appellant would
      be of no use to them because he had poor eyesight. In his witness
      statement he had claimed his mother had pleaded with the Taliban to
      show compassion because she would be alone.  At paragraph [60] Judge
      Aziz said:


         "... Whatever version is put forward, against the backdrop of what
         has previously occurred, I do not find incredible that the Taliban
         would have behaved in the manner claimed."


   5. At paragraphs [61] and [62], Judge Aziz addressed the appellant's
      claim that he had been able to obtain 'three threatening letters' that
      had been sent by the Taliban along with a petition, to support his
      claim for international protection with the assistance of his friend
      who, the appellant claimed, had obtained the documents from the
      landlord of the house the appellant used to live in, in Puli Khumri.
      Judge Aziz also addressed the appellant's claim that he had re-
      established contact with his brother, whilst the appellant was in
      France at paragraphs [63] to [65] of the decision.  At paragraphs [67]
      to [69], Judge Aziz said:


         "67. Looking at all of the evidence in the round, I place greater
         probative weight on the adverse credibility findings. Taken
         together, I find that they materially undermine the core elements
         of the appellant's account which are specific to him and his fear
         of the Taliban (I accept that a previous Tribunal has made a
         finding that the appellant's brother has a genuine fear of the
         Taliban).  I have taken into account all of the documentary
         evidence before arriving at my conclusions. In my global assessment
         of credibility and applying Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 I
         placed little weight on the documentary evidence relied upon (in
         particular, the letters from the Taliban). Equally, in light of the
         adverse credibility findings I place little weight upon the expert
         report.


         68.  I accept Mr Corden's submission that the appellant is an
         economic migrant and that he has been brought to this country with
         the assistance of his brother. I find that he has been in contact
         with his brother before he left Afghanistan. Whatever the position
         may have been at his brother's appeal hearing many years ago, they
         have since re-established contact (and not in the circumstances
         outlined by the appellant).


         69.  This is essentially a fabricated protection claim pieced
         together out of the factual matrix of his brother's successful 2008
         protection claim. Whilst I do not seek to question the earlier
         Tribunal's findings in respect of the appellant's brother's 2008
         protection claim, I find that the facts in relation to this
         appellant's specific fear of the Taliban have been manufactured and
         that he has used his brother's protection claim to create  a
         fictitious story of how the Taliban are also interested in him. The
         protection claim is dismissed on all grounds."


The appeal before me


   6. The appellant claims Judge Aziz accepted the appellant's account is
      consistent with the core of the account relied upon by the appellant's
      brother in 2008. That is, the appellant's father was a member of the
      Taliban who had died at the beginning of 2008 fighting for the Taliban
      against foreign forces. Following his death, Taliban members had
      attended at the family home and demanded the appellant's brother go
      with them to undertake fighter training.  The appellant's mother had
      asked for time to consult their paternal uncle, and the appellant's
      brother had then been able to flee Afghanistan.


   7. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal. First, there is an
      inadequate consideration of the documents that were relied upon by the
      appellant. Second, Judge Aziz failed to adequately consider the expert
      report of Dr Giustozzi that was relied upon by the appellant. Third,
      Judge Aziz failed to apply the principles set out in Devaseelan and AA
      (Somalia) v SSHD [2207] EWCA Civ 1040, and the approach that is to be
      taken when determining the appeal of a person who has relied on the
      determination of a family member that is relevant to the case under
      consideration.


   8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup on
      17th March 2020.


Ground 1: inadequate consideration of the documentary evidence


   9. As to the first ground of appeal, Mr Fazli submits the appellant had
      relied upon three letters that he claims have been received from the
      Taliban, that are to be found, with translations, at pages 50 to 55 of
      the appellant's bundle, and a 'Petition' that is to be found at pages
      56 and 57 of the bundle.  He submits the documents are very briefly
      referred to at paragraph [28] of the decision, but Judge Aziz failed
      to consider that evidence and does not adequately engage with it.  He
      submits that Judge Aziz fails to make any reference to the content of
      the letters which allege that the appellant reported the Taliban to
      the government, and, as a result, members of the Taliban were
      martyred.


  10. There is no merit to the first ground.  At paragraphs [29] to [36] of
      his decision Judge Aziz sets out in some detail the appellant's
      account as to how he has come to be in possession of the documents.
      The appellant's evidence was that he had not been aware of the three
      letters sent by the Taliban when he was in Afghanistan. He claimed in
      cross examination that he had telephoned a friend, who I shall refer
      to as [KH], and asked him to get the documents after he received the
      refusal letter from the respondent in 2019.  [KH] had obtained the
      documents from the landlord of the house they lived in, in Puli
      Khumri.  At paragraph [35] of his decision, Judge Aziz recorded the
      evidence of the appellant:


         "35. He confirmed that he had lost contact with his family after he
         left Afghanistan in 2016. He was asked how he therefore became
         aware of the existence of these documents 'after' he left
         Afghanistan if he had lost contact with his family in Afghanistan.
         The witness replied that he actually told his friend to go back to
         his home to see if he could find 'any' documentation to assist him
         with his case. The Home Office had said that he had not produced
         any evidence to assist him in support of his case and he was asking
         his friend to see if there was any documentary evidence that could
         be obtained to help him with this case.  The documents that had
         been found had been retained by the landlord of the property."


  11. At paragraphs [61] and [62] of his decision Judge Aziz said:


         "61. Appellant's former landlord retaining documentary evidence
         from 2016:  According to the appellant, he did have his family's
         contact details after he fled Afghanistan in January 2016. However,
         he was never able to speak to his family members as the telephone
         number was always blocked. After he arrived here in November 2017
         (nearly 18 months later), he asked his good friend [KH] to go to
         the family home to enquire about their whereabouts. The information
         that he received was that they had left the property. When his
         protection claim was dismissed by the respondent in September 2019,
         he again asked [KH] to go round to the property to see if there was
         any evidence that he could find to assist him with his claim.


         62.   Firstly, it is somewhat strange that having been aware that
         his family had left their former home in 2016 or 2017, that he
         should even make a suggestion that his friend should to (sic)
         return to his former rental residence in late 2019 to see if any
         documentary evidence could still be found. Secondly, I agree with
         Mr Corden's submission that there is no good reason at all why the
         landlord of the property would still, in November 2019, seek to
         keep in his possession correspondence from the Taliban from a
         former tenant that had left the property in 2016."


  12. At paragraph [67] of his decision, Judge Aziz confirms that he has
      taken into account all of the documentary evidence before arriving at
      his conclusions and that he could only place little weight on the
      documentary evidence relied upon (in particular, the letters from the
      Taliban).  In Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00439 the IAT
      confirmed that in asylum and human rights cases it is for an
      individual claimant to show that a document on which he or she seeks
      to rely can be relied on and the decision maker should consider
      whether a document is one on which reliance should properly be placed
      after looking at all the evidence in the round.  There were plainly
      concerns regarding the way in which the appellant had come to know
      about the documents being relied upon and the circumstances in which
      they had been obtained and sent to the appellant.  In my judgement, it
      is plain that Judge Aziz considered the documents relied upon in line
      with the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed and it was open to Judge Aziz,
      looking at all of the evidence in the round, to conclude that he could
      only place little weight on the documentary evidence relied upon by
      the appellant for the reasons set out in the decision.


Ground 2: inadequate consideration of the report of Dr Giustozzi


  13. At paragraph [57] of his decision, Judge Aziz noted the reliance
      placed upon the report of Dr Giustozzi, by the appellant.  He noted
      that the report is favourable to the appellant, but the weight to be
      attached to the report would depend upon the judge's overall findings
      as to the appellant's credibility. Mr Fazli referred me to the expert
      report that is to be found at pages 58 to 99 of the appellant's
      bundle. In preparing his report, Dr Giustozzi had sight of the
      determination of Immigration Judge Holt promulgated on 4th March 2009
      and documents relevant to the claim for international protection made
      by the appellant.  At paragraph [5] of his report Dr Giustozzi
      considered the appellant's account that the Taliban tracked him and
      his mother down in Puli Khumri and forced him to collaborate in their
      underground operations within the city, by storing their equipment and
      by allowing them to spend time in the house.  He considered that to be
      common practice among the Taliban, and therefore plausible.  Mr Fazli
      also referred me to paragraph [13] of the report in which Dr Giustozzi
      expresses the opinion that it is plausible that the Taliban might have
      been able to track the appellant down across different provinces.  I
      was also referred to the opinions expressed by Dr Giustozzi at
      paragraphs [20], [29], [46] and [49] of his report, each of which I
      have carefully considered.  Mr Fazli submits Judge Aziz did not have
      any proper regard to the expert report when assessing the credibility
      of the appellant and the risk upon return.


  14. The report must however be read in context, and at paragraph [4] of
      his report, Dr Giustozzi, confirms that with some exceptions, the
      Taliban as such, do not normally practice forced recruitment.  He
      confirms that interrogation of prisoners by ISAF and his own
      interviews with village elders have failed to produce any evidence of
      forced recruitment by the Taliban as an organisation. He identifies
      the only known cases of the Taliban forcing children to act against
      the will of their families.   At paragraph [5], Dr Giustozzi states
      that the appellant's case might fall under the exceptions set out in
      paragraphs 4(e) or 4(f) of his report.  They are:


         "e.  Relatives of Taliban are targeted for recruitment and even if
         coercion is not normally used in these cases, the Taliban offer
         financial incentives to recruits and employ psychological pressure;
         'your father was a hero of jihad and you have to join too', 'your
         family always participated in jihad and you have too' etc.  many
         young men have been brought up in the myth of their fathers or
         relatives as heroes of the 1980s jihad and are often vulnerable to
         this type of arguments.


         f.   The Taliban also reportedly used recruitment threats against
         members of family suspected of being linked to the government, in
         order to drive them away from a specific area without having to
         kill them, or in order to intimidate them into submission."


  15. Although the appellant's claim may, and Dr Giustozzi  puts it no
      higher than that, have been capable of falling under the two
      categories identified by Dr Giustozzi as exceptions, it was in the end
      for Judge Aziz to determine whether the appellant's account of the
      events that led to his departure from Afghanistan was accepted or
      rejected.  The plausibility of the account was not determinative but
      was one of a package of points that lead Judge Aziz to the conclusion
      that the appellant's account was not reasonably likely to be true. In
      reaching his decision Judge Aziz noted at paragraph [59] of his
      decision that even if the Taliban had managed to finally track down
      the appellant after several years, as the appellant claimed, it is
      surprising that they did not take him away or punish him for lying to
      them and escaping from them.  Judge Aziz noted at paragraph [60] of
      his decision the inconsistencies in the appellant's account of what
      had happened when the Taliban came looking for him in Puli Khumri in
      November 2015.  Concerns regarding the documents relied upon by the
      appellant in support of his claim and, the appellant's account as to
      how he had re-established contact with his brother are set out at
      paragraphs [61] to [65] of the decision.  In reaching his decision as
      to the credibility of the appellant, in my judgement Judge Aziz drew
      together the various strands of the appellant's claim in his analysis.
       As he properly noted, there was a degree of consistency in the
      appellant's account, but weighing that against concerns he had
      expressed, he concluded that the central account presented by the
      appellant was not reasonably likely to be true.  The appellant could
      not therefore gain any further assistance from the report of  Dr
      Giustozzi.  As Judge Aziz said, the report was favourable to the
      appellant, but the weight to be attached to it, depended upon the
      findings and conclusions reached as to the credibility of the
      appellant.  As Judge Aziz said at paragraph [67], in light of the
      adverse credibility findings made by him, he could only place little
      weight upon the expert's report.  That was neither unreasonable nor
      irrational.  I reject the second ground of appeal.  The limited
      reference to the report of Dr Giustozzi does not establish a material
      error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Ground 3: The previous decision of Immigration Judge Holt and the failure
to apply the principle in Devaseelan and to consider the case of AA
(Somalia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1040


  16.  Mr Fazli submits Judge Aziz found, at [54], that the appellant had
      given an account that in material respects is entirely consistent with
      the account of events in 2008 that had previously given by the
      appellant's brother and accepted by Immigration Judge Holt in the
      decision promulgated by the AIT on 4th March 2009.  Mr Fazli submits
      Judge Aziz should have treated the previous decision of Judge Holt as
      his starting point and ought to have assessed other aspects of the
      appellant's evidence, separately to those aspects that had already
      been accepted previously.


  17. In AA (Somalia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1040, Lord Justice Carnwath,
      with whom Lord Justice Ward agreed, held that the guidelines in the
      case of Devaseelan v SSHD [2003] Imm. A.R. 1, on the weight to be
      attached in immigration appeals to an earlier finding of fact, also
      applies to cases where the earlier decision involved different parties
      but where there was a material overlap of evidence.  Here, at
      paragraph [54] of his decision Judge Aziz confirmed that when one
      reads through the appellant's brother's 2008 witness statement, it is
      consistent with some core parts of the appellant's claim. He noted, in
      particular, that the appellant's father was a member of the Taliban
      who died fighting for the group in 2008, and the subsequent events
      leading to the departure of the appellant's brother from Afghanistan.




  18. The core of the claim advanced by the appellant's brother is set out
      at paragraph [11] of the decision of Immigration Judge Holt.  It was
      that their father, who had been a member of the Taliban, had died at
      the beginning of 2008 fighting for the Taliban against foreign forces.
      The appellant's brother had claimed that about 15 days after their
      father's funeral, 4 to 5 Taliban members had attended their home and
      demanded that the appellant's brother go with them to undertake
      fighter training with the Taliban.  Their mother had asked for time to
      consult their paternal uncle and the following day, their mother had
      raised money with the help of their uncle, for the appellant's brother
      to flee Afghanistan.  Immigration Judge Holt accepted as accurate, the
      evidence of the appellant's brother that he has a personal connection
      to the Taliban in that his father was a 'martyred' fighter.  Judge
      Holt also accepted as accurate the account that the Taliban singled
      out the appellant's brother personally for recruitment within about
      two weeks of their father's death by visiting their mother to ask for
      him to join them.


  19. Although those findings were plainly the starting point, it was the
      events that occurred following the departure of the appellant's
      brother that were relied upon by the appellant to support his claim
      that he would be at risk upon return to Afghanistan. They were matters
      that all post-date the decision of Immigration Judge Holt and had not
      been considered previously. Judge Aziz does not in fact depart from
      the findings previously made.  At paragraph [58] of his decision,
      Judge Aziz stated that even if it were the case that the appellant's
      father was a member of the Taliban and that it was his late father's
      desire that his two sons also joined the organisation, he did not find
      it credible that the Taliban would still have any interest in the
      appellant many years after the death of his father.  At paragraph [60]
      of his decision, Judge Aziz referred to the inconsistencies in the
      appellant's account of what had happened when the Taliban came looking
      for him in Puli Khumri in November 2015.  At paragraphs [61] to [65]
      Judge Aziz addressed the documents relied upon by the appellant that
      are dated September and October 2016, and the evidence of the
      appellant and his brother as to how they re-established contact.


  20. It is in my judgement quite clear that the judge's analysis did not
      disregard the previous findings made by Judge Holt.  On the contrary,
      at paragraph [67], Judge Aziz makes it clear that he was concerned
      about the core elements of the appellant's account which are specific
      to him, and his fear of the Taliban.  Judge Aziz noted and indeed
      accepted, that a previous Tribunal has made a finding that the
      appellant's brother has a genuine fear of the Taliban.   At paragraph
      [69], Judge Aziz confirms that he does not seek to question the
      earlier Tribunal's findings in respect of the appellant's brothers
      2008 protection claim.   Judge Aziz was not bound to accept the
      appellant's account of events post-dating 2008, just because a
      Tribunal had previously accepted the account of events in 2008
      advanced by the appellant's brother.  At its highest, as Mr Fazli
      accepts, the findings made by Judge Holt previously, simply support
      the appellant's claim that there is an established motive for the
      Taliban to have had an interest in this family.  The Taliban may well
      have had an interest in the appellant's brother in 2008 but that is
      not to say that the Taliban would inevitably have had an interest in
      the appellant many years later.


  21. In my judgement, Judge Aziz carefully considered the evidence in the
      round and it was open to him to find that the claim made by the
      appellant is essentially a fabricated protection claim pieced together
      out of the factual matrix of the successful 2008 protection claim made
      by the appellant's brother, and that the appellant's specific fear of
      the Taliban has been manufactured using his brother's protection claim
      to create a fictitious story of how the Taliban are also interested in
      him. In my judgement there is no merit to the third ground of appeal.


  22. The assessment of the risk upon return and credibility is always a
      highly fact sensitive task. The ingredients of the story, and the
      story as a whole, have to be considered by reference to the evidence
      available to the Tribunal. As the Court of Appeal said at [18] of
      Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  412, it is necessary to guard against
      the temptation to characterise as errors of law what are in truth no
      more than disagreements about the weight to be given to different
      factors, particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the
      advantage of hearing oral evidence.  Judge Aziz was required to
      consider the evidence as a whole and in my judgment, he plainly did
      so, giving adequate reasons for his decision.  The findings and
      conclusions reached by the judge are neither irrational nor
      unreasonable.  The decision was one that was open to the judge on the
      evidence before him and the findings made.


  23. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Decision:


   24. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Aziz promulgated on 10th December 2019, stands.


Signed   V. Mandalia                Date: 12th November 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

