
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09978/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                           |On 22 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                 Kokilan [K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rothwell, Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Powell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1984. He is  a  national  of  Sri  Lanka.  He
    pursued  a  claim  for  International  protection  under  the   Refugee
    Convention. That claim was rejected, as was the appellant's alternative
    claim on human rights grounds.


 2. Permission to appeal was sought on two  principal  matters:  first  the
    suggestion that  family  witness  statements  were  "self-serving"  and
    therefore  reduced  weight  could  be  placed  on  their  evidence  and
    secondly, the view taken by the judge took on  the  psychiatric  report
    may have materially infected his  conclusions.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker granted permission on 6 September 2018 observing:

         "... the appellant's case does not appear particularly  strong  and
         the assessment of the evidence of  those  not  related  to  him  is
         detailed and likely sustainable.  Nevertheless, I grant  permission
         on all grounds because of the possible adverse  implications  drawn
         from an arguable mistreatment  of  the  medical  evidence  and  the
         evidence of the relatives."

 3. I was initially disinclined to  allow  the  appeal,  being  broadly  in
    agreement with the way in which Judge Coker had  framed  the  grant  of
    permission. However, I have been persuaded by the detailed and forceful
    submissions of Ms Rothwell for the appellant that this is a case  where
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside  and  the
    matter remitted for a rehearing. As this case  is  to  be  reheard,  my
    reasoning will be brief. I wish to record for the  avoidance  of  doubt
    that it is perfectly possible that the re-hearing will come to the same
    decision.


4.   The first issue concerns the evidence of  the  appellant's  namely,  Mr
    [KM], (based in France, taken by Skype); Mr [SK] (an uncle, also  based
    in France and also  taken  by  Skype);  and  Mr  [AK]  the  appellant's
    brother, resident in the United Kingdom.

5.   At paragraph 30, the judge refers to the evidence  of  the  appellant's
    uncle and brother as "self-serving", and states:

         "The appellant maintains that his family home is  visited  twice  a
         year by the Sri Lankan authorities and it just so happens that  the
         time of both the appellant's brother's wedding and at  the  funeral
         the Sri Lankan authorities apparently turned  up  looking  for  the
         appellant.  Given the very low nature of the appellant's activities
         I do not consider that such adverse interest would continue  to  be
         shown by the Sri Lankan authorities."

6.   I find it questionable that the judge could categorise  the  activities
    as being "low level". Furthermore, the term "self-serving  "strikes  me
    as inapt in this circumstance.  The fact that these two individuals are
    relatives, and have given evidence which supports the appellant's  case
    is a matter which must  properly  be  considered  by  the  fact-finding
    Tribunal.  To dismiss it wholesale as "self-serving" is  an  abrogation
    of the judicial function carefully to weigh and assess evidence.

7.   In addition, I have been taken to material that was  before  the  judge
    in the form of the account given by another brother of  the  appellant,
    namely [SK1].  A letter is to be found at pages B1 to B2 of the  bundle
    and a further letter at page D10.

8.   Ms Rothwell was not counsel in the First-tier Tribunal,  and  does  not
    know what status was given to this material. She calls it evidence, but
    it is not in the form of a witness statement, and it was  not  tendered
    as evidence. It was simply the account of the brother given in the form
    of a letter, with no statement of truth.  We do not know what  reliance
    the appellant's representative sought to place on it, nor  do  we  know
    what arguments there may or may not have been as to the  weight  to  be
    afforded it.

9.   It is said by Mrs Rothwell (and not  disputed  by  Ms  Powell  for  the
    Secretary of State) that the judge makes absolutely no reference to all
    to this material.  This is a cause for concern.  If  the  judge  reject
    evidence out of hand, reasons need to be given for so  doing.   On  its
    face there is sufficient within this material, to give some measure  of
    corroborative support to the appellant's case, albeit untested in cross-
    examination. Not to mention the material at all must  be  an  error  of
    law.

10.  I can deal equally briefly I hope with  the  psychiatric  report.   The
    judge makes lengthy reference to it at paragraphs 33, 37,  38  and  40.
    The judge does not give particular weight to the conclusions reached by
    the consultant psychiatrist, particularly the repeated statement that a
    recognised symptom of PTSD is avoidance.  This could be an  explanation
    as to why the appellant was able to  function  normally  and  to  study
    without incident for a period but  only  had  recurrent  symptoms  when
    police incarceration led to flashbacks to the  torture  incident.   The
    judge may have considered and rejected such explanation, it he does not
    deal with it so it is impossible for the reader to know.

11.  I also mention an adverse comment to the effect at paragraph 40 that

         "If the appellant were such an active risk to himself as claimed by
         the  appellant's  brother  I  consider  it  very  likely  that  the
         appellant would have been admitted to a mental hospital."

    I have been taken by Ms Rothwell to one particularly relevant  document
    at page D86 to 88 of the bundle which indicates that the appellant  was
    seen  in  an  emergency  situation  by  the  psychiatric  services   at
    Bournemouth Hospital. The appellant's presenting complaint was  one  of
    distress and anxiety, the history makes reference to alleged  incidents
    of torture, medication is prescribed for  psychiatric  issues  and  the
    appellant is given the telephone number for the  crisis  team.   Whilst
    this falls short of a hospital admission, it is only by a fine  margin.
    Ms Powell suggests that this  is  purely  historic,  dating  from  some
    period prior to the assessment, but it is all part of  the  background.
    And the fact that it was not referred to at  all  by  the  judge  is  a
    source of considerable concern.

12.  I need not deal  with  the  remaining  grounds  because  the  foregoing
    matters are sufficient for me to conclude with that this is not a  safe
    decision. I cannot be satisfied  that  the  appellant's  case  received
    anxious scrutiny by the judge. Inconvenient  though  it  may  be,  this
    appeal to be allowed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  set
    aside.

Notice of decision

      1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         is set aside.

      2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  reheard
         afresh by a judge other than Judge Mozolowski.

      3) No findings of fact are preserved.

      4) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     14 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


