
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09602/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                           |On 8 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     MR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy instructed by J Stifford, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  10  October
    1988.  He first arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 September 2009 as a
    Tier 4 student.  That leave was subsequently  extended  until  27  July
    2014.  In December 2013, he left the UK to return to Bangladesh  before
    returning to the UK on 26 January 2014.   Thereafter,  he  applied  for
    leave to remain which was refused on 26 September 2014 with no right of
    appeal.  On 5  August  2016,  the  appellant  was  served  with  notice
    (RED.0001)  that  he  was  subject  to  administrative  removal  as  an
    overstayer.

 3. On 2 February 2017, the appellant  claimed  asylum.   On  15  September
    2017, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims for asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing
    on 22 October 2017, in a determination promulgated on 30  October  2017
    Judge  Suffield-Thompson  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on   all
    grounds.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   That
    was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but on 30 May 2018 the
    Upper Tribunal (UTJ Bruce) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 6. On 1 August 2018, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 notice seeking
    to upheld Judge Suffield-Thompson's decision.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The appellant's claim for asylum was based upon his, and his  family's,
    political involvement in Bangladesh.  He claimed that he and his family
    had been involved  in  anti-government  politics.   In  particular,  he
    claimed that during the local elections in 2016,  his  family  assisted
    his father's friend who was an opposition candidate.  His  family  were
    threatened and forced to  leave  their  home.   His  uncle  ("SM")  was
    targeted, shot and died in hospital.  Before the judge,  the  appellant
    claimed (relying upon documents provided at the hearing) that  a  false
    charge had been made against him in Bangladesh by  political  opponents
    and that he was subject  to  a  First  Information  Report  and  arrest
    warrant.  He feared that if he  returned  to  Bangladesh  he  would  be
    killed.

 8. Before Judge Suffield-Thompson, the respondent was not represented by a
    Presenting Officer.  Nevertheless, no application  for  an  adjournment
    was made and the judge dealt  with  the  case  without  a  Home  Office
    representative.  The appellant  was  represented  by  Counsel  and,  in
    addition to relying upon documentary and other  written  evidence,  the
    appellant gave oral evidence as did his uncle.

 9. In dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal,  the  judge  made  an  adverse
    credibility finding and did not accept the  truth  of  the  appellant's
    claim or evidence.

10. First, at para 27 the judge noted that the appellant had  only  claimed
    asylum after he had been served with notice of removal as an overstayer
    and that she took "great note of  the  timing  of  this  claim".   That
    reflects the judge's reference to s.8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 at para 24 of her determination
    which she said she bore "firmly in mind".

11. Secondly, the judge identified  a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence which undermined his credibility.  These  are  set
    out at paras 28-35 of her determination as follows:

         "28. The Appellant has not been consistent  in  his  evidence  both
             written and oral either during the hearing or in  his  SI  and
             AI.  I will set out the conflicts in his evidence below.

         29.  In his AI the Appellant (AI. Q6) stated that his  parents  had
             to leave their home and moved to a safe place in  March  2016.
             In his first witness  statement  (paragraph  2)  he  said  his
             parents had helped at the election in "Summer last  year"  and
             then  as  a  consequence  had  to  move.   So,  there  is   an
             inconsistency with  the  date.   I  find  that  any  event  as
             traumatic as his family having to leave their life-long family
             home to be at  a  date  the  Appellant  would  be  certain  to
             remember.

         30.  In his AI  (Q.62)  the  Appellant  said  that  the  summer  in
             Bangladesh is March until May and the rainy season  starts  in
             June.  This is not consistent with the information gathered by
             the Respondent.  The  Respondent  states  that  on  a  website
             (http://rundownroute.com/index.php/runs/asia/item/)  the   six
             seasons of Bangladesh summer begins in mid April.  I find that
             the Appellant was not honest in his answer in his AI.

         31.  In the AI the Appellant appears to be speaking of his "uncle",
             the man named [SK] and later  says  he  is  a  friend  of  his
             father.  I do not find this to be a deliberate untruth as  the
             Tribunal is aware from other Bangladeshi  appeals  that  as  a
             matter of respect people are often  referred  to  as  aunt  or
             uncle when they are older friends of the Appellant's  parents.
             He clarified this as soon as he was asked to do so (AI, Q 23).

         32.  I now turn to the newspapers that the Appellant has  submitted
             and that his counsel submits I  should  place  great  reliance
             upon.  In his AI he was asked the date of  the  2016  election
             and he said March 2016 (AI, Q19) but in the newspapers, he has
             submitted (with translations) one paper "The  Daily  Shurbana"
             says it was 31 March but the "Bangladeshi Pratidin" states  it
             was 16 April.

         33.  The Appellant was asked in his AI why he  could  not  go  back
             home and he said (AI, Q53) that he had no safe  place  to  say
             and yet he had laready (sic) told the officer at the start  of
             the interview that his parents were now living in a safe place
             (AI, Q6).

         34.  Although the appellant has told the Home  Office  interviewing
             Officer and the Tribunal that his family had  been  threatened
             and he would be killed (AI, Q56) he was unable to say when and
             how this threat had taken place.

         35.  The Appellant has said that the opposition wanted to kill  his
             parents but before they were attacked by the  opposition  they
             fled but he was unable to say when this happened.  Again I  do
             not find it credible that the Appellant would  not  know  when
             this threat took place especially as it prompted, he says, his
             parents to leave their family home."

12. Thirdly, at paras 36-40 the judge dealt with a number of documents that
    were relied upon by the appellant, including a death  certificate  said
    to relate to his uncle, letters of support including  one  said  to  be
    from the Bangladesh Nationalist Party ("BNP") and a court  warrant  and
    charge sheet.  The judge said this:

         "36. The Appellant has stated that his uncle was killed due to  his
             activities.  I have a death certificate before  me.   Firstly,
             there is nothing before me to show that they are indeed  blood
             relatives, there is nothing on the death  certificate  to  say
             how he died and I note that there is no date of birth on  this
             document of the deceased.  I give it  little  weight  in  this
             appeal.

         37.  I now turn to  the  overall  issue  of  the  accuracy  of  the
             documents  submitted  by  the  Appellant.   He  has  sent   in
             newspaper articles, letters  of  support  from  family  and  a
             charge sheet and arrest warrant.   In  her  skeleton  argument
             Miss. Geherman relies upon the case of PJ v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
             Civ 1011 in which the court stated that if there is a  process
             of enquiry which will conclusively resolve the authenticity or
             reliability of a document and it is easy to carry out then the
             Respondent should undertake those checks.

         38.  However, the fact that they did not do so does not then mean I
             have to accept these documents as being  of  great  evidential
             weight in the appeal.  The  dates  of  the  elections  in  the
             papers  are  different  which  leads  me  to  question   their
             accuracy.  In relation to the  first  information  sheet,  the
             arrest warrant and the charge sheet (Appellant's bundle, pages
             18-26) and the letter from  the  lawyer  (Appellant's  bundle,
             page 15) I accept that I did not have the originals before  me
             but the copy of the letter from the lawyer was one that  could
             easily have been created by anyone.  The reference  number  at
             the top was missing and the fact that it was dated 12  October
             2017, just before the hearing  leads  me  to  give  it  little
             weight.  I also had a copy of a letter purporting to come from
             the Bangladesh Nationalist  Party  (Appellant's  bundle,  page
             14).  Again (through no fault of the Appellant) I did not  see
             the original but the date of 12/10/17 is only some  two  weeks
             ago and states that his father was a member  of  the  BNP  and
             that this Appellant had to leave due to the  family  political
             activities.  Again, this is an easy letter  to  create  and  I
             give it little weight in the light of the Appellant's  overall
             inconsistent evidence and my finding that he is not a credible
             witness.

         39.  The Appellant provided some letters he states were from family
             and friend to support his story of his parent's involvement in
             politics but again, for the same reason I  give  these  little
             weight.

         40.  I also note that I had no independent evidence before me as to
             what a court warrant or charge  sheet  from  Bangladesh  would
             look like so had  nothing  before  me  but  the  word  of  the
             Appellant.  The burden of proof in this  case  lies  with  the
             Appellant, to  the  lower  standard,  and  I  find  that  this
             Appellant has not satisfied me to the lower standard  that  he
             has a well-founded fear of persecution as I do not accept that
             he  or  his  family  have  been  involved  in  any   political
             activities."

13. Given the judge's adverse credibility finding, she inevitably dismissed
    his appeal based upon risk on return to Bangladesh and (at para 43) she
    noted that the appellant had not relied upon Art 8.

The Grounds

14. The appellant's renewed grounds dated 24 January 2018 are threefold.

15. Ground 1 contends that the judge was wrong to give "little  weight"  to
    the documentary evidence as the respondent had taken no steps to verify
    the documents nor, given the absence of a  Presenting  Officer  at  the
    hearing, were they challenged before the judge.

16. Ground 2 argues  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's explanation why he had delayed in claiming asylum  set  out
    in his witness statement.

17. Ground 3 contend that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's  explanation  when  relying  upon  inconsistencies  in  his
    evidence.  It is said that the judge "simply rehearses the Respondent's
    initial findings in the Reasons for Refusal Letter".   Further,  it  is
    contended that the judge attached undue "prominence and  weight"  to  a
    number  of  matters  in  the  evidence.    First,   to   the   apparent
    inconsistency in the appellant stating  that  the  events  occurred  in
    "March 2016" which was also the "summer last year" when  the  objective
    evidence showed that the  summer  in  Bangladesh  began  in  mid-April.
    Secondly, it  was  a  "strained  and  artificial  inconsistency",  when
    looking at the appellant's evidence, to juxtapose his evidence that  he
    had no safe place to return when he also said his parents had moved  to
    a safe place.  The evidence was that his parents had left to a place of
    safety and continued to move around to remain safe.  Thirdly,  contrary
    to what the judge stated in paras 34 and 35, the  appellant  had  given
    evidence in his interview of when his parents were threatened  and  his
    uncle attacked and killed and also how the former had happened.

18. In his oral submissions, Mr Murphy  expanded  upon  ground  3  and  was
    content to rely upon grounds 1 and 2 without wishing  to  add  anything
    further.

19. In addition, he sought permission to rely  upon  a  further  ground  in
    relation to the judge's reasoning in para 38.  There, he submitted, the
    judge had wrongly failed to take into account the documents relied upon
    by the appellant in assessing his credibility, by giving  them  "little
    weight" because she had already concluded that the appellant was not  a
    credible witness.  Mr  Murphy  relied  upon  the  IAT  decision  in  MT
    (credibility assessment flawed - Virjon B applied) Syria  [2004]  UKIAT
    00307 at [6] where the IAT applied what was  said  in  the  High  Court
    decision of R v Special Adjudicator, ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469
    (Admin) at [19]-[23] where a judge was found to fall into  legal  error
    where he stated: "I therefore  attach  little  weight  to  the  reports
    bearing in mind that I have found both the appellant and his wife to be
    without credibility".

20. Ms Aboni did not object to the addition of this ground of appeal, which
    I grant permission  to  the  appellant  to  raise,  and  I  heard  oral
    submissions upon it.

Discussion

21. Before the judge, the entirety of the appellant's case turned upon  his
    credibility.  In the decision letter, the respondent had  not  accepted
    that the appellant's account was truthful.  Although the respondent was
    not represented at the  hearing  before  the  judge,  the  reasons  for
    refusal represented  the  respondent's  position,  at  least  upon  the
    evidence which had previously been submitted.  The appellant  (and  his
    Counsel) was not taken by surprise in that regard.  Indeed, it is  part
    of the appellant's case in the Upper  Tribunal  that  he  had,  in  his
    written statement, dealt  with  a  number  of  matters  raised  in  the
    decision letter which the judge failed to take into account.

22. The appellant did, however, rely upon further evidence, in particular a
    letter from the  BNP.   The  judge  was  not  required  to  accept  the
    reliability and truth of  its  contents  simply  because  a  Presenting
    Officer was not present to challenge it.  Subject to  the  requirements
    of  fairness,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  consider   whether   that
    documentation was reliable.  Of course, in the absence of a  Presenting
    Officer - both in relation to this evidence and the oral evidence given
    at the hearing - the judge was somewhat constrained in  assessing  that
    evidence.  It was important that she did not descend "into  the  arena"
    but that did not prevent her, subject to giving the appellant's Counsel
    a fair opportunity to deal with any issues,  raising  issues  posed  by
    that evidence in assessing its reliability.

23. I set that background out not because it  is  claimed  that  the  judge
    unfairly approached the evidence but simply to identify the constraints
    under which the judge was functioning in the absence  of  a  Presenting
    Officer.  That is, in my judgment, exemplified by the judge's  adoption
    of a number of reasons given in the decision  letter  for  disbelieving
    the appellants and to which I shall return shortly.

24. Before doing so, I begin with grounds 1 and 2.  Neither  was  developed
    by Mr Murphy in his oral submissions before me.  Neither ground is,  in
    my judgment, sustainable.

25. As regards ground 1,  I  reject  the  contention  that  the  judge  was
    required to accept the authenticity and reliability  of  the  documents
    relied upon by the appellant because the respondent had not  sought  to
    verify them.  Whilst  there  may  be  an  obligation  placed  upon  the
    respondent to make enquiries in order to verify documents, particularly
    where that can be undertaken simply and  effectively  (see  PJ  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 as clarified in MA (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2016] EWCA
    Civ 175 at [29]-[30]),  there  is  "no  general  duty  of  enquiry...to
    authenticate documents produced in support of a protection claim"  (see
    VT Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT 00368) (IAC)).  In the leading Strasbourg case
    of Singh and Others  v  Belgium  [2011]  ECHR  33210/11,  the  relevant
    documents emanated from the UNHCR and enquiry as to their  authenticity
    was undoubtedly "straight-forward" and from "an  unimpeachable  source"
    (see VT at  [16]  and  MT  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  253  (IAC)).   In
    particular, of course, an enquiry  did  not  create  any  risk  to  the
    individual concerned.  By  contrast,  in  this  appeal,  the  documents
    emanated from the authorities in Bangladesh (the ruling party of  which
    the appellant claimed to fear persecution) and I  do  not  accept  that
    authentication would be "straight-forward" and required.  Consequently,
    I reject ground 1.

26. As regards ground 2, the fact of the matter is that the  appellant  did
    not  claim  asylum  until  after  he  had   been   served   notice   of
    administrative removal as an overstayer.  That notice was served  on  5
    August 2016 and he did not claim asylum until almost six  months  later
    on 2  February  2017.   Importantly,  however,  his  asylum  claim  was
    principally based upon events that occurred in March 2016.  There  was,
    therefore, a relevant delay which, by virtue of s.8 of  the  2004  Act,
    was  potentially  damaging  of  his   credibility.    The   appellant's
    explanation at para 4(i) of his  witness  statement  states  that  "the
    question of safety of my life in my country did not arise" but that  is
    plainly not the case after March 2016.  His  further  comment  that  he
    "always wanted to go back to my country"  does  not,  in  my  judgment,
    offer a reasonable explanation why he did not claim asylum  in  the  UK
    sooner but only chose to do so after  he  was  served  with  notice  of
    removal as an  overstayer.   I  do  not  accept  that  the  judge  gave
    "disproportionate weight" to this factor in assessing  the  appellant's
    credibility.  She was entitled to take it into account, indeed she  was
    required to take it into account under s.8 of the 2004 Act, and  I  see
    nothing in the totality of her reason at paras 23-40 which  established
    that she gave improper weight  to  this  factor.   For  those  reasons,
    therefore, I reject ground 2 also.

27. Ground 3 has, however, more merit.

28. First, and this was a matter which particularly concerned UTJ Bruce  in
    granting permission, the judge placed improper weight upon  an  alleged
    inconsistency in the appellant's evidence concerning when  the  alleged
    events in Bangladesh occurred.  His evidence was that they occurred  in
    March 2016, in particular on 31 March 2016.  He referred to  this  time
    also as being the "summer last year".  Relying  upon  a  website,  also
    relied upon by  the  respondent  in  the  decision  letter,  the  judge
    concluded that his evidence is inconsistent with the statement  on  the
    website that summer in Bangladesh begins in "mid-April".  To regard the
    appellant's statement that, in effect, March 2016 was in  the  "summer"
    when it 'officially' began only in mid-April as significant  or  indeed
    an inconsistency at all, envisages the appellant having an  unwarranted
    degree of precision in the dates of the seasons in Bangladesh and  also
    places an unwarranted certainty in the  precision  of  the  information
    obtained from the website.  In my  judgment,  any  differences  in  the
    evidence cannot  rationally  support  a  reason  for  disbelieving  the
    appellant's account.

29. Secondly, I accept Mr Murphy's submissions that the  judge's  reasoning
    in paras 33 - 35 is also unsustainable.  Paragraph 33 fails properly to
    grapple with the appellant's evidence that his parents had  left  their
    home area to seek safety but were "constantly  on  the  run  and  being
    threatened" (see  para  4(e)  of  his  witness  statement).   Likewise,
    although his  evidence  at  his  asylum  interview  was  punctuated  by
    interruptions, it is clear from his answers at questions 56, 57, 58 and
    59 that he did specify when the threats and attacks  upon  her  parents
    occurred and also (in particular question 58) he gave some detail as to
    how their house had been broken into by individuals  carrying  weapons.
    I accept that the judge, at paras 33 - 35, has failed to fully  grapple
    with or appreciate the appellant's evidence at interview.  Her  reasons
    are inadequate to sustain, in part or at all, her  adverse  credibility
    finding.

30. As regards the additional grounds relied upon  before  me,  it  is  not
    necessary to resolve whether, in fact, the judge fell  into  the  error
    recognised in Vijon B and with which the Court of  Appeal  subsequently
    agreed in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367.   There  is  certainly  a
    very strong suggestion the judge considered  the  documents  (not  here
    medical reports as in the other cases) simply  as  a  'add  on'  having
    already determined that the appellant was not  credible.   I  would  be
    inclined to the view that she did.  However, in giving the  documentary
    evidence "little weight", the judge compounds any error in that  regard
    by taking into account "the appellant's overall inconsistent  evidence"
    which, as I have already concluded, she was not  properly  entitled  to
    do.  That,  therefore,  infected  her  assessment  of  the  documentary
    evidence in para 38.

31. Whilst some of the judge's reasons for reaching her adverse credibility
    finding remain unchallenged, the errors I have identified above are, in
    my judgment, material to her reaching that adverse credibility finding.
     I am unpersuaded that she would  necessarily  have  reached  the  same
    decision had the errors not occurred.

32. For these reasons, the judge materially erred in law  in  reaching  her
    adverse  credibility  finding  and  in   dismissing   the   appellant's
    international protection claim.

Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.   That  decision  cannot
    stand and is set aside.

34. Having regard to the nature and extent of  fact-finding  required,  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President  Practice  Statement,
    the appropriate disposal of this appeal is to remit it  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other  than  Judge
    Suffield-Thompson.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             16 January 2019
