
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09136/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 December 2017                         |On 8 December 2017             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    V Q B
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  appeals  against  a  decision  by  FtT  Judge  Farrelly,
    promulgated on 29 March 2017.

 2. The appellant was represented in the FtT, but those representatives are
    no longer in practice.

 3. The case was first listed for hearing in the UT on 5 October 2017.   An
    adjournment  was  granted  on  the  day,  to  give  the  appellant   an
    opportunity to obtain representation.

 4. At a hearing on 7 November 2017, the appellant was  granted  a  further
    adjournment.

 5. On 17 November 2017, the UT issued notice  of  hearing  on  7  December
    2017.

 6. A handwritten letter faxed to the  UT  on  5  December  2017  asks  for
    another adjournment for the same purpose.

 7. The letter appears to be in the same handwriting as  a  similar  letter
    which was before the UT on 7 November, and  which  the  appellant  (who
    speaks little English) said had been written for him by a friend.

 8. The appellant did not attend on 7 December 2015.

 9. Having regard to the overriding objective in terms of the rules and  to
    the history of the case, I considered that the appellant had been given
    more  than  reasonable  opportunity   to   prepare   and   to   arrange
    representation; that another adjournment was unlikely to  be  any  more
    productive; and that it was in the interests of justice to  proceed  in
    absence of the appellant or any representative.

10. The first ground of appeal is that the finding that the appellant would
    face prosecution not persecution contradicts the background evidence.

11. The respondent pointed out that the background  evidence  founded  upon
    relates to political activists, human rights activists and journalists,
    and that the appellant falls into none of these categories. At highest,
    he claimed to be the manager of a factory and involved in a strike; but
    it had not been accepted that he was a manager, or the orchestrator  of
    the strike.

12. Ground 1 is not substantiated.

13. Ground 2 refers to documentary evidence, and maintains that  the  judge
    failed to take into consideration evidence going to the quality of  the
    documents, and failed to come to his  own  conclusion  regarding  their
    reliability.

14. The respondent submitted  on  this  ground  that  the  judge  correctly
    directed himself on the approach to documentary evidence  at  paragraph
    19; at paragraph 25, noted there was nothing to  show  that  individual
    strikers were at risk; and found at  paragraphs  26  and  27  that  the
    appellant had inflated his profile.

15. This ground  shows  no  misunderstanding  of  the  evidence,  error  of
    approach or failure to reach a conclusion.

16. Ground 3 says that the finding that there was  no  evidence  individual
    strikers were at risk contradicted  background  evidence  that  strikes
    were  permitted  only  under  certain  circumstances,  and  independent
    activists could face government harassment.

17. This overlaps with the previous grounds.  Again, no real  contradiction
    is identified. The judge  did  not  find  that  the  appellant  was  an
    independent activist, as opposed to one of six hundred workers  engaged
    in a strike.

18. Ground 4 maintains that the judge gave no reasons for  finding  it  not
    credible that  the  appellant  would  organise  a  strike  after  being
    promoted to management, or for his conclusion that the appellant gilded
    his account.

19. This ground looks for  "reasons  for  reasons".   There  is  a  tension
    between being promoted to senior management  and  organising  a  strike
    against the employer.  There was no sensible explanation of the claimed
    promotion.

20. The decision must be read fairly and as a whole, and  bearing  in  mind
    that the judge had the benefit of hearing the evidence and its  testing
    in cross-examination.  At paragraph 21, he  noted  factors  adverse  to
    credibility, in which no error is alleged.  At paragraphs 25 and 26, he
    explained why he considered the account to have been embellished.

21. Separately and together, the grounds insist and disagree, but they fail
    to show that the decision is a less than legally  adequate  explanation
    of why the appellant failed to establish his case, or that  its  making
    involved the making of an error on any other point of law.

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

23. The FtT made an anonymity direction,  although  no  reason  is  stated.
    Anonymity has been preserved in this decision.

            [pic]

            7 December 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




