
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/09087/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th November 2017                      |  On 5th December 2017           |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                     mar
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    C Burns,  promulgated  on  28th  March  2017  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on  14th  March  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on 28th  March
    1990.  He appealed against a decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  15th
    August 2016, refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he had sold  groceries  to
    two men, who had subsequently been arrested for terrorism, and that his
    own failure to explain to the Anti Terrorism  Forces  (ATF)  about  his
    lack of involvement in terrorism, now expose him  to  a  risk  of  ill-
    treatment.  He alleged that there would be a case for imputed political
    opinion being ascribed to him on account of what he had alleged.

 4. The Secretary of State contests  this,  stating  that  the  Appellant's
    claim is not plausible and in any event does not  engage  a  Convention
    reason.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge began his determination by pointing out earlier on  the  lack
    of credibility in the Appellant's  testimony.   He  stated  that,  "his
    propensity to be untruthful is further demonstrated by his  conflicting
    account of what funds he took with  him  on  his  journey  to  the  UK"
    (paragraph 14).  This is what the Respondent  Secretary  of  State  had
    regarded as material and the judge referred to it at the outset of  the
    determination.

 6. The judge also pointed out that the Appellant did not in his  screening
    interview state that he has been suspected of involvement in  terrorism
    (see paragraph 13).

 7. For reasons that the judge set out (at paragraphs 41 to 50)  the  judge
    found the Appellant's claim to be lacking in credibility and  dismissed
    it.  T

 8. The judge  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  been  tired  or
    bewildered having just arrived into the UK  because  he  did  have  the
    benefit of an interpreter and he was not asked difficult questions (see
    paragraph 42).

The Appeal Before this Tribunal

 9. The essence of the appeal before this  Tribunal  lies  in  the  judge's
    determination that the Appellant could return to Iraq, because  he  was
    potentially returnable to Baghdad, from where he could go to  his  home
    territory.

10. The judge dealt with this under a section headed "Return to Iraq?" (see
    paragraphs 51 to 59).  The essence of the judge's determination lay  at
    paragraph 56 where it was held that the Appellant was "a  man  who  has
    had access to resources previously - either $1,000 or  $2,000  to  fund
    his journey" (paragraph 56).

11. The judge was of the view that the funds would be available to him also
    in Iraq upon return.

12. Permission to appeal had been granted by the Tribunal on 8th  September
    2017.

13. In submissions before  me,  Mr  Howard,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, relied upon the recent judgment of the Court of Appeal in AA
    (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ  944,  where  it  had  been  held  that  it  was
    important to  undertake  an  assessment  about  a  returnee's  position
    following arrival in Baghdad, and the judge had failed to  do  this  in
    paragraph 56, confining his attention purely to the Appellant's  return
    to the capital city in Iraq.

14. Mr Howard submitted that the  Appellant  was  Kurdish,  did  not  speak
    Arabic, and his family were all based in Kirkuk, and  not  in  Baghdad,
    such that it had not been shown by the judge that the  Appellant  would
    escape destitution if returned to  Baghdad.   In  short,  a  sufficient
    assessment had not been carried out by the judge at paragraph 56.

15. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that a closer look at paragraph 56 did
    show the judge having carried out  a  full  assessment.   After  having
    concluded that the Appellant was a man  who  had  access  to  resources
    previously, because he had been owner or  part-owner  of  a  shop,  the
    judge went on to say that, "I do not accept his  account  that  he  had
    lost touch with his family ... he does not say that his  father  is  no
    longer contactable".

16. The judge also held that this was a person who "would be  a  young  man
    returning to Baghdad prior to travelling  onto  IKR",  such  that  this
    plainly showed the judge focusing  his  attention  on  the  Appellant's
    onward travel journey to the IKR.  The judge had simply not  overlooked
    the Appellant's subsequent onward journey to IKR.

17. It was on this basis, submitted Mr Bates, that the judge had then  gone
    on in the same paragraph to state that,

         "He has family in Iraq and is likely to have access to  funds  from
         the business.  He has no  physical  disabilities.   He  has  worked
         before.  He is  resourceful  and  resilient  as  evidenced  by  his
         journey to the UK.  He will not be  at  risk  of  destitution  ..."
         (paragraph 56).

18. Second, Mr Bates submitted that the plain fact was that the Appellant's
    credibility was roundly rejected by the judge.

19. Third, Mr Bates submitted that the judge had thereafter gone on to look
    at the Appellant's Article 8 rights in the context of paragraph  276ADE
    and rejected that there  will  be  any  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration into Iraqi  society  upon  his  return.   The
    determination, submitted, Mr Bates, was without any material  error  of
    law.

20. In reply, Mr Howard stated that if one looks at  the  latest  Court  of
    Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, it is plain from the  appendix
    at the end of the judgment  that  there  is  a  section  headed  "Iraqi
    Kurdish Region" which requires an assessment of the position in respect
    of the IKR.  Mr Howard properly drew my attention to paragraph 20  here
    which states that,

         "Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected  to
         avoid any potential undue harshness in that city by  travelling  to
         the IKR will  be  fact-sensitive;  and  is  likely  to  involve  an
         assessment of

         (a)  the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to
             Irbil by air);

         (b)  the likelihood of case securing employment in the IKR; and

         (c)  the availability of resistance from family and friends in  the
             IKR".

21. Mr Howard then submitted that paragraph 21 goes on to say that,  "as  a
    general matter, another Kurd who is at real risk in a home area in Iraq
    is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR".

No Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law such that I  ought  to
    set it aside (see Section 12(1) of  TCEA  2007).   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

23. First, the  judge  does  expressly  take  into  account  "the  risk  of
    destitution" to the  Appellant  in  Baghdad  upon  arrival  because  he
    expressly refers to this at paragraph 56.

24. Second, Mr Howard submitted before me  that,  although  the  judge  had
    stated that the Appellant "is likely to have access to funds  from  the
    business", without explaining where this business was, the  plain  fact
    is that the Appellant had already stated in his evidence  that  he  had
    funds of $1,000 to $2,000 to fund his journey, from previous  resources
    that he had access to, and was an owner or part-owner of  a  shop  (see
    paragraph 56).

25. Third, the judge did not accept that the  Appellant  had  lost  contact
    with his family, was unable to call his father, or that his father  was
    no longer contactable.

26. Finally, the judge did not accept the Appellant's position in terms  of
    the likelihood of not being able  to  secure  employment  or  the  non-
    availability of assistance from his family.

27. In short, what is stated at paragraph 20 of the latest Court of  Appeal
    judgment (see the appendix) in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944, is  fully
    complied with in the judge's determination at paragraph 56.  Any  error
    has to be a "material" error and it  is  not  the  case  that  in  this
    respect the judge has erred in law in this determination.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 1st December 2017


