
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
pa/09041/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 17th January 2018                   |        On 15th February 2018        |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   ms A P
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Antonia Benfield, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State nonetheless I shall refer to the parties as they returned  before
    the First-tier Tribunal that Ms AP as the appellant and  the  Secretary
    of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st January 1980 and she
    arrived in the UK on 16th  January  2011  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    student.  Her husband arrived as her dependant.  On 9th  February  2016
    she claimed asylum and that was refused by the Secretary  of  State  on
    8th August 2016 for  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boardman.  In  essence  the  appellant  stated  she  had
    married someone secretly while her father was trying to  force  her  to
    marry someone else and with the assistance of her aunt travelled to the
    UK in 2011.  In 2013 her husband left her and  she  could  not  contact
    him.  In 2015 the appellant's father found out about the  marriage  and
    threatened her.  She now understood that her husband  had  returned  to
    Pakistan but she feared being killed by her family should  she  return.
    It was also presented that  she  had  an  immune  system  disorder  and
    depression.

 3. Following the hearing  on  10th  April  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed the appellant's claim and the Secretary of  State  appealed  on
    the following grounds.


Ground (i)


 4. The judge failed to give adequate reasons why the appellant  could  not
    internally relocate or  could  in  the  alternative  avail  herself  of
    sufficiency of protection.

 5. It was submitted that  the  refusal  letter  did  not  state  that  the
    appellant's account was internally and externally consistent  with  the
    background material and the refusal letter  also  considered  SM  (lone
    women - ostracism) CG [2016] UKUT 67 (IAC) and it was  noted  that  the
    appellant would be able to internally relocate.

 6. At paragraph  35  of  the  decision  under  challenge  the  appellant's
    submissions argued  that  applying  SM  the  appellant  was  unable  to
    relocate but at paragraph 38 of the determination did not deal with the
    alternative arguments put forward.  At paragraph 38(d) the judge stated
    "the appellant's evidence about her not having worked is plausible  and
    persuasive" but it was submitted that this was inadequate reasoning  in
    the light of SM stating that

         'It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,  or
         older women to seek internal relocation to a city.  It helps  if  a
         woman has qualifications enabling her to get  well-paid  employment
         and pay for accommodation and child care if required".

 7. The Secretary of State's  decision  was  that  this  appellant  was  an
    educated person.  It was further submitted that given the arguments put
    forward it was not clear what the judge meant  at  paragraph  38(f)  in
    relation to the guidance of SM.

 8. The refusal letter and arguments advanced by the Secretary of State  at
    the appeal were that there was sufficiency of protection  available  to
    the appellant with reference to KA and Others (domestic violence - risk
    on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) and SM also made reference
    to shelters and this had not been addressed by the judge.



Ground (ii)

 9. The judge materially erred in law in failing to reason  adequately  why
    the appellant's medical conditions  prevented  her  from  returning  to
    Pakistan.

10. The refusal letter did address the appellant's  medical  condition  and
    using background material noted that there  was  a  functioning  health
    service that could deal with the appellant's conditions.  At  paragraph
    38(e) of the  determination  the  judge  found  that  "the  appellant's
    evidence about her medical conditions was corroborated by  the  reports
    of Dr Saluja and Dr Hajioff."  It was submitted that this  finding  did
    not address the arguments put  forward  by  each  party.   The  medical
    evidence may support that the appellant does  have  certain  conditions
    but just confirming the conditions  did  not  mean  the  appellant  was
    unable to  return  to  Pakistan  or  that  it  reached  the  Article  3
    threshold.

11. Further at paragraph 38(f) the judge acknowledged the  medical  reports
    supporting the appellant's fear of her ability to get a job  on  return
    but  given  the  submissions  above  it  was  argued  that   this   was
    inadequately reasoned.



The Hearing

12. At the hearing before me Ms Willocks-Briscoe argued that there  was  an
    adequacy of reasons and relied on the grounds as  above  and  indicated
    that the judge did not engage  adequately  at  paragraph  38  with  the
    country guidance of SM.  The appellant had qualifications to enter  the
    work force and there was nothing to suggest that  she  could  not  seek
    support from her aunt.  Alternatively the appellant could return  to  a
    shelter and the judge had not engaged with this argument at all.

13. The judge did not say  why  the  appellant  could  not  access  medical
    facilities if she relocated and all of those factors should  have  been
    taken into account.  There was no diagnosis that  the  appellant  could
    not leave the house.

14. Nor was it feasible to consider the claim in relation to sufficiency of
    protection because the appellant would have to return to her home  area
    and it was accepted that she would be at  risk  of  an  honour  killing
    should she return to her home area.   Ms  Benfield  submitted  that  SM
    applied to this appellant.  There was no support from her aunt  and  it
    was noted that the appellant's evidence, and regarding  the  aunt,  was
    not challenged in relation to her essential account.  Further there was
    no challenge to the medical evidence at all.  The medical evidence  had
    indicated that this appellant was suffering from PTSD and  anxiety  and
    that she would be returning in a position which would make it difficult
    for her to find work and to be independent and this was  identified  in
    the medical report.

15. Ms Willocks-Briscoe asserted that the judge had not  engaged  with  the
    submissions of the Home Office at the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Although
    Article 3 was not pleaded on medical grounds the consideration  of  the
    medical report of Hajioff was relevant.  She made clear  that  she  had
    not said that the expert was not qualified.  The grounds of appeal were
    clear that in essence there was a lack of  adequacy  of  reasons.   The
    medical evidence must be considered in the round.



Conclusions

16. Ground (i) A review of the country guidance in  relation  to  women  on
    return to Pakistan was  undertaken  in  SM  (lone  women  -  ostracism)
    Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067.  This authority identified  that  in  SM
    and HM (divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004] UKIAT 00283
    it was noted that the position in Pakistan for women was unsatisfactory
    and  there  was  widespread  discrimination  and   insufficient   state
    protection.  There had been progress in the previous five years and  it
    was identified that crisis support, however,  may  be  available.   The
    authority  identified  that  internal  flight  possibilities   may   be
    available but each case would depend on its own  factual  matrix.   The
    questions included whether the  claimant  had  shown  a  real  risk  or
    reasonable likelihood of continuing hostility in her former  home  area
    and if she had would she avail herself of any effective  protection  in
    her home area from her own family members or from a current partner  or
    his family.  The matter moved  on  and  as  recorded  in  FS  (domestic
    violence - SM and HM - OGN) Pakistan CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00023,  it  was
    concluded that the background evidence on the position of women at risk
    of  domestic  violence  in  Pakistan  and  the  availability  of  state
    protection remained as it was set out in SM and HM (divorced women) but
    the current intention of the  authorities  was  to  improve  the  state
    protection for women although progress was slow.

17. KA and Others (domestic violence - risk on return) Pakistan  CG  [2010]
    UKUT 216 had  identified  that  there  had  been  legislative  measures
    undertaken to improve the situation in Pakistan in the previous  decade
    which had an effect on the operation on the Pakistan criminal law as it
    affected women accused of adultery.  Once again whether a woman faced a
    real  risk  of  honour  killing  would   depend   on   the   particular
    circumstances but was unlikely to impact on married women.   This  case
    also identified that there were women's shelters comprising  government
    run shelters and private and Islamic women's crisis centres in  general
    forwarding protection to victims of domestic  violence  although  there
    were significant shortcomings in the levels of services.  In  assessing
    whether  women  victims  of  domestic  violence  had  viable   internal
    relocation alternative regard must be had not only to the  availability
    of shelters but also to the situation of women  after  they  left  such
    centres.

18. Finally SM (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT  00067  set
    out at the headnote the following.

         "(1)     Save as herein set out, the existing country  guidance  in
             SN and HM (Divorced women - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2004]
             UKIAT 00283 and in KA and Others (domestic violence - risk  on
             return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) remains valid.

         (2)      Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in  her
             home area for a single woman or a female  head  of  household,
             there  may  be  an  internal  relocation  option  to  one   of
             Pakistan's larger cities, depending on the family, social  and
             educational situation of the woman in question.

         (3)      It will not be normally be unduly harsh to expect a single
             woman or female  head  of  household  to  relocate  internally
             within Pakistan if she can access support from family  members
             or a male guardian in the place of relocation.

         (4)      It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated,  better
             off, or older women to seek internal relocation to a city.  It
             helps if a woman has qualifications enabling her to get  well-
             paid employment and pay for  accommodation  and  childcare  if
             required.

         (5)      Where  a  single  woman,  with  or  without  children,  is
             ostracised by family members and  other  sources  of  possible
             social support because  she  is  in  an  irregular  situation,
             internal relocation will be more difficult and whether  it  is
             unduly harsh will be a question of fact in each case.

         (6)      A single woman or female head of household who has no male
             protector or social network may  be  able  to  use  the  state
             domestic violence shelters for a short time, but the focus  of
             such shelters is  on  reconciling  people  with  their  family
             networks, and places are in short  supply  and  time  limited.
             Privately run shelters may be more flexible, providing  longer
             term support while the woman regularises her social situation,
             but again, places are limited.

         (7)      Domestic violence shelters are available for women at risk
             but where they are used by women with children, such  shelters
             do not always allow older children  to  enter  and  stay  with
             their mothers.  The risk  of  temporary  separation,  and  the
             proportionality  of  such  separation,  is  likely  to  differ
             depending on the age and  sex  of  a  woman's  children:  male
             children may be removed from their mothers at the age of 5 and
             placed in an orphanage or a madrasa until the family situation
             has been regularised (see KA  and  Others  (domestic  violence
             risk on return) Pakistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  216  (IAC)).  Such
             temporary separation will not always  be  disproportionate  or
             unduly harsh: that is a question of fact in each case.

         (8)      Women in Pakistan are legally permitted to  divorce  their
             husbands  and  may  institute  divorce  proceedings  from  the
             country of refuge, via a third party  and  with  the  help  of
             lawyers in Pakistan, reducing the risk of family reprisals.  A
             woman who does so and returns with a new  partner  or  husband
             will have access to male protection and is  unlikely,  outside
             her home area, to be at  risk  of  ostracism,  still  less  of
             persecution or serious harm."

19. SM (lone women - ostracism) set out the country background reports  and
    evidence  and  in  particular  the  respondent's  Country   of   Origin
    Information Guidance from July  2014.   This  identified  at  paragraph
    1.3.14 that taking into  account  the  general  position  of  women  in
    Pakistan  where  they  faced  patriarchal  attitudes  and  deep  rooted
    stereotypes, may not be educated and may have to  depend  on  relatives
    for economic support and faced safety issues and social constraints  in
    living alone then internal relocation was likely to be unduly harsh but
    the authority noted that educated and professional women  may  find  it
    possible to support themselves in alternative  locations.   In  summary
    the generic country evidence reviewed in SM (lone  women  -  ostracism)
    concluded that despite protective legislation introduced  in  2010  and
    after, sufficient state protection will normally not  be  available  in
    the home area in circumstances whether  real  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm has been shown to exist there from the female's  applicant
    family or husband.

20. In this particular case it was clear from the findings of the judge  at
    38(b) that the respondent had accepted the appellant's account of  what
    had happened to her in Pakistan and  that  included  a  description  at
    paragraph 13 that the appellant had been

         "Scared for her life as she had already been  secretly  married  on
         10th May 2009 to the man  of  her  choice  whilst  staying  at  her
         paternal aunt's  house.    She  had  not  asked  for  her  father's
         permission as her community did  not  accept  love  marriages,  and
         according to Sharia law a marriage without a father's  consent  was
         not considered a valid Islamic marriage and  would  be  treated  as
         adultery and the woman could be stoned to death".

    Indeed the reasons for refusal letter confirmed that  it  was  accepted
    that the appellant's parents attempted to force her into a marriage  to
    settle a land dispute.  This was  seen  as  internally  and  externally
    coherent with the background material.  It seemed that the Home  Office
    accepted that  she  was  at  risk  of  an  honour  killing  and  turned
    immediately in the reasons for refusal  to  consideration  of  internal
    relocation.

21. The judge although in an elliptical account  accepted  the  Appellant's
    account of what had happened to her in Pakistan and accepted  what  had
    happened to her in the UK that being that her husband had left her.

22.  In  particular  the   judge   identified   that   her   evidence   was
    straightforward  consistent  internally   and   consistent   with   the
    background  information  and  detailed.  That  was  the   judge's   own
    assessment.  As such the judge accepted that the  appellant  entered  a
    love marriage with her husband without her father's  consent  and  that
    she and her husband fled  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2011  and  that
    furthermore her marriage had broken down because the appellant's family
    did not accept the marriage and the  last  contact  she  had  with  her
    husband was at the end of 2013 such that he had  returned  to  Pakistan
    and remarried. She was in effect single.

23. Although I was invited to consider that the judge should have addressed
    the issue of sufficiency of protection as set out in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter from my citation of  SM  (lone  women  -  ostracism)  at
    paragraph 63 it is clear that  sufficient  state  protection  will  not
    normally be available in the home area where there is a  real  risk  of
    persecution from a female applicant's family or  husband  and  that  is
    certainly the case in this instance. That is made plain by the  judge's
    findings.   Although the reasons for refusal  letter  referred  to  the
    various country guidance authorities  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of
    protection identified from KA and Others (domestic violence -  risk  on
    return) that

         "The  network  of  women's  shelters  (comprising  government   run
         shelters) (Dar ul-Amans) and private  and  Islamic  women's  crisis
         centres) in general affords effective protection for women  victims
         of domestic violence, although there are  significant  shortcomings
         in the level of services and treatment  of  inmates  in  some  such
         centres."

24. However, in SM (lone women) the Tribunal accepted the evidence  of  the
    limited availability of shelters and the scarcity of places.  There was
    no indication in relation to this matter that  particular  evidence  of
    placements or place within a shelter suitable  for  the  appellant  was
    available and as such I am not persuaded that the judge has  failed  to
    address the issue of shelter such that it constitutes an error of law.

25. I am persuaded that the country materials supports the conclusion  that
    state protection is in general unavailable as set out  above  and  that
    further in relation to shelters there are significant  shortcomings  in
    the level of services  and  treatment  that  inmates  receive  and  are
    considered  insufficient  and  temporary  such  that  they  are  not  a
    substitute for state protection bearing in mind the lower  standard  of
    proof,

26. As such with the judge's reference to SM  and  the  guidance  contained
    therein, although somewhat of a shorthand I am willing to  accept  that
    there is no material error of law  in  relation  to  the  treatment  of
    sufficiency of protection or in relation to shelters available  in  her
    home area or further afield.  The judge set out at paragraph 38 of  the
    decision the following.

         "The  Council  of  Islamic  Ideology  had  rejected   the   Women's
         Protection Act of 2006 as 'not in line  with  Islamic  injunctions'
         and stated that hudood laws dealt with all offences against  women,
         making a separate law unnecessary.  Many  civil  society  activists
         and law makers were calling for the dissolution of the CII  because
         of its  'regressive  decrees'.   A  number  of  specific  incidents
         relating principally to the treatment of young women and  of  wives
         by husbands were cited."

    There was a particular criticism of the judge's conclusions  from  this
    paragraph  [38]  not  least  that  there  was  a  failure  of  adequate
    reasoning.  The decision is set out unusually  and  intermittently  the
    decision is set out as bullet points which no doubt is to aid clarity.

27. After  some  effort  the  decision  is  comprehensible  based  on  some
    considerable cross-referencing in relation to the medical evidence  and
    the application of the factors under SM [2016].  The essential headnote
    of SM, as I have set out above, confirms that there may be an  internal
    relocation option.

28. The judge at paragraph 38 referred to SM  and  applying  the  headnote,
    which I have cited above, the appellant could not be  described  as  an
    older woman as she was 37 years old and it was not suggested  that  she
    was better off.  As submitted the critical  question  was  whether  her
    education would enable her to get a well-paid employment  and  pay  for
    her accommodation.  The judge accepted three  critical  factors  in  my
    view in determining this decision.

29. The first was that  the  appellant's  account  was  accepted  and  this
    included a recitation at paragraph 30 that  "her  aunt  had  asked  the
    appellant not to call again".  Although the  judge  does  not  actually
    state that he/she accepts the appellant's evidence that is implicit  in
    paragraph  38.   The  judge  at  paragraph  38(c)  accepted  that   the
    appellant's evidence  was  consistent  and  persuasive.   Thus  it  was
    concluded that the appellant did not have and would not have support of
    her family on return.  Clearly  she  was  single.   Secondly  that  her
    education would not benefit her in order to come within the  exceptions
    in SM because of the medical evidence which was also  accepted  by  the
    judge.  That was not set out in detail in the judge's decision but  the
    overall report was referred to was paragraph 45 of Dr Hajioff's  expert
    opinion which was accepted and  recorded that

         "I  believe  that  although  she  has   a   valuable   professional
         qualification the level of her depression with guilt  feelings  and
         loss of confidence will make it  difficult  for  her  to  establish
         herself and find employment in Pakistan.  That will be particularly
         so in an area away from her family as an independent and  unmarried
         woman".

30. There was no challenge to the actual medical  evidence  itself  or  the
    conditions cited by the appellant which included chronic depression and
    PTSD and coeliac disease.

31. It is clear that the judge did accept that the medical condition  would
    have a significant impact on the appellant's ability to find employment
    which would in turn might enable her to live independently in  Pakistan
    which is the critical question to be asked.  The further  question  was
    whether the aspect of the  medical  facilities  available  in  Pakistan
    would be available to the appellant on return.  However the description
    of the appellant and her medical condition needs to be taken as  it  is
    at the date of the hearing and that included the fact that

           "much of the time she would sit on the floor of her room thinking
           about what she has been through.  She said she feels  guilty  and
           blames herself for her present situation.  Sitting on  the  floor
           seems the appropriate position to take."

32. The point is that the appellant was receiving medication in the UK  and
    yet still sitting on the floor,  and  although  as  identified  in  the
    submissions she was no longer receiving counselling the question of her
    ability to obtain employment  and  thus  support  herself  was  clearly
    addressed by the judge such that the appellant would not be independent
    on return.  I find there was adequate reasoning.

33. Ground (ii) Further to Nixon (permission  to  appeal:  grounds)  [2014]
    UKUT 00368 (IAC) I give 'short thrift' to the  points  in  relation  to
    Article 3.  It was not the case that Article 3 was  being  claimed  and
    appealed on the basis of  medical  grounds  alone.   I  have,  however,
    addressed the issue of the judge's  overall  assessment  and  reasoning
    with regard the medical evidence above  and  how  her  condition  would
    affect the appellant's ability to relocate.

34. On reading the decision as a whole and although it was something of  an
    exercise to link  the  various  strands  of  the  determination,  which
    perhaps accounts for the grant of permission to appeal, I am  satisfied
    on a careful reading that there has been a brief  explanation  for  the
    conclusions on the central issues in line with Shizad  (sufficiency  of
    reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).   This  authority  directs
    that

         "The Upper Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of  the
         First-tier Tribunal where there has been  no  misdirection  of  the
         law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant
         country  guidance  has  been  taken  into   account,   unless   the
         conclusions of the judge draws  from  the  primary  data  were  not
         reasonably open to him or her".

35. It is clear  that  the  primary  data  could  have  been  more  clearly
    presented in this decision but on the whole the  decision  makes  sense
    and I find no material error of law and the decision shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 12th February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
