
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09428/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th December 2018.               |On 09th January 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                   m a M Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is an adult male and citizen of Iran, who claims to  fear
    persecution in Iran on the basis of his religion.  He made  application
    for recognition as a refugee which was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in a decision dated 4th July, 2018.  The basis of the appellant's
    claim was that he had been introduced by a friend to Christianity while
    he was living in Iran and had attended a house church on some  fourteen
    occasions, when on the last occasion he noticed police outside  and  he
    believed that his life was at risk.

2.   He claims to have left Iran in December 2015,  illegally  and  to  have
    travelled to Turkey where he remained for a month.  He  then  travelled
    to Greece where he stayed for three or four days and then on to Austria
    where he remained for a further three or four days.  He then claims  to
    have travelled to Germany where he remained for some five  months,  and
    then on to Denmark where he remained for two days.  He  then  travelled
    to Sweden where he remained for five or six days, and  then  to  Norway
    where he remained for a  week.   He  then  flew  to  Finland  where  he
    remained for eight months.  He then travelled by plane to  Italy  where
    he remained for two months, and eventually he travelled to  the  United
    Kingdom by plane on 9th May 2017, and claimed asylum on the same day.

3.   The appellant appealed the decision of the Secretary of State  and  his
    appeal was heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  Manchester  on  13th
    September this year by First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik.   Her  findings
    start at paragraph 17 of her Decision.  Criticism is made of the  first
    finding she made at Paragraph 17.I.  of  the  determination  where  she
    records that the appellant claims that he was introduced by an Armenian
    Christian, D, to F, and from  there  he  attended  a  house  church  on
    thirteen occasions at F's home.  The appellant claims that  D  did  not
    evangelise him as he was  not  allowed  to,  nor  did  he  provide  any
    Christian materials as this would be a crime in Iran.  The judge said:-

         "This being so, I do not find it reasonably  likely  D  would  have
         directed the appellant to a website and/or  introduced  him  to  F,
         given that this too would have placed D at risk, as being  seen  as
         evangelising a Muslim  by  directing  them  to  information  and/or
         individuals who could enable them to progress to conversion.  Given
         the appellant claims D facilitated the meeting between him and F in
         public, there is no reasonable explanation as to why D  would  have
         taken the risk."

4.   The criticism made of that finding  is  that  unfortunately  the  judge
    failed to have regard to the fact  that  the  transmission  of  written
    materials on Christianity would have exposed D  to  a  higher  risk  of
    discovery than simply passing on a web address, and reference  is  made
    to the evidence of an expert at page 70, paragraph 37, where the expert
    says that:-

         "These organisations do not follow a uniform structure and there is
         no single application  process  through  which  one  must  progress
         before being invited to a house church.  They work on the system of
         trust and if D trusted [the appellant] truly  to  the  interest  in
         Christianity and would not be  at  risk  for  the  secrecy  of  the
         organisation, then it is entirely plausible  that  [the  appellant]
         would have been introduced to F and was allowed to join."

    The judge makes her finding without considering the explanation offered
    by the appellant at paragraphs 17 and 18 of his witness statement.

5.   The second challenge it is said is based on assertions originally  made
    in the respondent's refusal letter.  In reply to these  assertions  the
    appellant made a rebuttal statement, but unfortunately the judge failed
    to take into account what  the  appellant  had  said  in  the  rebuttal
    statement before making her findings.

6.   I asked Mr Bates whether he was opposing the  appeal  and  he  told  me
    that he was because later findings made by the judge  were  sustainable
    and still went to the appellant's credibility.  Mr Bates did not put it
    in this way, but his point was that even if  those  early  findings  of
    credibility were wrong, later findings of credibility were correct  and
    sustainable.

7.   The  difficulty  I  have  with  that  suggestion  is  that  I  believe,
    unfortunately, the judge erred right  at  the  very  beginning  of  her
    findings in relation to 17.I. and it is not possible to  know  to  what
    extent that finding may have influenced her and  clouded  her  decision
    when she was considering the rest of the evidence before her.

8.   I told Ms Smith I did not need to hear from her.

9.   I have concluded that the judge did err in law  and  that  her  initial
    findings are wrong and may  have  influenced  her  in  considering  the
    remaining evidence.

10.  For all those reasons I have concluded that the decision should be  set
    aside and the appeal be reheard.  Because of the danger that her  first
    finding may have influenced the remaining findings I cannot permit  any
    of her findings to stand.

11.  The question then arises as to whether I  reserve  this  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal or remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  difficulty  with
    retaining it in the Upper Tribunal is that now I am retired I sit  very
    infrequently and I know that I am not coming back to Manchester  before
    next March when my current appointment expires because of my age.  I do
    not know whether I will be invited to extend my appointment or not, but
    in the circumstances I think it is  probably  safer  if  I  remit  this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh,  so  it  will  be
    heard by a judge other than Judge Malik, afresh.


Richard Chalkley
A judge of the Upper Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
A judge of the Upper Tribunal.

Dated 19 December 2018
