
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/09067/2016
     PA/08109/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd January 2018                         |On 6th March 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    [a n]
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born  in  1998.  He  appeals
    against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K   R   Moore,
    promulgated on 27 July 2017, dismissing his appeal against the  refusal
    of his protection claim.
2.   The judge did not find the Appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness  and
    pointed to inconsistencies in his account.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    sought on seven grounds:

    (i)  The judge failed to apply the guidance on vulnerable witnesses;


    (ii) The judge erred in finding that the Appellant's age assessment was
         Merton compliant and/or he  failed  to  give  reasons  for  such  a
         finding;


    (iii)    The judge erred in considering that the inconsistencies in the
         Appellant's age assessment  interview  undermined  the  Appellant's
         credibility;


    (iv) The Appellant's account of his father's role in  the  Taliban  was
         inconsistent with the expert evidence;


    (v)  The judge erred in finding that the Appellant could recall  events
         in June 2015, but failed to recall them at the appeal hearing;


    (vi) The judge erred  in  finding  that  the  Appellant's  account  was
         inconsistent with the objective evidence; and


    (vii)    The judge erred in finding that  the  Appellant  could  return
         safely to Kabul and/or his home area.


3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum  on  1
    December 2017 on the grounds that:

         "It is arguable that the judge  failed  to  indicate  or  determine
         whether he was dealing with a vulnerable appellant or to  make  any
         reference to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.  2  of  2010.
         Significant reliance is placed on AM (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 that  the  judge
         failed to adequately  engage  with  the  criticisms  of  the  local
         authority age assessment, and that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         was not entitled to rely on inconsistencies in the  age  assessment
         interviews in concluding that the account  was  not  credible.  The
         detailed  grounds  were  arguable.  The  Upper  Tribunal  may,   in
         particular,  wish  to  consider  the  differences  in  purpose  and
         safeguards between  an  asylum  interview  and  an  age  assessment
         interview."



Appellant's submissions

4.   Ms Foot submitted two letters from Wilson  Solicitors.  The  letter  to
    the London Borough  of  Dagenham  and  Barking,  dated  26  June  2017,
    criticised the age assessment report on  the  basis  that:  it  heavily
    relied on the physical characteristics and demeanour of the  Appellant;
    it came to  contrary  conclusions;  it  failed  to  conduct  background
    research; it  failed  to  consider  the  evidence  in  the  round;  the
    assessors stepped outside their field of expertise in drawing  negative
    conclusions on the Appellant's credibility; there was significant delay
    in finalising the assessment; it took into account incidents  occurring
    after the meetings; and there was confusion over  the  persons  present
    and issues discussed at each assessment meeting. The letter,  dated  23
    June 2017, made a formal complaint  against  the  Appellant's  previous
    solicitors in relation to the handling of the age assessment and  their
    failure to challenge it on judicial review.


5.   Ms Foot also submitted a copy of AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123  and  MS  (trafficking:
    Tribunal's powers: Article 4 ECHR) Pakistan [2016]  UKUT  00226  (IAC).
    She relied on her detailed grounds and  submitted  that,  although  the
    determination was lengthy, the judge had failed to follow the  guidance
    on vulnerable witnesses. He had erred in taking into  account  the  age
    assessment, which was plainly flawed on its face,  as  central  to  the
    Appellant's credibility.

6.   Since  there  was  no  challenge  to  the  age  assessment,  the  judge
    proceeded on the basis that the Appellant was 18, but  insofar  as  his
    assessment of credibility was concerned he should have  given  the  age
    assessment  limited  weight.  Considering  the  vulnerability  of   the
    Appellant, the judge erred in adopting the Respondent's view, which was
    the wrong approach.

7.   Ms Foot relied on statements from solicitors,  at  paragraphs  115  and
    128 of the bundle, which were not  referred  to  by  the  judge.  These
    statements dealt with the Appellant's interaction with a  Mr  Safi  and
    also an interview with  the  Appellant's  previous  foster  carer.  She
    described the Appellant as not having any English at all  and  that  he
    did not understand anything. She also described his  relationship  with
    Mr Safi who was in her opinion around the age of 18 and  not  50  years
    old as was described in the age assessment.

8.    Ms  Foot  submitted  that  the  appeal  was  dismissed,   because   of
    inconsistencies   in   the   Appellant's    account.    However,    the
    inconsistencies relied upon - his failure to recall  how  long  he  had
    remained in Afghanistan after being  asked  to  join  the  Taliban  and
    whether he had been shown how to use guns - were  not  significant  and
    were dealt with in  the  Appellant's  statement.  The  expert  evidence
    supported the Appellant's account. Mr Foxley found that the Appellant's
    account was plausible.

9.   In relation to ground (i), Ms Foot submitted that, despite a  reference
    in paragraph 9 of the decision to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note,
    the judge had failed to apply it.  She relied on paragraphs 30  and  33
    of AM (Afghanistan) and submitted that the judge also failed  to  apply
    paragraph 27 of JL (medical reports: credibility) China which states:

         "Applying this  guidance  would  have  entailed  the  judge  asking
         herself whether any  of  the  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's
         account (as given  in  her  asylum  interview)  identified  by  the
         Respondent in the reasons for refusal and described by the judge as
         being "cogent" could be explained by her being a vulnerable person.
         This the judge did not do."

10.  Ms Foot submitted that, although the judge referred to the  Appellant's
    age, cultural background and the medical report of Dr  Fairweather,  he
    failed to ask  himself  whether  this  explained,  or  was  capable  of
    explaining, the  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  account.  Where
    someone is vulnerable it was necessary to focus on objective indicators
    of risk, namely the evidence of the expert, Mr Foxley.  The  judge  had
    reached an irrational conclusion about his evidence at page 14  of  the
    decision in stating that the Appellant's evidence was inconsistent with
    that of Mr Foxley. It was not an inconsistency but a different  way  of
    describing the role of the Appellant's father. The Appellant's  way  of
    explaining his father's role may well be different than to the  way  he
    explains the conduct of other Taliban members. The judge had failed  to
    ask himself if the Appellant's  account  was  supported  by  background
    evidence and whether it explained the inconsistencies.

11.  In relation to the age assessment, ground (ii), Ms Foot submitted  that
    the assessment was obviously flawed and the judge  was  aware  of  this
    from the two letters from Wilson Solicitors (referred to at paragraph 4
    above). However, the judge gave no reasons for why he found the  report
    to be Merton compliant. He adopted the  findings  in  the  report,  but
    failed to deal with the matters raised in these  two  letters  and  the
    statements from the Appellant's solicitors (referred to at paragraph  8
    above).

12.  Ms Foot submitted that the purpose of an age assessment  was  different
    to the assessment of an asylum claim and she relied on analogy with MS.
    If a reasonable grounds decision was obviously wrong, although that was
    within the remit of the High Court, it was still within the  Tribunal's
    jurisdiction to  assess  it.  In  this  case  the  age  assessment  was
    procedurally unfair, therefore the judge should not hold  this  against
    the Appellant in assessing his asylum appeal. The focus on his physical
    appearance and the fact that the assessors did not give the Appellant a
    chance to explain meant that the judge should not have  relied  on  the
    contents of such a report and should not have attached  any  weight  to
    the assessors' opinions on credibility.  If  he  was  to  follow  their
    assessment then the judge should have explained why the age  assessment
    was Merton compliant, ground (iii).

13.  In relation to grounds (iv) (v) and (vi), these were  examples  of  the
    heads  of  complaint  already  raised.   There   was   no   substantive
    inconsistency between the Appellant and the expert. The judge was wrong
    to record the Appellant's  timing  of  departure  from  Afghanistan  as
    relevant, given his vulnerability and the expert evidence. This did not
    undermine his claim.

14.  Ms Foot submitted that there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    approach to whether the Appellant  could  relocate,  ground  (vii).  At
    paragraph 52 the judge gave no reasons why it was not unduly harsh.  Dr
    Fairweather stated that the Appellant would struggle  in  Kabul  as  he
    needed help to live there. The judge had failed to  take  into  account
    this assessment in  considering  relocation,  in  particular  paragraph
    8.9.1 at page 45 of Dr Fairweather's report which stated  that  it  was
    likely the Appellant would struggle to manage on a daily  basis  if  he
    returned Afghanistan.


Respondent's submissions

15.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted  that
    the judge had referred to the guidance at  paragraph  9.  She  accepted
    there was no explicit finding on whether the Appellant was a vulnerable
    witness, but the judge had in essence adopted the course set out in  AM
    (Afghanistan). The judge had considered all the evidence in  the  round
    at paragraph 30 and was aware that he must exercise caution  and  allow
    for nervousness at the hearing, the  interpreter  and  the  Appellant's
    age. There was no  criticism  that  the  procedure  during  the  appeal
    hearing was unduly adversarial or that the Appellant was not allowed to
    answer questions and explain  himself.  The  judge  was  aware  of  the
    Appellant's  vulnerability  in  making  his  credibility  findings.  At
    paragraphs 35 and 36, the judge referred to Dr Fairweather's report and
    he looked at all the evidence in the  round  before  finding  that  the
    Appellant was not credible.

16.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller referred to page  231,  the  age  assessment,  and
    submitted that all eleven points were put to the Appellant and  he  was
    given an opportunity to rebut those findings. It was open to the  judge
    to conclude that the social  workers  adequately  dealt  with  the  age
    assessment. He took into account the letters, which he referred  to  at
    paragraph 9, and was fully aware of the points  of  contention  in  the
    report. The judge did not find it plausible that on some occasions  the
    Appellant could remember dates and times  and  on  other  occasions  he
    could  not.  He  took  into  account  Mr  Foxley's  opinion  that   the
    Appellant's  account  was  generally  consistent  and   plausible.   At
    paragraph 37 he accepted the Appellant's lack of education and put  all
    relevant factors into his assessment of credibility. His  finding  that
    the Appellant was not credible was open to him on the  evidence  before
    him.

17.  The judge dealt with internal relocation and his findings at  paragraph
    52 were  sustainable.  The  Appellant  did  not  fear  his  family  and
    therefore would have a support network to look after him on return. The
    Appellant did not lack family support and could rely on them.


Appellant's response

18.  Ms Foot submitted that the judge erred in law because  he  found  that,
    because the Appellant had family elsewhere in Afghanistan,  they  could
    support him on return to Kabul. This was not  a  proper  assessment  of
    whether it was unduly harsh for the Appellant to  internally  relocate.
    The age assessment was not served until some time later, so  the  point
    that the teachers made after the meeting were not put to the  Appellant
    and the previous solicitors had  accepted  the  complaint  about  their
    inadequate representation.


AM (Afghanistan)

19.  Paragraphs 30 and 33 state:

         "30. To assist parties and tribunals a Practice  Direction  'First-
         tier and Upper  Tribunal  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive
         Witnesses',  was  issued  by  the  Senior  President,  Sir   Robert
         Carnwath, with the agreement of the Lord Chancellor on  30  October
         2008. In addition, joint Presidential Guidance Note No  2  of  2010
         was issued by the then President of UTIAC, Blake J and  the  acting
         President of the FtT (IAC), Judge Arfon-Jones. The  directions  and
         guidance  contained  in  them  are  to  be  followed  and  for  the
         convenience of practitioners, they are annexed  to  this  judgment.
         Failure to follow them will most likely be a material error of law.
          They are to be found in the Annex to this judgment."


         "33. Given the emphasis on the determination of credibility on  the
         facts of this appeal, there is particular force in the Guidance  at
         [13] to [15]:


             13.  The weight to be placed upon factors of vulnerability may
                  differ depending on the matter under appeal,  the  burden
                  and standard of proof and  whether  the  individual  is  a
                  witness or an appellant.


             14.  Consider the evidence, allowing  for  possible  different
                  degrees  of  understanding  by  witnesses  and   appellant
                  compared to those [who] are not vulnerable, in the context
                  of evidence from others associated with the appellant  and
                  the background evidence before you. Where there were clear
                  discrepancies in the oral evidence, consider the extent to
                  which the age, vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness
                  was an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.


             15.  The decision  should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has
                  concluded  the  appellant  or  a  witness  is   a   child,
                  vulnerable  or  sensitive,   the   effect   the   Tribunal
                  considered the identified vulnerability had  in  assessing
                  the evidence before it and this whether the  Tribunal  was
                  satisfied whether the appellant had established his or her
                  case  to  the  relevant  standard  of  proof.   In  asylum
                  appeals, weight should be given to  objective  indications
                  of risk rather than necessarily to a state of mind."



Dr Fairweather's report

20.  Paragraph 8.9.1 at page 45 states:

         "Mr Nasir is likely to struggle to manage on a daily basis if he is
         returned to Afghanistan. This is based on his likely  deterioration
         in his mental state, which will  reduce  his  ability  to  organise
         himself to access accommodation, obtain  then  maintain  employment
         and manage his daily needs.  He also has never had to do this  from
         his  reported  history.  His  accommodation  in  the  UK  is  semi-
         independent  showing  he  is  developing  some  independent  living
         skills.  However, he was provided this and did not have to seek it,
         there are support staff present, he receives financial support  and
         does not have to work and he  is  provided  opportunities  such  as
         college.  It is highly unlikely  he  could  replicate  this  social
         situation, which he needs, on his own.  He would then be vulnerable
         to exploitation from others in order to  survive  on  a  day-to-day
         basis.  Concerns in the UK were raised about his friendship with an
         older man, which would  be  concerning,  but  I  understand  it  is
         disputed by Mr Nasir. It is not clear what provisions he would find
         himself with and there is a risk he could become destitute  without
         a similar level of support that he has in the UK."



21.  The relevant paragraphs at pages 46 and 47 state:

         "8.10.1  From a psychiatric  prospective  there  are  many  factors
                  known to affect a young person's ability to recount  their
                  history.


         8.10.2   Firstly, his ability to recall and then give  his  history
                  will be affected by his psychiatric symptoms. It  is  well
                  recognised  that  PTSD  patients  have   relatively   poor
                  intentional recall of the traumatic events themselves  and
                  Mr Nasir suffered numerous traumas over a significant time
                  period  of  his  childhood  making  it  cumulatively  more
                  difficult. Their narrative  of  the  events  tends  to  be
                  fragmented and disorganised or poor in quality with little
                  content. Discrepancies in  sequential  accounts  given  of
                  traumas by  PTSD  sufferers  are  common:  this  has  been
                  established in populations where the fact of the trauma is
                  not at issue. Patients with PTSD not only have deficits in
                  their autobiographical memories of  the  traumatic  events
                  but also the organisation of the  autobiographical  memory
                  base in general can be affected. In addition, the  process
                  of recall even in healthy  normal  individuals  is  highly
                  variable as has been shown  by  a  number  of  studies  in
                  which, for example healthy volunteers have  given  witness
                  statements under  experimental  conditions.  Recall  under
                  conditions of psychological distress is  further  impaired
                  and thus would be expected to be  even  more  inconsistent
                  than normal.


         8.10.3   It is therefore expected the PTSD sufferers will  struggle
                  with  providing  exact  dates,  details,  timescales   and
                  coherent chronologies.  This  should  not  necessarily  be
                  taken as evidence of a lack of credibility.


         8.10.4   Mr Nasir was a child when the events took place.  Children
                  have a different ability to remember than adults and their
                  sense of  timescales  will  differ.   They  will  remember
                  different details with formal aspects such  as  dates  and
                  times less important.  He also reported having very little
                  education, which will affect the  way  he  interacts  with
                  adults, the information he conveys spontaneously  and  the
                  ability he has to provide detail of this type in terms  of
                  language.  It is not clear how much it has been  attempted
                  to gain a full history of  Mr  Nasir's  background,  which
                  would have made it more likely he would have disclosed the
                  domestic violence he witnesses.  In  addition,  there  are
                  varying attitudes to domestic violence and  culturally  it
                  may not be acknowledged as abuse that children  should  be
                  protected from.  This would influence how Mr Nasir  viewed
                  these childhood experiences and determine how important he
                  would deem them to be shared.


         8.11.1   Given the above, Mr Nasir is even more likely to  struggle
                  to give a full account of his history when in  an  anxiety
                  provoking situation, such as a Tribunal  hearing  or  Home
                  Office interview. In order to reduce his anxiety it  would
                  be best to conduct  any  formal  interview  in  a  neutral
                  manner as questioning could be experienced as  persecutory
                  if conducted in an overtly adversarial or  confrontational
                  manner and this would inevitably result  in  his  becoming
                  distressed, most likely exhibited  by  him  becoming  less
                  responsible or complaining of a headache as he did  in  my
                  sensitively conducted professional assessment.


         8.11.2   I also noted Mr Nasir's  rather  impoverished  ability  to
                  give details of his account and experiences, relying on my
                  questioning to draw out his  state  and  background.  This
                  could relate to his poor educational  level  and  cultural
                  background.


         8.11.3   Mr Nasir has capacity to give evidence. He does not have a
                  psychiatric disorder that interferes with his  concept  or
                  reality nor does he have cognitive impairment  that  would
                  result in him struggling to understand the  procedures  of
                  court or a Home Office interview."



Discussion and Conclusion

22.  Ground (i): We are of the view that the judge failed to properly  apply
    the Presidential Guidance on vulnerable witnesses. Although he referred
    to  the  guidance,  he  failed  to  apply  it  in  accordance  with  AM
    (Afghanistan). He made no overall finding of whether the Appellant  was
    a vulnerable witness, which he was required to do  in  accordance  with
    the guidance, and he failed to state  whether  any  such  vulnerability
    could explain the discrepancies in the Appellant account. The judge set
    out the inconsistencies, but failed to go  on  to  assess  whether  the
    inconsistencies  could   be   explained   by   the   Appellant's   age,
    vulnerability or sensitivity. The judge failed to apply paragraph 27 of
    JL.

23.  Grounds (ii) and (iii): the judge failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    why he considered the age assessment to be Merton compliant. There were
    numerous failings, pointed out in the  solicitor's  letters  that  were
    before the judge, which the judge failed to  deal  with.  Some  of  the
    matters relied on in the age assessment report, namely the  Appellant's
    ability to speak English and his relationship with an older  man,  were
    adequately dealt with by evidence and statements from  the  Appellant's
    solicitors and the judge failed to take  these  into  account.  It  was
    stated in the age assessment report  that  the  Appellant  could  speak
    English and there was concern about his relationship with a 50 year old
    man who sold phone cards. The  evidence  from  the  Appellant's  foster
    carer contradicted this. She stated that the  Appellant's  English  was
    poor and she had introduced the Appellant to an  Afghan  boy  who  sold
    phone cards; Mr Safi who was about 18 years old. The  judge  failed  to
    refer to this evidence or to give reasons why  he  preferred  what  was
    stated in the age assessment to the evidence of the Appellant's  foster
    carer.

24.  Whilst the weight to be attached to the age  assessment  was  a  matter
    for the judge, we are  persuaded  by  Ms  Foot's  submission  that  the
    assessment of credibility was one for the judge and he erred in law  in
    adopting the points raised by the social workers rather than making  an
    informed assessment of his own. In that respect we find that the  judge
    erred in law in his assessment of the Appellant's asylum appeal and his
    credibility.

25.  The purpose  of  interviews  carried  out  by  social  workers  in  age
    assessments are to ascertain  the  age  of  the  appellant.  This  will
    undoubtedly involve an assessment of whether the account is a  truthful
    one, but only in so far as it relates to age. Whether an appellant  has
    given a credible account of his asylum claim is a matter for the judge.
    He/she may rely on inconsistencies between the account given to  social
    workers in interview and the account given in an asylum interview or on
    appeal, but it is incumbent on the judge to take into account  evidence
    which explains such inconsistencies and to form his/her own view of the
    evidence, giving adequate reasons for its acceptance or rejection.  The
    judge should be careful  to  distinguish  between  what  it  a  factual
    account given by the Appellant and what  is  an  opinion  or  inference
    drawn by a social worker.

26.  The remaining points in relation to the inconsistencies,  grounds  (iv)
    (v) and (vi), are subsumed within these  two  points  and  we  find  it
    persuasive that the inconsistencies were not significant when  assessed
    as part of the evidence as a whole. Therefore, it was incumbent on  the
    judge to assess whether the Appellant was vulnerable  and  whether  his
    vulnerability was an adequate explanation for them.

27.  Ground (vii): the judge's assessment of  internal  relocation  appeared
    to be on the basis that he had family to whom he could return. However,
    the Appellant would be returned to Kabul  on  his  own  and  there  was
    expert opinion that he struggled to support  himself  on  a  day-to-day
    basis. On the evidence, it was unlikely that the Appellant could access
    the support of his family, by travelling to his home area. We find that
    the judge erred in law in finding that it would not be unduly harsh for
    the Appellant to return to Kabul.

28.  We find that the judge erred in law for the reasons given above and  we
    set aside his decision to dismiss the Appellant's  appeal.  Given  that
    the judge failed to apply the guidance on vulnerable witnesses, it  was
    submitted by both parties that the matter should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing. In accordance with paragraph 7.2 of
    the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012, we direct the  Appellant's
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing  before  a
    judge other  than  Judge  Moore.  None  of  the  judge's  findings  are
    preserved.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 5 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 5 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
