
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09908/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 February 2018                         |On 22 March 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                   MR A N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Christie of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is from the Palestine Territories originating in the Gaza
    Strip.  His date of birth is 11 November 1986.  He left  the  Palestine
    Territories on 13 February 2008 via Egypt from where he flew direct  to
    the UK.  He was using an Italian passport, which his agent had obtained
    for him.  He claimed asylum in the UK on 4 March 2008.  The  claim  was
    refused by the respondent on 2  April  2008.   The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge Hanes and his appeal rights  were  exhausted  on  20
    June 2008.  Between 2008 and the fresh claim being  made  on  17  March
    2016 it would appear that submissions were made  to  the  Secretary  of
    State in 2009 and further submissions on 22 December 2011,  but  papers
    were mislaid. There was a final rejection of those further  submissions
    on 23 June 2015.  Following an application for judicial review, settled
    by the terms of a consent order, the Home Office agreed  to  reconsider
    the appellant's case.  The fresh claim was made on 17 March 2016 on the
    basis of the Refugee Convention, international protection and  Articles
    3 and 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The  appellant
    claimed he would face mistreatment as a former member of  Al-Aqsa.   He
    has  a  diagnosis  of  PTSD.   The  Secretary  of  State  refused   the
    appellant's claim on 31 August 2016.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on  23  May  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Freer dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8,
    asylum, and humanitarian  protection.   He  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 3 on medical grounds.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appeal was listed before me for hearing  on  7  December  2017.   A
    preliminary issue was raised  at  that  hearing  by  the  Secretary  of
    State's representative.  It was asserted that the appeal  ought  to  be
    treated  as  abandoned  under  Section  104(4A)  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 because the appellant  had,  subsequent
    to the First-tier Tribunal's decision, been granted leave to remain for
    a period of 30 months.  I adjourned the hearing and gave directions for
    both parties to make written  submissions.   Written  submissions  were
    provided  by  both  parties.   The  respondent  accepted  that  in  the
    circumstances of this case the appeal was not treated as abandoned  and
    therefore the matter was listed for a resumed hearing  on  16  February
    2018.

 6. There is a further preliminary issue to be dealt with in this case.  In
    the  appellant's  skeleton  argument  for  this  hearing  it  has  been
    requested that the  Tribunal  record  in  its  determination  that  the
    appellant is a Palestine national from Gaza so as to avoid  any  future
    dispute over the issue.  This issue was originally pleaded in ground  1
    of the appellant's grounds of appeal.  The respondent in  the  Rule  24
    response stated that Judge Freer  did  make  clear  findings  that  the
    appellant was  Palestinian  and  from  Gaza,  and  on  that  basis  the
    appellant withdraws the ground of appeal that requests that there is  a
    formal record that this is a finding of the  judge.   The  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer is rather confusing on this matter.  If
    I were deciding whether or not ground 1 was made out I would have  been
    inclined to agree with the position asserted in  the  grounds  that  no
    clear findings were made in this  regard.   At  paragraph  129  of  the
    decision the judge set out:-

         "The appeal is allowed but only on human  rights  under  Article  3
         ECHR.  It is predicated on an educated guess, having heard all  the
         evidence about his birth family,  that  he  originates  from  Gaza,
         otherwise he does not succeed at all."

    The Secretary of State in the Reasons for Refusal Letter did  not  take
    any issue with the appellant's assertion to be from the Gaza Strip.  It
    does not appear that this issue was canvassed during the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The appellant does not appear  to  have
    been given an opportunity to address this point, either at the  hearing
    or by way of post-hearing submissions.  In the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hanes in 2008 he found that the appellant 'is  a  person
    who emanates from the  Palestinian  authorities.   His  last  place  of
    residence was in  Gaza'.   I  therefore  record  as  requested  by  the
    appellant that the appellant is a Palestinian national from Gaza.

 7.  At  the  hearing  before  me  on  7  December  2017  the  respondent's
    representative indicated that the position of the appellant's wife  and
    child would be investigated.  Essentially ground 6 of  the  grounds  of
    appeal assert that the appellant's wife and son should  be  treated  as
    dependants on his claim and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  by
    failing to make a finding on that issue.   Ms  Everett  submitted  that
    this Tribunal has no jurisdiction to treat the appellant and his  child
    as dependants.  She submitted that there was a  letter  from  the  Home
    Office in 2016 in which they declined to treat them as  dependants  and
    required them  to  send  further  evidence.   She  submitted  that  the
    appellant's wife and his son did not arrive with the appellant  in  the
    United Kingdom and therefore they do not meet the  requirements  to  be
    added as dependants on the appellant's protection claim.  She submitted
    that there were other avenues available to the appellant's wife and son
    in that they could make their own applications either for asylum or for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  No decision has  been  made  in
    relation to the appellant's wife or son and therefore the Tribunal  has
    no jurisdiction to consider that issue.   She  suggested  that  anybody
    could be added as a  dependant  in  circumstances  where  clearly  they
    cannot be dependent.  Therefore it cannot be the case that  a  Tribunal
    is seized of matters where no decisions have been made.

 8. Ms Christie handed up a copy of a letter that was in  the  bundle  from
    the appellant's solicitors in March 2016 asking for them to be added as
    dependants on the appellant's asylum claim.  This establishes that  the
    Home Office were asked in March 2016 to add them  as  dependants.   The
    Home Office had the necessary evidence to  make  a  decision  regarding
    whether they qualified as dependants.  She referred to the Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter which confirms the documents that were submitted.  There
    is nowhere that the Home Office refuses that application to be added as
    dependants.  She referred to page 8 of the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter
    where the Home Office set out that they had not considered the wife and
    son because neither of them appear on the asylum claim.   She  referred
    to the Home Office's guidance and submitted that the  Home  Office  had
    not followed their own guidance.  She referred to tab A at  A2  of  the
    appellant's bundle which contains  the  skeleton  argument  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal which clearly sets out as a preliminary  issue  the
    appellant's wife and son as dependants.  The skeleton  argument  refers
    to the requirements of paragraph  349  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    reference is made to the respondent's policy of dependants  and  former
    dependants of May 2014 at paragraph 3.8.  She submitted that it is  not
    a requirement for the appellant's wife and son to be part of  the  pre-
    flight family.  She submitted that the  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to
    consider all matters raised included in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.
     There may be issues that have not been fully determined in the Reasons
    for Refusal Letter, however if those issues are raised at  a  Tribunal,
    Tribunals often then go on  to  make  a  finding.   The  issue  of  the
    appellant's son forms part of his human rights claim.  The wife and son
    do not need to have a separate decision to be considered  by  reference
    to the human rights claim.  The reason the Tribunal has jurisdiction to
    consider all matters raised as part of a decision  otherwise  it  would
    lead to appellants having to judicially review part of a decision.  The
    First-tier Tribunal did not consider that it did not have jurisdiction,
    it just failed to make a finding.

 9. In response Ms Everett submitted that being a spouse and a  child  does
    not automatically mean they satisfy the requirements to be dependent on
    a protection claim.  If the appellant's wife and child feel they should
    have been given a decision and were not, the proper  course  of  action
    would have been to initiate judicial review proceedings.  There  are  a
    number of avenues available to the appellant's wife and child.

10. Ms Christie responded that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  a
    decision.  There is a lack of understanding at why the Tribunal did not
    reach a decision on this issue.  The Tribunal should make a decision if
    the people qualify as dependants.  Where issues clearly have  not  been
    determined by the Secretary of State the Tribunal decides those  issues
    all the time.

11. Moving to the substantive issues in this case the grounds of appeal are
    lengthy.  Only grounds 3, 5 and 6 are now pursued.   Ground  3  asserts
    that the judge erred in his consideration of the risk to the  appellant
    on  the  basis  of  the  dire  humanitarian  situation  in  Gaza,   the
    appellant's personal circumstances, and  the  consequent  risk  of  him
    suffering inhumane and degrading treatment.  The judge  relied  on  the
    considerably outdated 2011 country guidance case of HS  (Palestinian  -
    return to Gaza) Palestinian Territories CG [2011] UKUT 124 holding that
    there is no case for showing widespread risks of serious  harm  to  the
    level expected in Article 3 ECHR.  It is asserted that the judge failed
    to consider up-to-date evidence on the humanitarian situation in  Gaza.
    The evidence submitted to the First-tier Tribunal  details  the  severe
    poverty, internally displaced people, lack of  humanitarian  assistance
    and reconstruction since the 2014 hostilities, inability to access food
    and clean water, destruction of homes,  schools,  hospitals  and  other
    vital infrastructure and the increase in violence since  October  2015.
    Whilst the judge acknowledges that the blockade forces  the  people  of
    Gaza to live in a state of  perpetual  humanitarian  crisis  and  Oxfam
    reports that Gaza will be unliveable  by  2020,  he  did  not  consider
    whether someone with the appellant's particular  vulnerabilities  would
    face a real risk of inhumane and degrading  treatment  if  returned  to
    such conditions.  The judge failed to consider whether the  appellant's
    vulnerabilities expose him to a risk of harm.  His mental health,  lack
    of housing, lack of family or other support structures and inability to
    sustain himself were all relevant to the determination  of  whether  he
    faced a risk of suffering inhumane and degrading treatment on return to
    Gaza.  The judge made factual findings  without  an  evidential  basis.
    The judge found that the appellant knows people in Gaza and that he can
    rely on support.  The judge accepted that in 2014  the  appellant  lost
    fourteen of his relatives in a missile attack (see paragraph 79).   The
    judge did not specify who the people who the appellant  could  rely  on
    might be.  No consideration was given to the appellant's evidence  that
    he has no contacts in Gaza and that he does not know if  his  remaining
    family are alive.

12. Ms Christie referred  to  the  Home  Office  guidance  on  humanitarian
    protection at page 12 referring to the paragraph which sets out:

         "There may  be  exceptional  situations  where  conditions  in  the
         country, for example, absence of water, food or basic shelter,  are
         unacceptable to the point that return in  itself  would  constitute
         inhuman and  degrading  treatment  for  the  individual  concerned.
         Factors to be taken into account include age,  gender,  ill-health,
         the effect on children, other family circumstances,  and  available
         support structures."

    and at page 13:

         "Decision makers must consider a claimant's ability  to  cater  for
         their most basic needs, such as food, hygiene  and  shelter,  their
         vulnerability to ill-treatment and the prospect of their  situation
         improving within a reasonable timeframe."

    She submitted that the judge has not considered humanitarian protection
    under Article 15(b).  She referred to paragraph 100 of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision where the judge  set  out  correctly  the  relevant
    case.  The judge looked solely at the country guidance case of  HS  and
    said there is no case law showing widespread risks of serious  harm  to
    the level expected in Article 3 ECHR.  That is the  only  consideration
    the judge gave to humanitarian protection under  15(b).   It  is  clear
    from the decision under the heading  of  "Humanitarian  Protection"  at
    paragraph 105 that the judge considers only Article  15(c)  of  Council
    Directive 2004/85/EC, the Qualification  Directive.   There  are  three
    main errors in the judge's approach as set out  in  the  grounds.   The
    judge failed to apply the findings  regarding  the  appellant's  mental
    health to a consideration of the humanitarian protection  claim  as  to
    whether as a result of his mental  health  condition  he  would  suffer
    inhumane and degrading treatment.

13. Ground 5 asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to  determine  whether  the
    appellant's return to Gaza would breach his or his family's  Article  8
    rights.   The judge accepted that there is no  possibility  of  a  Gaza
    resident relocating to the West Bank  or  vice  versa,  but  failed  to
    consider the consequences of this and the family life of all members of
    the family in violation of Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  39.   Their
    son was born in the UK and is undocumented. The judge set out  that  he
    was "told not to weigh  up"  the  appellant's  wife's  case.   This  is
    incorrect.  Counsel for the  appellant  submitted  that  any  potential
    asylum issue arising out of the risks to the appellant's wife need  not
    be determined as she had not made an asylum claim  in  her  own  right.
    The judge was required to  consider  the  appellant's  wife  and  son's
    Article 8  rights  when  considering  the  effect  of  removal  of  the
    appellant.  The judge failed to consider the Supreme  Court's  guidance
    on precariousness in Agyarko v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  11  where  Lord  Reed
    stated, at paragraph 52, that the cogency of the public interest in the
    removal of a person living in the UK unlawfully is liable to  diminish,
    or the weight to be given  to  precarious  family  life  is  liable  to
    increase  if  there  is  a  protracted  delay  in  the  enforcement  of
    immigration control. It was submitted that in  circumstances  in  which
    the appellant, his wife and son are unable to live together  abroad  as
    they originate from different parts  of  the  Palestinian  Territories,
    removal would result in family rupture so precariousness cannot  affect
    the weight to be accorded to their family life.  The judge erred in his
    consideration of the best  interests  of  the  appellant's  son  to  be
    brought up with both his parents, again failing to consider  the  issue
    of family rupture.  While finding it is not likely that the child would
    prosper in Gaza he simply finds that the child is  not  a  trump  card.
    This is not a  lawful  consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's son under Section 55 of the 2009 Act.  The judge  erred  in
    discounting the absence of medical treatment in Gaza on the basis  that
    health resources are being used  in  the  UK.   The  finding  that  the
    appellant was not removable counts against the respondent's  seven-and-
    half year delay undermines the dicta in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008]  UKHL
    41.   The  judge  erred  in  considering  the  issue  of  whether   the
    appellant's lack of identity  document  would  prevent  his  return  to
    Palestine.  There was a flawed reasoning and lack of  evidential  basis
    for finding the appellant to be a danger to  the  public.  Ms  Christie
    submitted that the entire consideration of Article 8 is  unclear.   She
    submitted that there are unusual circumstances in this case because the
    appellants cannot live together in Palestine which would  amount  to  a
    flagrant violation of their family life.

14. Ms Everett submitted that the judge did only consider Article 15(c) and
    did not consider Article 15(b) However, there is a massive overlap with
    regard to Article 3 so the findings on Article 3  having  already  been
    made led to the judge finding the humanitarian situation  is  not  such
    that the appellant would  be  subject  to  indiscriminate  violence,  a
    finding open to the judge.  She accepted that the grounds with relation
    to Article 8 gave rise to a  more  vexing  argument.   The  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights with regard to the Article 3 medical claim  and
    therefore any findings on family life and any misdirection would not be
    material because the appellant is not being removed.  It  is  difficult
    for the judge, having found that the appellant cannot be removed on the
    basis of human rights (in this case Article 3), he has  to  look  at  a
    hypothetical situation with regard to Article 8.   She  submitted  that
    there was not enough evidence to make a finding  that  the  appellant's
    wife could not return to Palestine.  The judge is looking at the  issue
    in the abstract.  The evidence that  was  there  before  the  judge  is
    insufficient for the judge to reach the conclusion that the UK was  the
    only place that the appellant, his wife and child could continue family
    life.

15. Ms Christie submitted that the judge  was  required  to  determine  the
    appeal on the basis of Article 8, notwithstanding  a  finding  that  it
    would breach the appellant's human rights to be removed on the basis of
    Article 3.  It is incumbent upon a judge to decide all  matters  raised
    in an appeal.

Discussion

16. There is no appeal against the decision with regard to the  appellant's
    claim for asylum and the findings of  the  judge  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's account of events.  The judge set out under the heading  of
    "International Protection" the following:

         "95. There is no credible basis  for  finding  a  valid  protection
             claim.  The 2008 findings of IJ Haynes must be accepted as the
             starting point.  My other points make it even  more  difficult
             for the Appellant.  The Home Office was broadly right.

         96.  ..."

17. With regard to risks  facing  the  appellant  on  return  to  Gaza  the
    appellant argues that the judge simply  relied  on  HS  and  failed  to
    consider up-to-date evidence on the humanitarian situation in Gaza  and
    did not consider the  appellant's  particular  vulnerabilities  (mental
    health, lack of housing, lack of family or other  support  structures).
    They were all relevant to the determination of whether he faced a  risk
    of suffering inhumane and degrading treatment on return to Gaza.

18. I accept that the judge has not specifically referred to Article  15(b)
    of Council Directive 2004/85/EC. Article 15(b) provides:

         '(b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of  an
         applicant in the country of origin'

19. There is a high threshold to succeed in a claim under Article 15(b). In
    HS it was held:

         "224.    As regards the  general  socio-economic  and  humanitarian
             situation in Gaza, there is on the whole common ground in  the
             evidence provided by both sides, although some of the evidence
             on the part of the Secretary of  State  indicates  some  small
             level of improvement in various  respects.  There  has  to  be
             shown to be a severe deprivation with denial of shelter,  food
             and the most basic necessities  of  life  for  the  appeal  to
             succeed. It is relevant to note the conclusion of the  AIT  in
             AM & AM (Armed conflict - risk categories) Somalia  CG  [2008]
             UKAIT 00091 that to succeed in a claim for protection based on
             poor socio-economic or  dire  humanitarian  living  conditions
             under the Refugee Convention, Article 15 of the  Qualification
             Directive or Article 3, the circumstances  would  have  to  be
             extremely unusual (see e.g. para 157)."

20. In M'Bodj v Etat Belge (case C-542/13) it was held  that  the  risk  of
    deterioration of health of a third country national  suffering  from  a
    serious illness as a result of the absence of appropriate treatment  in
    his  country  of  origin  was  not  sufficient  to  warrant  the  grant
    subsidiary protection unless the person was intentionally  deprived  of
    health care. It was not argued that  there  would  be  any  intentional
    deprivation of health care.

21. The judge has considered the relevant factors and made a  finding  that
    the up to date  evidence  provided  with  regard  to  the  humanitarian
    situation in Gaza is insufficient to show a widespread risk of  serious
    harm to the level expected in Article 3 ECHR cases (paragraph 100). The
    appellant argues that this is the only consideration given by the judge
    to Article 15(b). However,  there  is  a  significant  overlap  between
    Article 15(b) and Article 3. The same factors  are  relevant  and  have
    been considered by the judge. The judge set out:

         "101 I rely on the country guidance case of HS. There  is  no  case
             law showing widespread risks of  serious  harm  to  the  level
             expected in Article 3 ECHR ...

         ...

         102  There may be some basis for believing that his family home was
             attacked by Hamas before he left. He has never  been  a  Hamas
             supporter. They went to great lengths  to  cement  their  hold
             over Gaza. That  would  be  a  very  traumatic  event  and  is
             consistent with the psychological evidence I  have  read.  One
             event like this would plausibly explain why he left Gaza using
             an agent, if he is from Gaza. Yet I am asked  to  square  this
             with his statement that his parents remained  there  in  Gaza.
             This is another puzzling aspect of his account."

22. The judge relied on the case of HS but also considered the up  to  date
    evidence submitted and has acknowledged that personal factors  must  be
    taken into account when he was considering Article 15(c)  referring  to
    Elgafaji. The judge has taken into account that there will  be  support
    available. The judge set out:

         "105.    The Appellant relied  on  Article  15(c)  of  the  Council
             Directive  2004/85/EC  (the  Qualification  Directive).   This
             relates to his  security  and  humanitarian  situation  if  he
             returns to Gaza.  The test is facing a real risk of  suffering
             serious harm.  Specifically, it requires a  certain  level  of
             indiscriminate (i.e. non-targeted) violence.  There  are  very
             few parts of the world where the Courts have found such a high
             level to exist.  So it is often claimed but rarely succeed  as
             a legal argument.  As a Judge, I must  take  very  great  care
             over such decisions, which can potentially affect millions  of
             individuals if taken forward in a higher Court.

         106. Gaza is under blockade from  Egypt  and  Israel.   I  wish  to
             emphasise that Egypt is involved.  ...  The evidence  is  that
             the blockade forces the people of Gaza to live in a  state  of
             perpetual humanitarian crisis.  No destroyed homes in Gaza had
             been rebuilt, as of May 2015.  In 2016, the  blockade  entered
             its 10th year.  The Rafah border crossing was  almost  totally
             closed by the Egyptians.  Oxfam ... reports that Gaza will  be
             unliveable by 2020 ...

         107. Elgafaji (2009) stated that the more the applicant is able  to
             show that he is specifically affected  by  reason  of  factors
             particular to his personal circumstances, the lower the  level
             of indiscriminate violence required.

         108. Given that the Appellant's parents still live there (or did up
             to 2014), despite the much earlier incident when he says Hamas
             burnt down the house, it is hard to  see  what  indiscriminate
             violence might come  his  way.   There  is  no  current  armed
             conflict with Israel.  There was a ceasefire agreement  signed
             in August 2014.  Hamas is  not  reportedly  misbehaving  on  a
             grand scale of  violence;  their  control  is  tight  and  has
             arbitrary  aspects.   They  are  re-arming  which  foreshadows
             future conflict but counsel has not  pointed  me  to  material
             that  shows  as  at  today   a   current   serious   risk   of
             indiscriminate i.e. non-personalised violence.  The  Appellant
             is vulnerable but does that of itself  attract  indiscriminate
             violence towards him?  I am asked to suppose it  does  but  no
             clear proof of it has been adduced.  I do not find that  shown
             to the low threshold.  He may find  it  difficult  to  sustain
             himself but that is not an obvious  cause  for  violence.   He
             knows people there.  I suggest that he can rely on support".

23. The judge did identify who  he  considered  was  able  to  support  the
    appellant. The judge  referred  at  paragraph  78  to  the  appellant's
    evidence given to Dr Stevens  (as  mentioned  by  Dr  Egnal)  that  his
    parents were still living in Gaza. The judge said 'I would expect  them
    to support him now but he says nothing  about  that'.  The  judge  also
    referred to the appellant's account  that  despite  an  attack  on  his
    family home his parents remained in Gaza. The judge also refers to  the
    appellant's account given to Mrs Rose and the medical report  from  his
    GP which was that his parents helped him to escape to  Egypt  when  the
    war situation became critical and there was pressure to take sides.  At
    paragraph 102  the  judge  again  refers  to  the  statement  that  the
    appellant's parents remained in Gaza. With regard to the rocket  attack
    in 2014 there is no suggestion that his  parents  or  immediate  family
    were killed. The evidence was  that  it  was  nieces  and  uncles  (see
    paragraph 30). It is clear that the judge considered that the appellant
    could obtain support from his parents.  Although  the  judge  does  not
    refer to Article 15(b) I do not consider  that  there  was  a  material
    error of law given the high  threshold  -  a  severe  deprivation  with
    denial of shelter, food and the most basic necessities of life for  the
    appeal to succeed. The appellant's grounds focused on the  up  to  date
    humanitarian situation in Gaza and the appellant's  mental  health  and
    lack of support. The judge has  taken  into  account  the  up  to  date
    objective evidence and found that the appellant would be able to obtain
    support from his parents. It was found in HS that there is a good  deal
    of humanitarian aid and there is medical support available in Gaza. The
    judge has taken all the relevant factors into account when  considering
    the risk to the appellant on return under Article 3  and  15(c).  Given
    the high threshold to be met on the facts of this case the judge  would
    have arrived at the same conclusion under Article 15(b) as  he  did  on
    15(c) 'I find no evidential basis to grant humanitarian  protection  to
    this appellant.' Although the appellant is vulnerable there is  support
    available through his parents such that substantial  grounds  have  not
    been shown that the appellant, if returned to Gaza, would face  a  real
    risk of  suffering  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment.  There  was  no
    material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  findings  and  decision  on
    humanitarian protection.

24. I will deal with ground 6, the 'dependants issue' next.  The First-tier
    Tribunal judge having found that the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection and having dismissed his asylum claim  was  not
    required to make any findings on the dependants issue. Although a judge
    is required to make findings on material issues  raised,  if  an  issue
    falls away as a result of the judge's findings on other matters  it  is
    regularly the case that a judge will not go on to decide  other  issues
    that essentially are parasitic on a  substantive  claim.  It  might  be
    preferable for a judge to set out why he was not considering the  issue
    (it might have been that the judge did not consider he had jurisdiction
    as argued by the respondent, that  they  did  not  meet  the  test  for
    'dependants' or because he had rejected the protection claim) but it is
    not a material error of law for him to have failed to  make  a  finding
    given the rejection of all aspects of the protection claim.  There  was
    no claim left for the appellant's wife and son to  be  dependent  upon.
    Having found no error of law I also therefore do  not  need  to  decide
    this issue.

25. In relation to ground 5, I will deal with the 'best interests'  of  the
    appellant's son first.

26. The judge set out:

         "121.     The  best  interests  of  the   child   are   a   primary
             consideration.  It is not likely that the child would  prosper
             in Gaza  as  described  above.   This  is  a  weighty  if  not
             conclusive  factor  against  the  normal  public  interest  in
             removal.  The public interest is set out in  section  117B  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The wife is
             not a person with status at present and the marriage  occurred
             with both parties knowing their unsettled status.   The  child
             is not a trump card.  I have been told not to weigh up her own
             case so I will leave the point there."

27. Consideration of and determination of a child's best interests are part
    of the Article 8 assessment. The judge has  correctly  identified  that
    the best interests of a child are a primary consideration. However, the
    judge has not identified what the child's best interests are. It  would
    appear that the judge has misinterpreted the submission which was  that
    he should not consider any potential asylum issue arising  out  of  the
    risks to the appellant's wife as no asylum claim  had  been  made.  The
    judge was required to make a finding as to what the best  interests  of
    the child are. Failing to do so in this case is  a  material  error  of
    law.

28. I set out below the judge's consideration of Article  8  of  which  the
    above paragraph (121) formed part:

         "118.    I turn now to Article 8: private and family life.  Medical
             aspects can fall under Article 8 too; I do not need to  repeat
             everything.

         119. The case of Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11  confirms  that,  in
             order to succeed  under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules,  the
             Appellant will need to  show  that  the  consequences  of  the
             decision  will  cause   very   substantial   difficulties   or
             exceptional circumstances or unjustifiable harshness  for  the
             Appellant.   Gaza  as  described  above  tends  to  fit   that
             description, all the more so while the Appellant  is  mentally
             unwell.  That is however a temporary  situation.   We  do  not
             know what his mental state will be in 2020 and  we  really  do
             not know what state Gaza will be in at that date.  What  Oxfam
             has predicted is an extrapolation from the past that does  not
             allow for the possibility of changes.

         120. In MM Zimbabwe [2012] EWCA Civ 279, Moses  LJ  held  that  the
             absence of medical treatment is an  additional  factor  to  be
             weighed in the balance with other factors which engage Article
             8.  However, the fact that health resources are being used  in
             the UK is likely to be a factor in favour of removal, so I  am
             not sure where that takes us.

         121. ...

         122. A factor in his favour is the delay by  the  Home  Office  but
             against that he was not removable anyway in 2008  (as  it  was
             noted), so the point may be  a  Pyrrhic  victory.   EB  Kosovo
             [2008] UKHL 41 remains a good authority.   The  Appellant  has
             been able to start a family in the UK, which  would  not  have
             happened if a speedy outcome had taken  place.   There  is  of
             course no sign that  he  has  put  down  roots  in  the  wider
             community; his friends and family are Palestinian and  he  has
             not changed his identity in any way.

         123. The Home Office is criticised for failing to consider the  Al-
             Aqsa document and arrest warrant.  However, I have  been  able
             to make up my own mind about them.   They  did  not  help  the
             Appellant.  ...

         ...

         125. Under the statutory weighting factors,  it  lies  against  him
             that he is not fluent in English and is not supporting himself
             economically.  He has had a precarious status at best for  the
             last  decade.   The   statutory   factors   all   favour   the
             respondent's refusal decision.

         126. Considering these matters as a whole, it is strongly  arguable
             that he meets the Article 3 threshold and it may also  be  the
             case  that  the  Article  8   weighing   exercise   makes   it
             disproportionate to remove at the present time.  I  take  note
             that he just possibly is within the scope  of  Paposhvili  for
             medical reasons but that may not be so forever and  perhaps  a
             reversible state of depression should not be counted as such a
             factor."

29. The judge has not undertaken an appropriate balancing exercise and  has
    failed to  reach  a  conclusion  on  whether  or  not  it  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference in the family life of the appellant,  his
    wife and their child if he were removed to Gaza. The judge had  already
    concluded that it would breach his Article 3 rights to remove  him.  It
    is often difficult when a decision has  already  been  reached  on  one
    aspect of an appeal that has the result that the  appellant  cannot  be
    removed (for a period of time) to  consider  separately  what,  in  the
    judge's mind, seems to have become a hypothetical  situation.  However,
    that is what the judge was required to do. The Article  8  claim  is  a
    separate  claim  to  the  Article  3  claim  and  the  appellant  could
    potentially succeed under both.

30. These failings amount to material errors of law. I set  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision aside in  respect  of  the  Article  8  issue  only
    pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act  2007  ('TCEA').  The  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision on humanitarian protection is dismissed.

31. I considered whether or not I could re-make a decision on the Article 8
    appeal myself. The appellant, his wife and his child have no status  in
    the UK. For an Article 8 claim to succeed the threshold  test  requires
    that they risk suffering a flagrant denial of the right under Article 8
    such as would completely deny and nullify the right in the  destination
    country - see EM (Lebanon) v SSHD UKHL 2008:

         "38. The question to be determined in this  appeal  is  accordingly
             this: whether, on the  particular  facts  of  this  case,  the
             removal of the appellant and AF to Lebanon will so  flagrantly
             violate her, his and their article 8 rights as  to  completely
             deny or nullify those rights there. This is, as Ms Carss-Frisk
             QC for the Secretary of State emphasised, a very hard test  to
             satisfy, never found to be satisfied in respect of any of  the
             qualified  Convention  rights  in  any   reported   Strasbourg
             decision."

32. I have not had any submissions on this issue.  Further  there  has  not
    been sufficient fact finding by the First-tier Tribunal for me  to  re-
    make the Article 8 decision.

33. I considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings.
    I am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact finding that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

34. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at
    the First-tier Tribunal  at Taylor House before any judge   other  than
    Judge Freer pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of  the  TCEA.  A
    new hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

Notice of Decision

The  appellant's  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  is
allowed on the Article 8 issue  only.  The  appeal  against  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision on humanitarian protection is dismissed.  There  was  no
appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision on asylum.  Therefore  the
respondent's decision on  the  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  claims
stand.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

