
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09559/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2020                  |On 01 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born in 1982. He appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    dated  13  September  2019  refusing  his   claim   for   international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on  28
    January 2020, dismissed the appeal. The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Upper Tribunal has taken a provisional view  that  the  matters  of
    error  of  law/setting  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  can
    appropriately be disposed of  without  a  hearing.  Neither  party  has
    objected to that proposed form of disposal. Upon review of the  papers,
    I find that the Upper Tribunal can fairly determine the appeal  without
    a hearing.

 3. By submissions dated 7 September  2020,  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    stated that she does not oppose the appeal. In particular, she  accepts
    that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision  falls
    to be set aside by misunderstanding and /or  overlooking  part  of  the
    evidence adduced by the appellant. The appellant's witness (Mr  S)  had
    provided two witness statements. In the  first,  Mr  S  refers  to  the
    appellant telling him about problems the appellant had  encountered  in
    Iraq. The judge at [61], however, had found it 'very unlikely that  the
    appellant would not have told his friend about  [his  problems]  before
    his visit in 2017...I do  not  find  the  evidence  of  [Mr  S]  to  be
    reliable...' It  would  appear  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  have
    considered the first statement of Mr  S  since  his  findings  directly
    contradict the evidence contained in that statement. if the  judge  has
    considered the first statement but found its contents  unreliable  then
    he has failed to give any reasons for so finding. Accordingly,  I  find
    that the Tribunal's rejection of Mr S's evidence cannot stand. I  agree
    with both parties that the decision must be set aside for legal  error.
    Since  the  error  concerns  the  judge's  overall  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence in the appeal, there will  need
    to be a  fresh  consideration  of  that  evidence  and  a  fact-finding
    exercise de novo. That exercise is better conducted in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to which this appeal is returned.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 28 January  2020
    is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The  appeal  is
    returned to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  Bell;  1.5  hours;
    Glasgow; first available date; Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter)  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision at or following a hearing de novo.


                                                                      Signed
Date 18 November 2020

         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
