
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/09919/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 November 2020                |On 16 November 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     SO

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr D Ball of counsel, instructed by  Duncan  Lewis  &
Co

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who claims to be a citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity,
    with date of birth given as 1.1.92, has appealed with permission to the
    Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Gibbs) promulgated 5.2.20, dismissing on all grounds his appeal against
    the decisions of the Secretary of State, dated 2.4.19 and  25.9.19,  to
    deport him from the UK and  to  refuse  his  claims  for  international
    protection and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant had claimed that he was at  risk  on  return  to  revenge
    killing in a feud arising out of his illicit relationship with a  young
    woman. He also claimed to have been identified to  the  authorities  as
    being involved in distributing PJAK literature, resulting in the  issue
    of a warrant for his arrest. More recently, he claims to have denounced
    Islam and begun studying  Christianity,  so  that  he  is  at  risk  of
    punishment by death on return to Iran.

 3. Referring to his answers in interview, his Kurdish Sorani language  and
    inability  to  speak  Farsi,  and  the  absence  of  Iranian   identity
    documentation, the respondent refuted his claim of Iranian nationality,
    stating in the 2016 refusal decision, "It is instead believed that  you
    are a  national  of  Iraq  based  on  your  language  used."  This  was
    considered in the previous  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  promulgated
    8.5.17 (Judge Meah), where he was found to have failed  to  demonstrate
    that he was a national of Iran and not Iraq. This judicial finding  was
    relied on the most recent refusal decision of  25.9.19,  together  with
    language analysis from May 2019 in which his linguistic background  was
    assessed with  a  high  degree  of  certainty  to  be  Iraq,  with  the
    respondent concluding, "it is not accepted that  you  are  national  of
    Iran.  Rather,  you  are  believed  to  be  a  national  of  Iraq."  In
    consideration of the issues addressed below, I am  satisfied  that  the
    respondent's position was a positive assertion that  the  appellant  is
    Iraqi rather than merely not accepting that he is Iranian, or that  his
    true nationality is uncertain. Mr Tan confirmed  at  the  hearing  that
    this remains the respondent's position.

 4. In summary, the grounds of application for permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal are as follows:

      i. That in considering the  appellant's  nationality,  the  First-tier
         Tribunal misapplied the burden of  proof  in  disputed  nationality
         cases;

     ii. That in considering the appellant's claim to be  a  Christian,  the
         First-tier Tribunal erred at [44] of the  decision  in  finding  an
         inconsistency  between  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  and   the
         consultant psychiatric report;

    iii. That in considering the psychiatric report, the First-tier Tribunal
         erred in rejecting the consultant's assessment that  the  appellant
         presented a high risk of suicide because  the  respondent  did  not
         consider he presented such a risk;

     iv. That  in  considering  the  deportation  decision,  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  took  into  account  irrelevant  factors  and  failed  to
         consider sections 117B and 117C of the 2002 Act,  as  amended,  and
         paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 5.3.20, with the judge stating that there was  nothing
    in the grounds and, in respect of the first ground, that it was for the
    appellant to establish that it was reasonably likely that he  was  from
    Iran. However, when the application was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission on  10.5.20,  considering
    the grounds to have identified arguable  points  of  challenge  to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. On 7.7.20 the Upper Tribunal issued directions proposing that the error
    of law issue be determined in a remote hearing, providing  for  written
    submissions of objections. In response and by  letters  dated  14.7.20,
    the appellant's and the respondent's representatives and consented to a
    remote hearing.

 7. In summary, the respondent's Rule 24 response, dated 4.8.20,  made  the
    following points in relation to each of the four grounds of appeal:

      i. It is accepted that the burden of proof was  on  the  appellant  to
         establish to the lower standard of proof his claim to be an Iranian
         national, and that the burden of proof was  on  the  respondent  to
         establish on the balance of probabilities that the appellant is  in
         fact an Iraqi national. However, it is  submitted  that  the  judge
         applied the correct burden and standard of proof;

     ii. It is accepted that in considering the appellant's claim  to  be  a
         Christian convert, the two  pieces  of  evidence  at  [44]  of  the
         decision, his oral  evidence  and  the  report  of  the  consultant
         psychiatrist are not necessarily incompatible, as the appellant may
         have attended church in more than one of the institutions in  which
         he has been detained in the UK. However, it is submitted  that  the
         error is not material as it depends on the success of ground 1  and
         the claim to be an Iranian national, and, secondly, the judge  gave
         other reasons for rejecting the claim to be a Christian. It is also
         pointed out that  no  Dorodian  witness  attended  the  hearing  to
         support the claim to Christian conversion;

    iii. The concerns as to the reliability of the  psychiatric  report  set
         out by the judge  between  [26]  and  [34]  of  the  decision  were
         reasonable and open to the judge. In particular,  the  judge  noted
         that the suicide attempt whilst at Morton Hall IRC, reported by the
         appellant to the consultant, did not appear in his medical records.

     iv. It is  accepted  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  whether  the
         appellant met either of the exceptions  in  s117C  or  whether  the
         public interest in deportation was outweighed  by  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above those in the two exceptions.  However,
         it is  submitted  that  the  appellant's  appeal  was  advanced  on
         protection grounds and he did not articulate any human rights claim
         other than in a vague reference to private life and  the  assertion
         that there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
         in Iran.

 8. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  For the  reasons  set  out
    below, I am satisfied that the only ground of any merit is in  relation
    to the nationality claim.

The Nationality Claim

 9. I note that there has been no challenge to the judge's  refusal  of  an
    adjournment request so that the respondent could  carry  out  enquiries
    with the Iranian embassy, the judge considering that the appellant  had
    been given ample time to adduce evidence, including that of  an  expert
    on the issue of nationality, but failed to do so.

10. The judge was entitled to apply Devaseelan (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -
    Extra-territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKAIT 00702 and  take  as  a
    starting point the findings of the previous Tribunal decision  in  2017
    that the appellant failed to establish to the lower standard  of  proof
    that he was Iranian as claimed. It  is  not  open  to  the  appellant's
    representatives  to  now   challenge   the   earlier   and   previously
    unchallenged decision. In any event, Judge Gibbs accepted  at  [39]  of
    the decision that  facts  occurring  since  the  initial  decision  are
    relevant in considering whether to depart from that decision.

11. For example, at [39] of the decision the judge noted that the  language
    report had to be taken into account, and [40]  of  the  decision,  took
    into account the Iraqi authorities' failure to confirm the  appellant's
    nationality. The reference in the  GCID  at  page  251  of  the  bundle
    states, "Findings were that  he  was  Iranian  in  line  with  previous
    findings of 24/04/19, we should look  at  whether  a  referral  to  the
    Iranians would be possible."  In  relation  to  this  point  the  judge
    stated, "I do not know what information was  placed  before  the  Iraqi
    authorities and I also find that the appellant has only  just  revealed
    that the respondent has been proceeding on the basis of a name which is
    not in fact his real name." According to the record of proceedings,  at
    the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing the appellant  stated  that  his
    surname  was  in  fact  Ahmedi.  Whilst   the   grounds   assert   that
    "determinations of nationality by a particular embassy should be  given
    considerable  weight,"  the  judge  was  entitled  to   question   what
    information was provided. I do not accept the submission in the grounds
    that the respondent was under a duty  to  withdraw  that  part  of  the
    refusal decision because of the claimed rejection following  interviews
    at the Iraqi Embassy. The grounds attempt to elevate the GCID  note  to
    the status of a determination by the Iraqi Embassy, which in my view is
    putting it rather too high. The report in the GCID is at  best  second-
    hand and the weight to be attached was entirely for the judge. Contrary
    to the submissions made both in the grounds and orally, the  judge  did
    take this matter into account. It  is  well-established  law  that  the
    weight to be given to any particular factor in an appeal  is  a  matter
    for the judge and will rarely give rise to an error of law,  see  Green
    (Article 8 -new rules) [2013] UKUT 254. In Herrera v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 412, the Court of Appeal said that it is necessary to guard against
    the temptation to characterise as errors of law what are  in  truth  no
    more than disagreements about the  weight  to  be  given  to  different
    factors, particularly if the judge  who  decided  the  appeal  had  the
    advantage of hearing oral evidence.

12. The primary point in the first ground is that the judge failed to apply
    the correct burden and standard of proof where it was the Secretary  of
    State's assertion that the appellant is Iraqi and not  Iranian.  Whilst
    it is for the appellant to establish to the  lower  standard  of  proof
    that he is Iranian, I accept, as  does  the  respondent,  that  as  the
    respondent makes the positive assertion that the appellant is Iraqi, it
    is for the respondent to discharge the burden of proving  this  on  the
    balance of probabilities.

13. I agree that at no point does  the  judge  accurately  distinguish  the
    separate  burdens  and  standards  of  proof   in   relation   to   the
    countervailing assertions of nationality. However, I do not accept  the
    complaint in the grounds that the judge erred in stating the burden and
    standard of proof at  [21]  of  the  decision,  which  dealt  with  the
    adjournment application made on the basis that the respondent should be
    required to make enquiries  of  the  Iranian  embassy.  The  judge  was
    correct to state  there  that  the  burden  of  establishing  that  the
    appellant is Iranian was on the appellant; as it is his assertion  that
    he is Iranian. It is clear, as Mr Ball accepted,  that  the  burden  of
    establishing that he is Iranian as claimed is on the appellant, to  the
    lower standard of proof. In relation  to  that  issue,  the  judge  was
    correct as to both the burden and the standard.  No  error  of  law  is
    disclosed in this regard.

14. However, elsewhere in the decision the judge appears not to distinguish
    the different burdens and standards of proof that may apply in  a  case
    of disputed nationality. At [41] of the decision the judge  stated,  "I
    place weight on the fact that the burden of proof is on  the  appellant
    and he has had several years  to  obtain  evidence  to  discharge  this
    burden." It is not clear whether the judge was there referring  to  the
    appellant assertion to be Iranian  and/or  the  respondent's  assertion
    that he is Iraqi. More clearly, at [43] the  judge  applied  the  lower
    standard of  proof  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    establish that he is a citizen of Iran, but added "and it is reasonably
    likely that he is a citizen of  Iraq.  On  this  basis  his  claim  for
    protection must fail because he does not assert that  he  would  be  at
    risk on return to Iraq." The respondent's position set out in the  Rule
    24 reply rather side-steps the issue. However, Mr Tan accepted that the
    judge appeared there to be applying the lower standard of proof to both
    whether the appellant's claim to be Iranian is made out and whether the
    respondent's assertion that he is Iraqi has been satisfied. As  already
    pointed out, it is clear that the judge did not make any self-direction
    in relation to the burden on the respondent and the standard  of  proof
    of a balance of probabilities in relation to  the  assertion  that  the
    appellant is Iraqi.

15. It follows that if there is any error on the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in respect of the nationality issue, it is in relation to  the
    finding that the appellant is "reasonably likely" to be  a  citizen  of
    Iraq. Having given anxious consideration to the way in which the  judge
    dealt with this issue, I am satisfied that this  finding  was  made  in
    error of law.

16. However, I raised with the two  representatives  whether  the  error  I
    identified was material to the outcome of  the  appeal.  If  the  judge
    erred as to the burden  and  standard  of  proof  in  relation  to  the
    assertion that the appellant is Iraqi, the fact remains that the  judge
    found,  applying  the  correct  burden  and  standard  of  proof,  that
    appellant has failed to establish that he is Iranian, which  undermines
    his factual claim to be at  risk  on  return  to  Iran  for  the  feud,
    political, or religious reasons claimed. On the face of it,  the  judge
    did not err in respect of the burden and standard of proof in  relation
    to that issue. I asked the two representatives to consider  where  that
    leaves the appellant; not having succeeded in establishing that  he  is
    Iranian, but not being liable for deportation to Iraq.

17. Mr Ball relied on the respondent's Home Office guidance to submit  that
    in a case  of  disputed  nationality,  where  the  respondent  makes  a
    positive assertion as to nationality, there is but one test,  with  the
    burden on the respondent to prove  the  assertion  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities. He submitted that otherwise the appellant would be  left
    in limbo.

18. However, the other side of that coin is to ask whether a failure by the
    respondent  to  establish  that  he  is  Iraqi  entirely  relieves  the
    appellant from the burden to establish his claimed Iranian  nationality
    so that it must be assumed that he is Iranian.  Having  heard  detailed
    submissions from both representatives on the point, I was not persuaded
    that Mr Ball's submission is correct. Even if the respondent failed  to
    establish that he is Iraqi, there  must  remain  a  burden  on  him  to
    establish that he is Iranian, as claimed. I am not  satisfied  that  Mr
    Ball's restrictive  interpretation  of  the  Home  Office  guidance  is
    correct; it can surely only reflect the position in law and is not,  in
    my view, a policy decision to which the respondent is bound.

19.  Following  further  submissions   and   discussions   with   the   two
    representatives as to this issue, I reached the conclusion that the way
    in which the judge dealt generally with  the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof in relation to the issue of nationality amounted  to  a  material
    error of law requiring the decision to be set aside and  remade.  Given
    that the judge failed to distinguish that there are  different  burdens
    and standard of proof in relation to issues of claimed  nationality  by
    both the appellant and the respondent, I am satisfied that there can be
    no confidence that the judge's finding that  the  appellant  failed  to
    demonstrate that he was Iranian as claimed was not  influenced  by  the
    error of law as to the correct burden and standard of proof in  finding
    that the appellant is Iraqi. The one finding is so intertwined with the
    other that it is impossible to be satisfied that the finding  that  the
    appellant is Iraqi did  not  unduly  influence  the  finding  that  the
    appellant failed to demonstrate that he is Iranian, as claimed.

20. For the purpose of this appeal, I make no definitive finding  that  the
    two related issues of nationality require two  separate  findings  with
    different burdens and standards of proof. It may be that  provided  the
    judge has properly identified and made a correct self-direction  as  to
    the burden and standard of proof, the issue can be resolved by a single
    finding whether the appellant is Iraqi or Iranian. That will be for the
    Tribunal remaking the decision in the appeal to consider.

The Remaining Grounds of Appeal

21. I have addressed the other grounds of appeal briefly below for the sake
    of completeness but am not  satisfied  that  any  of  them  disclose  a
    material error of law.

22. In relation to ground 2 and the claim of Christian conversion, I agree,
    as does the respondent, that the alleged  inconsistency  identified  by
    the judge at [44] of the decision is not necessarily an  inconsistency,
    as  the  appellant  could  have  attended  church  services  whilst  in
    detention in the UK. He told the judge at the First-tier Tribunal  that
    he first became  involved  with  Christianity  in  September  2019  but
    converted to Christianity on 7.10.19.

23. It follows that the appellant has failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  is
    Iranian, as the judge appears to have found, the claimed risk on return
    as a Christian convert would fall away, rendering the error  complained
    of as not material. However whether or not there was an error of law in
    relation to the nationality issue, the judge  was  entitled  to  accord
    little weight to the claim of Christian conversion in  the  absence  of
    the witness Pastor Asgher. In the premises, any error is immaterial; on
    the basis of the limited evidence put before the Tribunal, the claim of
    Christian conversion was bound to fail.

24. In relation to the third ground and the complaint  as  to  the  judge's
    treatment of the psychiatric evidence, it is clear that the judge  gave
    careful consideration to this evidence, accepting  that  the  appellant
    was suffering from low mood and depressed, but because of  his  ongoing
    detention rather than because of events  in  the  past  or  a  fear  of
    deportation. The judge did not ignore the evidence but  concluded  that
    limited weight could be give to the report. Cogent reasoning  for  this
    conclusion is adequately set out between [26] and [35] of the decision.
    The judge was entitled, for example,  to  point  out  at  [28]  of  the
    decision that the consultant failed to comment on the  absence  of  any
    reference in the medical records  to  an  alleged  suicide  attempt  by
    hanging at Moreton Hall. At  [31]  the  judge  noted  that  whilst  the
    consultant concluded that the appellant was at high  risk  of  suicide,
    the staff treating him in detention did not take such a view. In  fact,
    one month  after  seeing  the  consultant,  on  17.1.20  the  appellant
    reported to staff at Moreton Hall that he did not have any suicidal  or
    self-harming thoughts, even though he was struggling with low moods and
    intrusive thoughts. In this regard, the grounds at [25] assert that the
    judge made a striking error of fact. It is asserted that the  detention
    centre staff did  have  "very  live  concerns"  about  the  appellant's
    suicide risk and for  that  reason  he  was  repeatedly  placed  on  an
    Assessment Care in Detention and Teamwork (ACDT) Plan, on  25.3.19  and
    again in September 2019. However, I am not satisfied that there was  an
    error of face  and  this  overstated  ground  is  little  more  than  a
    disagreement with the findings and the weight given to the evidence.

25. Neither  is  the  judge  to  be  criticised  for  concluding  that  the
    appellant's mental health issues do not  adequately  or  satisfactorily
    explain  the  inconsistencies  in  his  account  which  undermined  the
    credibility of his claim. The issue was one for the judge to assess and
    for which findings cogent reasoning has been provided.

26. In relation to  the  fourth  ground  in  relation  to  the  deportation
    decision, which could have been more carefully addressed, it is correct
    that the judge did not consider either of the two exceptions in section
    117C of the 2002 Act. However, on the facts of this case  it  is  clear
    that the judge concluded that the appellant was a foreign criminal  who
    had caused serious harm. Further, it is not clear from the grounds that
    the appellant could have met  either  exception  or  demonstrated  very
    compelling circumstances, relying  only  on  rather  vaguely  expressed
    private life grounds. The appellant's case was pursued on the basis  of
    the protection claim, not human rights. In the circumstances, no  error
    of law is disclosed and the ground  is  an  attempt  to  undermine  the
    decision by dissection and criticism of its constituent parts.

27. Nevertheless, as set out above, I have found material error of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal requiring it to  be  set  aside
    and remade. When a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  has  been  set
    aside, section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007
    requires either that the case is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    with directions, or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme
    of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007  does  not  assign  the
    function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The  errors  of
    the First-tier Tribunal vitiate all other  findings  of  fact  and  the
    conclusions from those facts  so  that  there  has  not  been  a  valid
    determination of the issues in the appeal.

28. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.



Decision

         The appellant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  to  the
         extent that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

         The remaking of the decision in the appeal is remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal sitting at Harmondsworth, with no findings preserved.



         I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    11 November 2020



Anonymity Direction


I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    11 November 2020

