

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number
PA/09516/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Birmingham
  Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 5th February 2018
    On 12th February 2018




                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                     KMS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms H Masih (Counsel, instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Ms A Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis that he was a Kurd from Iraq
   and on the basis of events he suffered in the country. The application
   was refused and it was not accepted that he was from Iraq or that the
   events complained of took place. The Appellant's appeal was heard by
   Judge Carlin at Sheldon on the 24th of March 2017 and dismissed for the
   reasons given in a decision promulgated on the 30th of March 2017.

2. The Judge accepted that the Appellant was from Iraq but found that there
   were inconsistencies in his evidence and there was a lack of supporting
   evidence that might have been expected. The Judge found that the
   Appellant was not in need of international protection on any basis. The
   Judge referred to AA (Article 15(c) Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)
   briefly in paragraph 30 in the context of his article 8 assessment.

3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that the Judge
   had not considered that the Appellant came, as he had found, from a
   contested area and had not properly considered the guidance in AA with
   regard to the return of the Appellant and relocation to the IKR.
   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lambert as there was arguable
   confusion as the Appellant's home area and whether he could be returned
   there and with regard to his ability to go to the IKR.

4. The Respondent's rule 24 response argued that the Judge had not erred
   and that the decision was open to him for the reasons given. However at
   the hearing it was accepted that the Judge's findings on the Appellant's
   home area were not sufficient and the Judge had not addressed the issues
   of documentation and the Appellant's return and relocation. It was agreed
   that the decision could not be salvaged and it was proposed that the
   appeal be remitted to be heard afresh with no findings preserved.


5. The course of action proposed is entirely appropriate. The guidance in
   AA requires clear findings on the ability of an individual to obtain
   appropriate documentation and to be in a position to be able to support
   themselves of access family assistance. There are no relevant findings
   made in the decision and in the findings that were made there is a large
   element of confusion and inadequacy of reasons. In the circumstances I
   find that the decision of Judge Carlin contained errors of law and cannot
   stand. It will be remitted to be heard by a Judge other than Judge Carlin
   with no findings preserved.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The decision is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham for re-
hearing on all issues with no findings preserved, not to be heard by Judge
Carlin.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

I make no fee award which remains an issue for the First-tier Tribunal
dependent on the outcome of the remitted appeal.

Signed:


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 7th February 2018






