

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/09784/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated On |
|On 17 May 2019                           |04 July 2019                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                                     GM
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr D Sills (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made on 27 November 2018, following  a
hearing of 21 November 2018,  and  which  it  sent  to  the  parties  on  30
November 2018.  The  tribunal  decided  to  dismiss  the  claimant's  appeal
against the Secretary of State's decision  of  27  July  2018,  refusing  to
grant him international protection.

2.    The tribunal granted the claimant anonymity. Nothing  was  said  about
that before me but I  have  decided  to  maintain  the  status  quo  and  to
continue that  grant.  Accordingly,  the  claimant  is  not  named  in  this
decision.

3.    By way of background, the claimant is a national  of  Rwanda  and  was
born on 28 May 1987. He entered the United Kingdom  (UK),  lawfully,  on  16
September 2016. Indeed, prior to coming to the UK he  had  obtained  a  visa
permitting him to study in the UK. He was given  leave  to  enter  until  30
January 2018 and made his claim for international  protection  (it  appears)
on that very day.

4.      Shorn of all of but the essentials, the account relied upon  by  the
claimant  when  seeking  international  protection  may  be  summarised   as
follows: In 2014 the claimant became  involved  with  the  Rwandan  National
Congress (RNC) which is an oppositionist party based in  Rwanda.  He  played
an undercover role in co-ordinating the work of the party along  with  other
individuals two of whom  were  arrested  in  April  of  2014.  The  claimant
himself was arrested on 25  May  2014  and  was  subjected  to  questioning,
threats and  ill  treatment  prior  to  being  released.  In  June  2014  he
travelled to the USA so that he could be trained for a role he had  obtained
with an American NGO. Following his training he returned to  Rwanda  and  in
January 2015  he  travelled  to  Uganda  but  on  return,  was  stopped  and
questioned by the Rwandan police. He was physically ill-treated  and  items,
including his  laptop  computer  were  taken  from  him.  He  was,  however,
released on the following day. Having considered his situation,  he  decided
it would be safer if he were to secure employment in  a  different  area  to
where he had previously been based.  So,  he  went  to  Karongi  in  Rwanda.
However, whilst there,  rumours  spread  that  he  was  actively  recruiting
members for the RNC. That drew the attention  of  the  authorities.  It  was
suggested to him that in those circumstances he might wish to  leave  Rwanda
for his own safety and it was that, he says, which prompted him to obtain  a
Rwandan passport and apply to study in the UK. He says that once in  the  UK
he felt safer and hoped that things would change in Rwanda so that he  could
safely return. However, he  subsequently  received  news  that  one  of  his
former political associates had been killed and,  in  January  of  2018,  he
received an email from an unknown source (but he  believes  it  was  from  a
contact of his) which had attached to it a summons requiring him  to  attend
at a Rwandan police station. He says it  was  that  which  prompted  him  to
claim international protection when he did.

5.    The Secretary of State did not believe that the claimant had  given  a
truthful account of events and  neither,  upon  appeal,  did  the  tribunal.
Indeed, in its written reasons of 27 November  2018,  the  tribunal  devoted
much time to a detailed explanation as to why it was rejecting the  account.
That consideration started with an assessment of the position under  section
8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act  2004.  It
is perhaps worth setting out the salient part of section 8  which  has  been
in its current since 20 October 2014 and so, in that form, for all  relevant
dates material to this appeal. It relevantly provides:



                 8. Claimant's credibility

           1) In determining whether to believe a statement made by  or  on
              behalf of a person who makes  an  asylum  claim  or  a  human
              rights claim, a deciding  authority  will  take  account,  as
              damaging the claimant's  credibility,  of  any  behaviour  to
              which this section applies.


           (2) This section applies to any behaviour by the  claimant  that
           the deciding authority thinks -
                       (a) is designed or likely to conceal information,
                       (b) is designed or likely to mislead, or
                       (c) is designed or likely to obstruct  or  delay  the
                       handling or resolution of a claim or the taking of  a
                       decision in relation to the claimant.


           (3) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section  (2)  the
           following kinds of behaviour shall be  treated  as  designed  or
           likely to conceal information or to mislead-
                       (a) failure without reasonable explanation to produce
                       a passport on request to an immigration officer or to
                       the Secretary of State,
                       (b) the production of a document which is not a valid
                       passport as if it were,
                       (c) the destruction, alteration or disposal, in  each
                       case without reasonable explanation, of a passport,
                       (d) the destruction, alteration or disposal, in  each
                       case without reasonable explanation, of a  ticket  or
                       of a document connected with travel, and
                       (e) failure without reasonable explanation to  answer
                       a question asked by a deciding authority.


           (4) This section also applies to failure by the claimant to take
           advantage of a reasonable opportunity to make an asylum claim or
           human rights claim while in a safe country.


           (5) This section also applies to failure by the claimant to make
           an asylum claim or human rights claim before being  notified  of
           an immigration decision,  unless  the  claim  relies  wholly  on
           matters arising after the notification.


           (6) This section also applies to failure by the claimant to make
           an asylum claim or human  rights  claim  before  being  arrested
           under an immigration provision, unless -
                       (a) he had no  reasonable  opportunity  to  make  the
                       claim before the arrest, or
                       (b) the claimant relies wholly  on  matters  arising
           after the arrest.


5.    Subsection 7 contains  a  number  of  definitions.  The  phrase  "safe
country" is defined as being "a country  to  which  Part  2  of  Schedule  3
applies". As to that, there is a list of countries appearing at paragraph  1
of Part 1 to Schedule 3 and which includes, amongst others, France,  Belgium
and Bulgaria. I mention those because they were mentioned  by  the  tribunal
at paragraph 26 of its written reasons which I  shall  set  out  below.  So,
that is what section 8 says.

6.    In dealing with  section  8  matters  the  tribunal,  in  its  written
reasons, said this:

           "Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration   (Treatment   of
           Claimants, etc) Act 2004, and Paragraph 339L of the  Immigration
           Rules


           23.   The Respondent says that the Appellant's failure to  claim
               asylum  until  the  day  his  student  visa  was  to  expire
               seriously undermines his credibility. Section 8 provides:
                 (1) In determining whether to believe a statement made  by
               or on behalf of a person who makes  an  asylum  claim  or  a
               human rights claim, a deciding authority shall take account,
               as damaging the claimant's credibility, of any behaviour  to
               which this section applies.
               (2) This section applies to any behaviour  by  the  claimant
               that the deciding authority thinks  -  (a)  is  designed  or
               likely to mislead, or (c) is designed or likely to  obstruct
               or delay the handling or resolution  of  the  claim  or  the
               taking of a decision in relation to the claimant.
               (3) Without prejudice to the generality  of  subsection  (2)
               the  following  kinds  of  behaviour  shall  be  treated  as
               designed or likely to conceal information or  to  mislead  -
               (c) the destruction, alteration or disposal,  in  each  case
               without reasonable explanation, of a passport.
               (4) This section also applies to failure by the claimant  to
               take advantage of a reasonable opportunity to make an asylum
               claim or human rights claim while in a safe country.
               (12) this section shall not  prevent  a  deciding  authority
               from determining not to believe a statement of  the  grounds
               of behaviour to which this section does not apply.


           24.   The Appellant accepts that he  did  not  claim  asylum  on
               arrival in the United Kingdom, or at  any  time  thereafter,
               until shortly before his visa was due to run  out,  when  he
               made  an  appointed  [sic]  to  make  an  asylum  claim,  an
               appointment he attended on 30 January 2018.


           25.   In his screening interview he said, 'I came as  a  student
               but also wanted safety because my life was in danger  in  my
               country', suggesting that his experiences in Rwanda  were  a
               reason for coming to  the  United  Kingdom.  In  his  asylum
               interview, when asked why  he  had  not  claimed  asylum  on
               arrival, he said 'I had come to study, on  a  student  visa,
               because I had come as a  student  but  with  no  security  I
               continued the chance  of  studying  I  was  to  continue  my
               studies because I was in a country  which  was  peaceful,  I
               therefore  could  continue  my  studies,   because   I   was
               peaceful.' He said  he  had  never  intended  to  return  to
               Rwanda.  In  his  witness  statement  he  suggests  that  he
               'closely followed what was going on home  [sic]  with  hopes
               the situation would change for me to return.' In evidence he
               said he feared being refused entry if he had claimed at  the
               airport, and thereafter he thought he would be  expelled  if
               he claimed and  he  wanted  to  finish  the  course  he  was
               studying. He said that he was  prompted  to  claim  when  he
               received the email in  January  2018  attaching  the  police
               summons.


           26.   I am therefore satisfied that he entered the  country  and
               failed to claim asylum when he had an opportunity to do  so.
               He thereafter failed to claim when he had ample  opportunity
               to do so. He thereafter failed to claim when  he  had  ample
               opportunity. He travelled, on his own  account,  to  France,
               Belgium and Sofia (Bulgaria).  He  had  the  opportunity  to
               claim on arrival back in the United Kingdom  each  time.  He
               did not do so. I find the explanation he gives for his delay
               in claiming to be wholly unimpressive. If he was in fear, as
               he claims, I find it difficult to accept that he would  wait
               until the 'eleventh hour,' to seek international protection.
               Given the number of opportunities he had to claim, his clear
               education and intelligence, and his ability with the English
               language, I consider his failure  to  claim  earlier  to  be
               significantly damaging to his credibility. That  said,  this
               is only one factor to weight in the balance when considering
               his case. I am mindful, and it is clear, that this does  not
               in itself justify refusal of a claim".


7.    Then, having said what it had wanted  to  say  about  section  8,  the
tribunal set out a number of matters which it thought  weighed  against  the
claimant with respect to  its  credibility  assessment.  It  did  so  in  an
extensive passage commencing at paragraph 27  and  concluding  at  paragraph
46. I have not found it necessary to set all of that out  for  the  purposes
of this decision. But I would observe, at this stage, that it would  not  be
inappropriate to describe the  tribunal's  reasoning  as  set  out  in  that
passage as being cogent.

8.     The  issuing  of  the  tribunal's  decision  was  followed  with   an
application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The  grounds  as
drafted were thought to  be  unpersuasive  by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal who refused permission and by a Judge of  the  Upper  Tribunal  who
granted it. It is not necessary for me to say anything more about them.  But
the granting Upper Tribunal Judge took a  point  concerning  the  tribunal's
treatment of section 8 of the 2004 Act and relevantly said this:

           "2. However, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  started  his
           credibility findings with making findings under section 8 of the
           2004 Act. Arguably, that is an error of law since it  will  have
           undoubtedly influenced the Judge in consideration of  his  other
           findings. As a result, it may be that  the  Appellant  has  been
           denied a fair hearing. On this ground only, I grant permission".

9.    So, the grant was limited. Permission having been granted,  albeit  on
limited grounds, the case was listed before the Upper Tribunal  (before  me)
for an oral hearing so that it could be decided  whether  the  tribunal  had
erred in law and, if it had, what should flow from that.  Representation  at
that hearing was as stated above and I am grateful to each representative.

10.   Mr Sills drew my attention to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
SM (Section 8: Judge's Process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116 and the judgment  of
the Supreme Court in JT  (Cameroon)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2008] EWCA Civ 878. He argued that, when  taken  together,  that
decision and that judgment meant it was  impermissible  for  a  tribunal  to
"compartmentalise" its consideration of the section 8  issues  and  that  it
should not, or at least need not, commence its credibility  assessment  with
a consideration of section 8. It should also read in the word  "potentially"
in section 8(1) immediately prior to the word "damaging". The tribunal  here
had fallen foul of all of that and had not considered section  8  points  as
part of a holistic credibility  consideration  but  rather  had  effectively
elevated the status of the section 8 points in a way  which  had  prejudiced
its consideration of the other credibility  aspects.  Further,  it  had  not
actually specified,  in  circumstances  where  it  should  have  done,  what
behaviour it was relying upon as offending section 8 and had  not  explained
how section 8, in its view, applied at all. Mr Diwnycz, whilst not  formally
conceding, struck a conciliatory  note  by  expressing  the  view  that  the
tribunal's approach to section 8 was  "open  to  serious  criticism".  As  I
understand it (though my understanding may  be  wrong)  he  also  seemed  to
suggest (and if this was the suggestion I disagree with it)  that  generally
speaking it would not be open to a tribunal to take an  adverse  credibility
point against a claimant with respect to delay in claiming so  long  as  the
claimant had lawful leave to remain in the UK during the period of any  such
alleged delay.

11.   I agree with Mr Sills that the tribunal did not,  in  terms  and  with
reference to the content of particular sub-sections of  section  8,  specify
the behaviour of the claimant which it thought offended  the  provisions  of
section 8. But it seems to me clear from what it said in the passage I  have
set out above and in particular from the content  of  paragraph  26  of  the
written reasons, that it had in mind what it found to be an  unexplained  or
inadequately explained delay in claiming international protection  from  the
point of the claimant's arrival in the  UK.  So,  although  there  was  some
discussion at the hearing as to whether it might have had  other  section  8
provisions in mind, I have proceeded on the basis that it was  deciding  the
claimant had fallen foul of section 8(4) of the 2004 Act. But I am not  sure
that it was open to the tribunal to do that or, at least,  not  in  the  way
that it did. It seems to me (and no cases on this issue  were  cited  before
me) that section 8(4) primarily contemplates behaviour  on  the  part  of  a
claimant who passes through safe countries, as defined, on his/ her  way  to
the UK and who spurns the opportunity of  seeking  international  protection
in any of those countries. The UK itself does not  appear  in  the  list  of
safe countries I have referred to above. That would be consistent with  what
I think the purpose of section 8(4) is (see above).  I  have  not  found  it
necessary to actually decide whether delay in claiming after arrival in  the
UK is capable of falling within the ambit of section 8(4) but  it  seems  to
me, on the basis of the material and arguments  before  me,  that  there  is
sufficient uncertainty about the point to have required an explanation  from
the tribunal, which it did not give, as to why given the way the  subsection
is expressed the internal delay it was relying upon fell within  its  terms.
Interestingly, though, the tribunal did note that,  after  arriving  in  the
UK, the claimant had travelled to France, Belgium and Bulgaria. It made  the
point about that that he had had "the opportunity to claim on  arrival  back
in the United Kingdom each time" and had not done so. But it may be that  it
would have been open to  the  tribunal  to  have  regarded  the  failure  to
actually claim in those three countries as falling within section  8(4)  but
that is not what it did. I should add that if the tribunal had section  8(5)
in mind instead, once again as explanation as to why it thought  it  applied
was required. If section 8 is relied upon there does need  to  be  certainty
as to which of its provisions are thought to apply as  well  as  why  it  is
thought one or more does even though an explanation as to all of  that  will
not normally need to be detailed.

12.    As  to  holding  the  delay  in  claiming   against   the   claimant,
notwithstanding his existing grant of leave, I see nothing to say that  such
was not permissible. The tribunal, at paragraph  26,  reasoned  out  why  it
thought, in the circumstances of this particular  case,  such  a  delay  was
damaging  to  his  credibility.  Its  conclusion  as  to  that,  of  course,
comprised part of  (indeed  the  nub  of)  its  section  8  assessment.  But
interestingly, it seems to  me  that  irrespective  of  section  8  and  its
existence, it would have been open to the tribunal to have taken  a  general
adverse credibility point stemming from the delay if it had wished to do  so
anyway.

13.   Whilst it seems to me it will not be good practice for a  tribunal  to
commence a credibility assessment with  its  findings  as  to  the  position
under section 8, it does not seem to me that the positioning of such  points
at the outset of a credibility assessment is, of itself, an  error  of  law.
As Mr Sills recognises,  whilst  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  SM  decided  that
section 8 did not require the behaviour to which it applies  to  be  treated
as the starting point of the assessment of credibility, it did not say  that
such was precluded. Further, the Supreme Court in JT, cited above,  did  not
(see paragraph 16) regard the positioning of the section  8  assessment  "as
necessarily fatal". The point that does emerge, though, from  that  decision
and that judgment is that section  8  considerations  are  not  to  have  an
elevated status and should only be a component  of  an  overall  credibility
assessment. I agree with Mr Sills that the tribunal, given the  way  it  has
expressed itself in its written reasons, has at least given  the  appearance
of having compartmentalised its section 8 assessment.   Further  it  appears
to have reached  a  view  as  to  section  8  and  then  looked  at  general
credibility considerations, having already reached a view as  to  section  8
first of all.  It has given the appearance of having then looked at  general
credibility through the lens of its adverse section  8  conclusion.  I  have
decided that in so doing, it has erred in law.  Indeed,  insofar  as  it  is
relevant, it does appear that, to a large  extent,  it  has  made  the  same
mistake which had been made by a tribunal in the case which  ultimately  led
to the Supreme Court's judgment in JT.

14.         It does not necessarily  follow  that,  simply  because  I  have
identified an error of law in the tribunal's  approach,  that  its  decision
has to be set aside. I have asked myself whether it can  be  said  that  the
error I have identified was not  material  and  could  not  therefore,  have
affected the outcome of the appeal, given what I perceive to be the  cogency
of the adverse credibility findings which have been  made  independently  of
section 8. Indeed, it seems to me that if the tribunal had not  referred  to
section 8 at all and had simply based its adverse  credibility  findings  on
what it  perceived  to  be  an  inadequately  explained  delay  in  claiming
(notwithstanding the grant of leave)  alongside  the  various  other  points
which it made, it would have been very difficult to have  faulted  it.   But
Mr Diwnycz did not seek to argue before me that any  error  might  not  have
been material. Further,  I  have  not  found  myself  able  to  dismiss  the
possibility that had the  tribunal  not  undertaken  a  separate  section  8
consideration prior to addressing the  remaining  credibility  concerns  and
had it not found the claimant's credibility to be damaged to  a  significant
extent due to the section 8 considerations, it might (though I am  far  from
saying would) have taken a different view. So, I cannot be  satisfied  that,
had it not made the error it did, it would  nevertheless  have  reached  the
same outcome. That does mean I have to set aside its decision. But I  do  so
with regret bearing in mind the obvious care and depth of thought which  has
gone into the making of the decision by the tribunal.

15.   the next thing to consider is whether I  should  remake  the  decision
myself in the Upper Tribunal  or  whether  I  should  remit.  Since  I  have
concluded that the credibility assessment is  unsafe  it  follows  that  the
tribunal's  findings  are  unsafe.  In  those  circumstances   it   is   not
appropriate for me to preserve any of the findings. So, there will  have  to
be a  complete  rehearing.  Given  that,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  most
appropriate course of action is remittal. That then is what I  have  decided
to do. Since I am remitting I am statutorily obliged to give  directions  to
the tribunal for the remaking of the decision. I set  out  those  directions
now:


Directions for the rehearing

A. The decision of 27  November  2018  has  been  set  aside.  None  of  the
tribunal's findings and conclusions are preserved. In  those  circumstances,
there shall be a complete rehearing  of  the  appeal  before  a  differently
constituted First-tier Tribunal (a  different  Judge).  That  hearing  shall
take place at the Bradford hearing centre with  a  time  estimate  of  three
hours. A  Kinyarwandan  speaking  interpreter  shall  be  provided  for  the
benefit of the claimant.

B. The First-tier Tribunal rehearing the appeal shall consider all  matters,
both fact and law, entirely afresh.

C. These directions may be replaced, supplemented or amended at any time  by
any Salaried Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in the Immigration and  Asylum
Chamber.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside. Further,  the  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
That grant applies to all parties to the proceedings.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall name or otherwise identify the claimant or any  member  of
his family. Failure to comply may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Dated: 2 July 2019

M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
