

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: PA/09316/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport |         Decision & Reasons        |
|On 15 February 2018              |Promulgated                        |
|                                 |On 13 March 2018                   |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     AV
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:      Mr O Manley, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fowell in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen  of
    Albania, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum and
    issue removal directions.


 2. The application under appeal  was  refused  on  19  August  2016.   The
    Appellant exercised her right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is the appeal which came before Judge Fowell on 2  June  2017  and
    was dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The application was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P J M Hollingsworth on 22 September 2017 in the following terms

       It is arguable that the Judge has placed  misconstruction  upon  the
       expert report of Dr Jayawickrama in respect of the risk  of  suicide
       and has arguably misconstrued the significance of  the  cut  to  the
       Appellant's  wrists.  It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  has   made
       insufficient allowance for the Appellant being a vulnerable witness.
       Although the Judge at paragraph 48 of the  decision  refers  to  the
       need to take account of this vulnerability and the difficulty  which
       she may have experienced in recalling events and explaining them. In
       the next paragraph  the  Judge  states  that  the  Judge  found  her
       explanations difficult to follow.


       It is arguable that it is unclear to what extent the Judge has  made
       allowances for the factors referred to at paragraph 48,  in  setting
       out the analysis  of  the  evidence  received  at  the  hearing.  At
       paragraph 51  the  Judge  states  that  the  Judge  appreciated  the
       Appellant may have real difficulties in recalling  for  example  the
       sequence of events but these were serious discrepancies.  The  Judge
       continues by stating that the Judge struggled throughout to get  any
       real understanding as to why the Appellant feared the  family  would
       actually harm her.


       It is arguable that the Judge has failed to set out to a  sufficient
       degree  the  extent  to  which  allowance  has  been  made  for  the
       vulnerability of the Appellant as  a  witness  and  failed  to  take
       account of the extent of the objective evidence, in relation to  the
       matters raised in the permission application, so far as Kanun law is
       concerned. It is arguable that the Judge  has  failed  to  delineate
       with  sufficient  clarity  the   nexus   between   the   Appellant's
       vulnerability and the circumstances of the claim.


       It is arguable that the Judge has not given sufficient weight to the
       references  in  the  report  of  Dr  Jayawickrama  to  the  specific
       references as referred to in the permission application  to  threats
       to kill.


       Whilst the Judge at paragraph 51 of the  decision  has  referred  to
       struggling throughout to gain any real understanding as to  why  the
       Appellant feared the family  would  actually  harm  her  and  quotes
       paragraph 37 of Dr Jayawickrama's report, it is  arguable  that  the
       essence of the matter quoted at paragraph 37 of that  report  raises
       the question of the application of Kanun law, the Appellant's degree
       of understanding of the application of that law and the appreciation
       or otherwise of the Appellant subjectively of the implementation  of
       it. It is arguable that the distinction drawn at paragraph 53 of the
       decision is affected by the  relevant  parts  of  Dr  Jayawickrama's
       report dealing with threats to kill. At paragraph 55 of the decision
       the Judge states that the Judge had to conclude that  the  Appellant
       had altogether misrepresented this threat from  her  family  and  in
       those circumstances the Judge could not regard  her  as  a  credible
       witness.


       It is arguable that the references in Dr  Jayawickrama's  report  to
       threats to kill are material in this context. At paragraph 38 of the
       report Dr Jayawickrama the author states that she described how  the
       family have stated they will kill both of them if they  returned  to
       Albania and describes living in fear and states that  she  does  not
       wish to return to Albania. At paragraph 72 of  the  same  report  Dr
       Jayawickrama states her history states that she was perceived by her
       own family as someone who brought shame to her own family,  disowned
       her and made threats to harm her i.e. kill her. It  is  likely  that
       feelings of loneliness and fear and helplessness have  affected  her
       mental state over this period of time.


       It is arguable that the Judge has set out an insufficient evaluation
       of the basis of Dr Jayawickrama's conclusion with regard to  suicide
       risk. At paragraph 80 of the  decision  the  Judge  states  that  it
       seemed to the Judge in the circumstances at the basis  on  which  Dr
       Jayawickrama formed his view about the risk of suicide was  entirely
       unsound.


       It is arguable that the factors referred  to  in  Dr  Jayawickrama's
       report as identified in the permission application do  not  lead  to
       the conclusion of entire unsoundness  or  that  moderate  depressive
       illness does not form the backcloth to attempted suicide.


 3. By a rule 24 response dated 8 November 2017 the Respondent opposed  the
    appeal arguing that the Judge directed himself  appropriately  and  had
    regard  to  the  presidential  guidance  on  dealing  with   vulnerable
    witnesses and bore the Appellant's vulnerability in mind when  reaching
    his conclusions on credibility. It was also submitted  that  the  Judge
    gave full consideration to the issue of claimed suicide attempts.




Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Appellant is a citizen of Albania born  on  27
    May 1985. The Appellant left Albania in April 2015  and  travelled  via
    Belgium to the United Kingdom arriving clandestinely on 20 April  2015.
    On 7 January 2016 she went to  Ilford  police  station  to  report  her
    partner for domestic violence and was detained as an  illegal  entrant.
    Following her detention she claimed asylum. The basis of her claim  was
    that  she  faced  persecution  in  Albania  from  her  family  as  they
    disapproved of her relationship and also from her partner's family  who
    had previously mistreated her. She said that the state would be  unable
    or unwilling to protect her. The Appellant also claimed  that  she  was
    suffering from depression and had  attempted  to  commit  suicide.  The
    Respondent did not accept that the Appellant's fear was genuine or that
    her account was truthful or that she was currently suffering  from  any
    medical condition.


 5. In dismissing the appeal, the Judge found that the Appellant was not  a
    credible witness (paragraph  55)  and  that  the  Appellant  had  never
    genuinely attempted suicide.





Submissions


 6. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Manley represented the Appellant.  Mr  Manley
    said that there was one critical issue being the first point raised  at
    paragraph 3 of the grounds referring to paragraph 49 of  the  decision.
    The Judge failed to correctly record or understand the evidence  given.
    At paragraph 49 the Judge incorrectly records the Appellant's  evidence
    being that her father said that the wedding would have to take place in
    United Kingdom. Mr Manley said that as soon as this evidence  had  been
    given at the hearing the interpreter  clarified  that  he  had  made  a
    mistake and that the correct translation of  the  Appellant's  evidence
    was that her father had wanted the wedding to take place in Albania and
    not in the United Kingdom.


 7. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Richards  said  that  he  had  read  the
    Presenting Officer's note from the hearing and this note agreed with Mr
    Manley's submission. It was clear  that  the  Judge  had  mistaken  the
    evidence and as this  paragraph  was  the  foundation  of  the  adverse
    credibility finding Mr Richards accepted that the decision was  unsafe.
    Mr Richards helpfully  added  that  there  were  other  errors  in  the
    decision for example the  finding  that  there  was  no  mention  about
    threats to kill which was clearly incorrect.


 8. I said that the appeal would be allowed and as  the  errors  found  and
    accepted related to the credibility of the Appellant's account it would
    be appropriate to remit to the first-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.


Decision


 9. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are detailed and the  grant
    of permission sets out the arguable errors of law very clearly. At  the
    hearing before me it was conceded on behalf of the Respondent that  the
    Judge had fallen into error. The clearest error was that the judge,  at
    paragraph 49 of his decision, misrecorded the evidence  and  based  his
    adverse credibility finding, at least partially,  upon  that  erroneous
    record.  Both  the  Appellant's  representative  and  the  Respondent's
    representative had clear notes of the evidence given at the  first-tier
    Tribunal hearing which conflicted with the Judge's record.


10. It is unnecessary to go into any further detail since this is a  matter
    which will need to be considered by the First-tier  Tribunal  at  a  de
    novo hearing. However, it is perhaps important to  record  that  it  is
    important  for  judges  when  considering  the  Presidential   Guidance
    relating to vulnerable witnesses to not only refer to that guidance  in
    deciding whether a witness is vulnerable  but  where  vulnerability  is
    accepted to also record whether the  order  and  manner  in  which  the
    Appellant gave his  or  her  evidence  were  affected  by  his  or  her
    vulnerability.
  Summary

11. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I allow the Appellant's appeal.


12. The error of law identified  goes  to  the  heart  of  the  credibility
    finding made and in these circumstances I remit the matter to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.







Signed:                                 Date: 9 March 2018


[pic]


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
