
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/09179/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 17 February 2021                  |on 2 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            ABDULGHAFOOR HAIDARI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Dalziel, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of FtT Judge  Debra  H  Clapham,
    promulgated on 10 December 2019.

 2. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Afghanistan,  born  on  3  June  1977.
    Previous proceedings, PA/11882/16, ended with the decision of FtT Judge
    P A Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on 9 October 2017.  The appellant  did
    not establish that he had been  employed  by  the  United  Nations,  or
    threatened by the Taliban.

 3. In the proceedings before Judge Clapham,  it  was  accepted,  based  on
    further evidence, that the appellant had worked for the  UN.   However,
    the allegations of threats were again rejected.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the UT are:

    (1) failure to assess credibility in light  of  objective  evidence  of
    specific targeting of UN employees (numerous sources are cited);

    (2) failure to assess authenticity  of  warning  letters  in  the  same
    light; and

    (3)  assessing  credibility   on   "unsourced   subjective   views   of
    plausibility instead of with reference to  the  up  to  date,  multiple
    sourced and factual objective evidence referred to supra".

 5. In response to directions issued by the UT, the appellant preferred  an
    oral hearing.

 6. I am obliged to both representatives for their clear submissions.

 7. The main points, further  to  the  grounds,  which  I  noted  from  the
    appellant were these:

      i) The starting point for the FtT was its acceptance at [83] that  the
         appellant worked for the UN.  Its assessment should have been  made
         in light of the objective evidence around that fact.  There was  no
         indication in the decision of that evidence being considered in the
         round.

     ii) There was an almost entire absence of reference  to  the  objective
         evidence, not even a standard  recitation  that  it  had  all  been
         considered.  The only specification was at [92],  the  end  of  the
         decision,  a  passage  from  the  respondent   about   "westernised
         behaviour" in returnees, a matter on which the  appellant  had  not
         based his case.

    iii) In his FtT inventory II the appellant provided over  500  pages  of
         evidence, with a key passage index, and in inventory IV  a  further
         40 pages.

     iv) The FtT's approach did not compare well with KB & AH  (credibility-
         structured  approach)  Pakistan  [2017]  UKUT  00491  (IAC),  which
         explained that one of the four key factors in assessing credibility
         was consistency with objective evidence.

      v) the judge did say that she assessed the threatening letters "in the
         round", but she failed to say,  "in  the  round  of  what".   Those
         letters went to the heart of the  claim,  being  connected  to  the
         appellant's work for the UN.

     vi) The FtT's decision should  be  reversed,  failing  which  the  case
         should be remitted to the FtT for fresh hearing, but preserving the
         finding that the appellant worked for the UN.

 8. The submissions for the respondent were:

      i) The agreed starting point was that the appellant worked for the UN,
         but credibility remained for assessment.

     ii) The judge was not bound  to  rehearse  the  details  of  the  large
         bundles of background evidence before her.  The appellant  did  not
         claim to be more than a low-level employee of  the  UN.  Having  no
         significant profile, background evidence alone  did  not  establish
         real risk.

    iii) The crucial question was whether the appellant had been threatened.
          It was open to the judge to conclude that he had  not  been.   She
         gave legally adequate reasons, in which  no  specific  errors  were
         suggested.

     iv) The judge's conclusion did not involve the making of any error on a
         point of law.  Her decision should stand.

      v) If there was any error, the case should be remitted.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. The appellant did not refer directly in the UT  to  any  of  the  large
    volume of "objective" (or background) evidence.  It has not  been  said
    that the FtT judge was asked to make findings  based  on  any  specific
    items, so he can hardly complain about their absence.

11. I have looked at the key passage index, pages 461 -  488  of  inventory
    II.  That is in itself an extensive survey, mainly about the activities
    of the Taliban, and not limited to  cases  such  as  the  present.   It
    includes many passages on risk to returnees who are perceived as having
    become westernised.  I do also note several passages to the effect that
    UN staff members may be targeted by insurgents, which does not  exclude
    lower-level employees, particularly due to the indiscriminate nature of
    attacks; see, for example, the references at pp. 485 - 486.

12. The appellant did not argue that he is entitled to  protection  because
    he had worked for the UN, at a low level, without more.  No doubt  that
    was because the guidance and background evidence  does  not  support  a
    real risk in such an instance.

13. The background evidence does show that some persons in the  appellant's
    category  may  become  targets.   That  set  the  scene  in  which  the
    credibility of his individual claim became crucial.   I  do  not  agree
    that the Judge reached her decision without regard to that  well  known
    context.  It was common ground.  There was no need to set  out  matters
    which were uncontentious.

14. The grounds and submissions for the appellant do not fairly reflect the
    FtT's reasons for dismissing the appeal, which include the following:

      i) At [82],  the  agreed  starting  point  was  the  previous  adverse
         decision, subject to the concession that the appellant  worked  for
         the UN.

     ii)  At [83], no good reason for absence of further documentation  from
         the UN on threats made to and reported by the  appellant,  security
         protocols in place, or the reason he left his employment;  evidence
         that his contract expired, contrary to  his  claim;  unsatisfactory
         explanation that to seek further information would endanger anyone;
         no reason for UN not to provide such information if requested.

    iii) At [84], hard to understand why the  Taliban  would  telephone  the
         appellant in a language he did not understand;  concerns  over  why
         the appellant would "hide" at his home for  two  months,  where  he
         could easily be found; concerns  over  translation  of  threatening
         letter; not credible the appellant would not  ensure  his  employer
         could get in touch with him, or take no further  steps  to  protect
         himself; self-contradiction over whether he had somewhere  else  to
         go.

     iv) At [85], not credible the UN would not have protocols in place over
         security of staff; failure to obtain information on that matter.

      v) At [86], not credible the appellant  would  wait  5  days  to  take
         threatening letter to UN office;  explanation  that  Taliban  might
         have been waiting outside his house rejected, as if so, they  could
         just have entered the house.

     vi) At [87], concerns over translation, adopted from previous decision.

    vii) At [88], not credible that  under  circumstances  as  claimed,  the
         appellant's supervisor "would rush off to a  meeting"  [effectively
         brushing off the appellant's report].

   viii) At [89], absence of evidence from appellant's supervisor.

     ix) At [91 - 92], appellant's acceptance of his employment  as  "by  no
         means high profile"; and "cannot  be  perceived"  as  such  by  the
         Taliban.

15. Some of those  reasons  overlap.   Some  are  obviously  stronger  than
    others.  A  few  of  them  are  not  much  more  than  statements  that
    assertions are "not credible", without specific reasoning;  but  it  is
    plain enough why those assertions were put in that category.

16. The essential challenge in all 3 grounds is lack of  contextualisation.
    The only criticism  of  adequacy  of  reasoning  is  the  rather  vague
    assertion  in  ground   (3)   of   "unsourced   subjective   views   of
    plausibility".  None of the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  is  directly
    attacked.

17. The background evidence did not require a finding  in  the  appellant's
    favour, only because he had worked for the UN; and he did not say  that
    it did.  He has not referred to anything  in  the  background  evidence
    which undermines any  of  the  FtT's  reasons  for  not  accepting  his
    credibility.   The overall theme of those reasons is that the appellant
    was able to show that he worked for the UN, because that was true;  but
    he was unable to establish the alleged threats against him, which ought
    to have been just as easy, because  that  was  an  embellishment.   The
    appellant has not suggested anything wrong with the reasoning  that  if
    true, the claim could have been substantiated through the UN.

18. The appellant has not shown that the FtT erred  by  deciding  the  case
    without regard to the possibility that a low-level employee of  the  UN
    might be threatened  by  the  Taliban.   The  FtT  concluded  that  the
    appellant had not established a real likelihood that such threats  were
    issued.  That conclusion is not shown to have involved  the  making  of
    any error on a point of law.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

20. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      19 February 2021
      UT Judge Macleman

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS
1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:
2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).
3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).
4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).
5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.
6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.
