
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: PA/09643/2019 (V)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard Remotely                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 January 2021                            |                              |
|                                              |On 21 January 2021            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     GH

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Mr J Greer of Counsel, instructed by  Broudie  Jackson  &
Canter Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity  with  date
   of birth given as 1.1.93, has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
   6.12.19 (Judge Bannerman), dismissing on all grounds his  appeal  against
   the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  26.9.19,  to  refuse  his
   claim for international protection made on 25.6.19. The appellant claimed
   a well-founded fear of persecution in Iraq on the basis of his membership
   of a particular social group (PSG) as a victim of Kurdish 'honour'  crime
   arising from an alleged incestuous relationship with his sister or  step-
   sister, A.

2.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  disbelieved  the  appellant's  core   factual
   account, concluding that it was an invention to bolster  a  false  asylum
   claim. The judge also considered that as his  CSID  card  was  left  with
   family members in Iraq, as he came from a non-contested area of Iraq, and
   in light of the finding that he is not at risk  from  any  blood-feud  or
   honour killing, he had the ability to re-document himself and  return  to
   his home. In the premises, the appeal was dismissed.

3. In summary, the grounds of appeal submit  that  the  judge  (1)  provided
   inadequate and faulty reasoning for  reaching  the  conclusion  that  the
   appellant was not a witness of truth, and  (2)  placed  undue  weight  on
   irrelevant considerations, namely, the Tribunal's view of the appellant's
   demeanour.

4. On 18.2.20 the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal on all grounds, considering it  arguable  that  the  judge
   erred in finding that the appellant was  not  a  convincing  witness  and
   appeared to place weight on his demeanour during the hearing. Further, it
   was considered arguable that the judge  erred  in  not  setting  out  her
   reasons for finding the appellant's explanations implausible.

5. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   I  have  also  taken  into
   account  the  appellant's  written   submissions,   dated   7.4.20;   the
   respondent's Rule 24  reply  of  14.5.20;  and  the  appellant's  further
   written submissions, dated 21.5.20.

6. The Upper Tribunal  has  also  received  two  further  bundles  from  the
   appellant, including a further witness statement and other evidence as to
   an attempt to redocument himself.  However,  at  this  stage  I  am  only
   concerned  with  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal   and,
   therefore, am not prepared to admit the subjective material.

7. I first note that the grounds do not challenge the  judge's  findings  on
   documentation and return to Iraq, and in particular  that  the  appellant
   will be able to access his CSID and redocument himself. To  that  extent,
   the further subjective evidence would appear to be immaterial.  Mr  Greer
   accepted that this evidence was not pertinent to the error of  law  issue
   but pointed out that if the credibility  findings  are  flawed  then  the
   basis of the judge's finding that the appellant could  return  home  also
   fall.

8. In relation to the allegation of inadequate reasons, the  respondent  has
   drawn  to  the  attention  of  the  Tribunal  the  guidance   in   Shizad
   (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085, to the effect that
   although there is a legal  duty  to  give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
   conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those
   reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes  sense.
   Even where the requirements to give adequate reasons  are  not  met,  the
   Upper Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the  First-tier
   Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of  law,  the  fact-finding
   process cannot be criticised and the relevant Country Guidance  has  been
   taken into account, "unless the conclusions  the  judge  draws  from  the
   primary data were not reasonably open to  him  or  her."  The  respondent
   submits that the  Tribunal  holistically  engaged  with  the  appellant's
   evidence and provided cogent reasons from [61] onwards of the decision.

9. In response, the appellant points to MK (duty to give  reasons)  Pakistan
   [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC), which held inter alia, "If a Tribunal  finds  oral
   evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document to  be
   worth  no  weight  whatsoever,  it  is  necessary  to  say  so   in   the
   determination and for such findings to be supported by  reasons.  A  bare
   statement that a witness was not believed or that a document was afforded
   no weight is unlikely  to  satisfy  the  requirement  to  give  reasons."
   Reference is made in the written submissions to various statements of the
   judge, namely:

     i. At [64] finding the  appellant's  account  of  his  departure  from
        Kurdistan  implausible  and  that  this  aspect  of  his  case  was
        "strange";

    ii. At [65] making reference to "issues" with the  screening  interview
        without explaining what those issues are and  how  they  undermined
        credibility;

   iii. At [65] rejecting without reason the appellant's account of  having
        woken up in his sister's bedroom as implausible;

    iv. At [66] rejecting the appellant's account  to  have  been  adopted,
        making reference to his position and the "issues" that his evidence
        raised being far from persuasive against the lower standard.

Adequacy of Reasoning

10. Reading the decision as a whole, I am not persuaded  that  the  decision
   is devoid of adequate reasoning and find that it is clear to  the  reader
   why the appeal was dismissed. Whilst the findings are relatively  briefly
   stated, it is clear that the appellant's account stretched credibility to
   the point that he was disbelieved, for which I am satisfied the judge has
   provided cogent reasons. The references relied on  by  the  appellant  to
   "issues" have to be read in context of the decision as a whole, by  which
   it is clear that when referring to issues with  the  screening  interview
   the judge was effectively referencing  those  issues  identified  by  the
   respondent at [5] of the decision and the note of the evidence  at  [28].
   The judge's treatment of the evidence between [27] and [42] explains  the
   other "issues" there were with the evidence. That the  appellant's  claim
   of his sister having had sex with  him  without  his  consent  was  found
   implausible is hardly surprising. The judge's  record  of  the  evidence,
   including that at [35], notes the difficulties the appellant got  himself
   into in explaining this account.

11. This was not a case of a bare  statement  that  the  appellant  was  not
   believed but the judge went on from [61] onwards to give reasons,  having
   explained that she had given very careful consideration  to  all  of  the
   evidence, both written and oral. In the premises, I find no error of  law
   is disclosed by this ground of appeal.



Demeanour

12. In relation to demeanour, the appellant criticises the judge stating  at
   [63], "I have to make it plain that the appellant was  not  a  convincing
   witness, even against the lower standard. I simply did  not  believe  him
   against that standard," and at [64],  "Throughout  his  evidence  he  was
   stumbling and delayed in answering when it suited him to  do  so  and  at
   other times not. This is not the delivery of a man, in  my  opinion  even
   against the lower standard, who is telling the truth." It is argued  that
   the appellant had given evidence of having been subjected  to  incestuous
   sexual assault at the hands of his sister whilst he was intoxicated, and,
   therefore, any stumbling in speech and delay in  answering  questions  on
   such matters might be suggestive  of  shame  or  discomfort  rather  than
   suggestive of deception. It is submitted that the judge made  no  attempt
   to excuse other possible causes of the appellant's discomfort  in  giving
   evidence. However, the submission itself is mere speculation and  it  was
   not incumbent on the judge  to  exclude  all  other  possible  causes  of
   discomfort.

13. In SS the Upper Tribunal stated at  [44]  that  it  was  impossible  and
   perhaps undesirable to ignore altogether the impression  created  by  the
   demeanour of a witness giving evidence "But  to  attach  any  significant
   weight  to  such  impressions  in  assessing  credibility  risks   making
   judgements which at best have no rational  basis  and  at  worst  reflect
   conscious or unconscious biases and prejudices. One of the most important
   qualities expected of a judge is that they will  strive  to  avoid  being
   influenced by personal biases and prejudices  in  their  decision-making.
   That requires eschewing judgements based on the appearance of  a  witness
   or their tone, manner or other aspects of their  behaviour  in  answering
   questions. Rather than attempting to assess whether testimony is truthful
   from the matter in which it is given, the  only  objective  and  reliable
   approach is to focus on the content of  the  testimony  and  to  consider
   whether it is consistent with other evidence (including evidence of  what
   the witness has said on other  occasions)  and  with  known  or  probable
   facts."

14. As the respondent pointed out, SS (Sri Lanka),  R  (On  the  Application
   of) v Secretary of State  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1391,  held  that  "research
   confirms that people do not in fact generally rely on demeanour to detect
   deception but on the fact that liars are more likely to tell stories that
   are illogical, implausible, internally inconsistent,  and  contain  fewer
   details than persons telling the truth." The  respondent  submitted  that
   the Tribunal considered all the evidence and made clear its  reasons  for
   rejecting the appellant's account.

15. I am not  satisfied  that  any  significant  weight  was  given  to  the
   appellant's demeanour, per se. As Mr McVeety submitted,  effectively  the
   judge was pointing out that the appellant was evasive when it suited him.
   What the grounds do not address is that what concerned the judge was  not
   the fact of the appellant "stumbling" or  being  "delayed"  but  that  he
   appeared to do so only when it suited him whilst at other times was  able
   to give his evidence  without  stumbling  or  delaying  his  answers.  An
   example of evasion is given at [34] of the decision. Again, a reading  of
   the judge's note of the evidence from [27] of the decision onwards and  a
   holistic consideration of the decision justifies the judge's reliance  on
   this point.

16. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.




Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       13 January 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       13 January 2021


