
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/09145/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Rolls Building, London           | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9th February 2018                      | On 14th March 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    ms NM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Perry promulgated on 26th April  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 16th March 2017.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Pakistan, who was born on  10th
    March 1987.  She appealed the decision of the Respondent  Secretary  of
    State dated 15th August 2016, refusing her application for asylum.  The
    basis of her claim is that she has  been  disowned  by  her  family  on
    account  of  having  been  involved   in   an   illicit   extra-marital
    relationship with a man by the name of IS, such that if she were to  be
    returned to Pakistan she would be a lone female, who would  be  subject
    to ill-treatment, and who not be able to find internal relocation.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim was  set  out  in  detail  by  Judge  Perry,  who
    observed that the Appellant entered the UK on 14th December  2011  with
    entry clearance as a Tier 4 Student, which was valid until  June  2013.
    In October 2012 she commenced the relationship  with  IS  and  on  14th
    February 2013 he started living with her in a  house  in  London.   The
    Appellant stated that because of the stigma with which her family would
    have viewed the relationship with IS she did not tell her parents  that
    she was cohabiting with him (see paragraph 12).

 4. Sometime in 2013, the Appellant did then return back home  to  Pakistan
    and she told her mother she wanted to marry IS, although  she  did  not
    tell him that she was cohabiting with him, but  she  forbade  her  from
    doing so (paragraph 13).  In the meantime, the  Appellant  was  granted
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student  from  8th  July  2013  until  18th
    February 2015.

 5. The judge observed how the basis of her  present  asylum  claim  arises
    from the fact that in December 2014 an "aunty" visited the  Appellant's
    house in London from Manchester.  She did so unannounced.   She  was  a
    neighbour of the Appellant's back home in Pakistan.  She had apparently
    been asked that she visit the Appellant in London by her mother.  While
    she was visiting somebody else, she took the opportunity to drop in  on
    the Appellant's house.  The Appellant was not there but her  co-tenants
    were there.  In a space of  a  few  minutes  they  told  her  that  the
    Appellant had undergone an abortion after falling pregnant with IS, who
    the co-tenant said the Appellant was married to.   When  the  Appellant
    contacted her mother a week later she states that the mother  told  her
    that as far as she was concerned the Appellant was dead.   She  had  no
    contact with her family from December 2014 onwards.

 6. The Appellant continued to live with IS until 18th January  2016.   The
    relationship then broke down.  The Appellant moved to Birmingham.   The
    final straw between them was when the Appellant asked IS  to  accompany
    her to the Home Office for an interview and, after  initially  agreeing
    to do so, he  then  refused  and  became  violent  towards  her.   (See
    paragraphs 13 to 16).

 7. The judge observed at the outset how  he  had  expert  reports  from  a
    Professor Bluth of the University of Bradford and a psychiatric  report
    from Razia Hussain (paragraph 11).  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    went on to say that a number of aspects of the Appellant's  claim  were
    accepted.  These were that there was a Convention reason, her  identity
    was as stated, her nationality was accepted, the fact that she  had  an
    abortion on 18th April 2013 was accepted, and the medical evidence  was
    accepted.  However, equally importantly, other aspects of her  evidence
    were not accepted (see, paragraph 17).  The judge accepted  the  social
    stigma that would arise from her cohabiting with  a  IS  without  being
    married to him (paragraph 18).

 8. In other respects, however,  the  judge  was  not  persuaded  that  the
    Appellant was telling the truth.  First, the judge  was  not  satisfied
    why the Appellant would routinely repeat the fact that she and IS  were
    married to the wider world at large (including to doctors  who  treated
    her) where no such stigma applied.  Second, if her housemates  were  of
    the conservative mindset that she herself describes (such that she  had
    to lie about her relationship with IS to them) it was not clear why she
    shared with one of her housemates the sensitive matter  of  her  having
    had an abortion.

 9. The judge also observed that,

         "Having accepted she routinely lied to the world at large as  to  a
         relationship not just to those who might ascribe a social stigma to
         the same, having failed to identify why that  was  so  or  why  she
         shared with one of her housemates that she had an abortion,  in  my
         judgment they are factors that damage her credibility".

10. The  judge  also  found  as  plausible  the  Respondent's  reasons  for
    rejecting the Appellant's account.  Three aspects were referred to:-

   i)  First,  that  the  account  of  her  aunty  having  visited  her  was
      implausible given that the aunt had never visited her before.




  ii) Second, that having her aunt done so,  and  being  admitted  into  the
      house by a co-tenant, who had never met the aunty, the co-tenant  then
      shared with the Appellant's aunty (a complete stranger) the fact  that
      the Appellant was married and had an abortion.



 iii) Third, the Appellant's account was that her aunty must have been given
      her address by her parents (as she had not given it to her)  and  that
      her aunty was clever and "visited when she knew the claimant would  be
      out" (paragraph 19).  The judge did not find this to be  credible  for
      two reasons.  First, because,  "the  Appellant  assured  me  that  her
      parents believed her when she had previously reassured them about  the
      nature of her relationship with IS." Secondly, the judge also goes  on
      to say that, "if the co-tenant was as  conservatively  minded  as  the
      Appellant states the co-tenant would have known this would  be  viewed
      by the Appellant's family".  Accordingly, the judge held that  whereas
      it was plausible that the aunty had met  with  the  co-tenants  for  a
      meeting "it is unlikely to have taken place in the way  the  Appellant
      describes" (paragraph 19).

11. The judge thereafter went on to look at further documentary evidence in
    support of the Appellant's assertion that she had been disowned by  her
    family.  This included a court report and two  press  reports  together
    with the original summons, which were provided on the  morning  of  the
    hearing (paragraph 27).  The  judge  in  this  respect  held  that  the
    Appellant had failed to provide a full explanation for the delay in  it
    being provided (paragraph 27).  More serious,  however,  was  the  fact
    that there was an advert placed by her  family  on  4th  February  2016
    disowning their daughter.  The originals had  not  been  supplied  even
    though the reports were twelve months  old.   What  was  curious  about
    these press reports was that they were referring to summons  which  had
    already been issued when the summons were dated 17th February 2017,  as
    long as the year after the press report (paragraph 28).

12. The judge concluded by stating that the Appellant had "not only  failed
    to make an asylum claim at the first  opportunity  but  now  refers  to
    matters to support the application that were known to her at  the  time
    that were not relayed" (paragraph 30).

13. The claims were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

14. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to take into the
    country guidance and the psychiatric  expert  report.   No  weight  was
    placed on the court  summons,  and  the  press  reports.   The  judge's
    approach of credibility was misconceived.

15. On 11th October 2017, the Upper  Tribunal  granted  permission  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that in coming to the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant's account contained inconsistencies, the  Tribunal  erred  in
    failing to have  regard  to  the  expert  evidence  of  the  consultant
    psychiatrist, who had specifically commented on the Appellant's ability
    to accurately recall events.

The Hearing

16. At the hearing before me  on  9th  February  2018,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Mr  J  Gajjar,  of  Counsel  and  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr I Jarvis, a Senior Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.
    Mr Gajjar made the following four submissions before me.

17. First, that the issue before the judge was that concerning  the  expert
    report of Dr Razia Hussain.  The judge had the report (which appears at
    pages 42 to 55 of the bundle) but  failed  to  apply  it.   The  expert
    report was significant insofar as it specifically dealt with the  issue
    of abortion and the ability of the Appellant to recollect events.  Yet,
    the judge overlooks this.  Instead, the  conclusion  that  it  was  not
    credible for the Appellant to have told a flatmate about her  abortion,
    given how conservative her flatmate was, overlooked the fact  confirmed
    in the exit report that the Appellant  was  a  vulnerable  woman.   Her
    partner had forced her into an abortion. The judge's criticism  of  the
    Appellant having routinely repeated the fact that she was married to IS
    to the world at large (including to doctors who  treated  her,  knowing
    that this did not carry a stigma with them, failed  to  factor  in  the
    expert report of Dr Razia Hussain who had referred to her state of mind
    (see page 47 of the report).  The expert had recorded how "NM ended  up
    aborting her child but she says it devastated  her  as  she  found  the
    experience very tormenting" (page 47).  The expert recounts also  that,
    "NM knows, she cannot now go to Pakistan,  where  her  family  is  most
    likely to get her killed to salvage  the  family  honour,  which  is  a
    strange and inhuman scenario in Europe but a part of routine events  in
    Pakistan" (page 49).  It has also confirmed that, "the  traumatic  past
    events  related  to   her   relationship   with   IS   and   subsequent
    pregnancy/abortion has affected her life in  general"  (page  50).   In
    relation to the Appellant's mental  state,  the  expert  observes  that
    "there was also evidence of a certain degree of psychomotor retardation
    (slowness of movements and thoughts)" (see  paragraph  6.1).   None  of
    this, submitted Mr Gajjar, was expressly referred  to,  or  taken  into
    account implicitly, by the judge.

18. Second, the judge had misunderstood the reference to a "court  summons"
    when criticising the Appellant for the fact (at paragraph 28)  that  an
    advert placed by her  family  on  4th  February  2016  disowning  their
    daughter, had wrongly referred to a court  summons  having  been  taken
    out, when the court summons was dated 17th February 2017, which  was  a
    year later.  Mr Gajjar submitted that  the  judge  had  discounted  the
    suggestion that there may have been two court summons.  If one looks at
    question 63 of the interview (at B9) it  is  clear  that  there  was  a
    reference to a possible police report when Q, the Appellant's friend in
    Pakistan, "told me that a report has been filed about me by  my  father
    and brother to the police station".  Mr Gajjar submitted that  this  is
    what the Appellant would have meant in a reference to a court summons.

19. Third, the judge had accepted that there had abuse  of  the  Appellant,
    observing that, "there is no dispute  the  abuse  occurred;  the  issue
    relates to the allegedly inconsistent accounts the Appellant  gives..."
    (at paragraph 26).  The judge states that, "she did not refer to it  in
    her statement lodged on 20th July  2015"  (paragraph  26).   Mr  Gajjar
    submitted that it was irrational to have expected a  reference  to  the
    domestic violence, given that the relationship with IS did not come  to
    an end until 2016.

20. Finally, the judge failed to make findings upon  the  vulnerability  of
    the  Appellant  and  to  follow  the  guidance  given  in   the   Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No.2 (2010), a child  vulnerable  adult  and
    sensitive Appellant guidance.

21. For his part, Mr Jarvis submitted that, as  far  as  the  last  of  the
    points made by Mr Gajjar were concerned, the  directive  in  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010 did not create a different  way
    of treating the evidence.  It was there for anyone to draw  upon.   The
    guidance was simply saying that one must take care  when  dealing  with
    vulnerable witnesses, but did not carve out a new path for viewing  the
    evidence.

22. Second, although beyond paragraph 12 of the determination there was  no
    express reference to the psychiatric report of Dr Razia  Hussain,  much
    of what was in that report was simply what the  Appellant  had  herself
    said to the expert.  The fact was that the Appellant had  no  cognitive
    malfunction at all.

23. Third, as far as the media  report  is  concerned,  which  was  heavily
    criticised by the judge at  paragraph  28  because  it  referred  to  a
    summons already issued on 17th February 2017, when  the  report  itself
    was in the newspaper only on 4th February 2016, all that Mr Gajjar  had
    been able to say was that there may have been  an  earlier  prosecution
    report, which the Appellant had confused the summons  with.   This  was
    highly speculative.

24. Fourth, any confusion that there may have been in this  respect,  could
    not be explained away by the fact that the Appellant's family  appeared
    to have put a newspaper advert on 4th  February  2016  disowning  their
    daughter, and referring to a summons, which had not been  issued  until
    17th February 2017, a year later.

25. In reply, Mr Gajjar  made  two  further  points.   First,  as  far  the
    Appellant's abortion  was  concerned,  there  was  a  detailed  witness
    statement from her (at paragraphs 15 to 16) where she had explained why
    she had disclosed her pregnancy.  The co-tenant showed concern  to  her
    when she was feeling vulnerable and downcast.   The  judge  was  wrong,
    accordingly, to state (at paragraph 18 of the determination) that  this
    lacked credibility.  Second, as far as the  medical  report  itself  is
    concerned the judge did not say that the report  contains  an  itemised
    list of considered aspects relevant to the Appellant.   Had  the  judge
    applied the vulnerable adult  and  sensitive  Appellant  guidance  this
    would indeed have been the case.  Accordingly, the judge's approach had
    effected  the  eventual  findings  made  on  the  credibility  of   the
    Appellant.  I was asked to allow the appeal.

No Error of Law

26. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (Section 12(1) of TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.   I  find  that  the  decision  of  Judge  Perry  is   clear,
    comprehensive, and entirely well-reasoned.  My reasons are as  follows.



27. First, there is the  issue  of  the  psychiatric  report  of  Dr  Razia
    Hussain.  The judge refers  to  it  at  the  outset  at  paragraph  11,
    together with the report of Professor Bluth.  However, it  is  not  the
    case that the judge thereafter ignores it.  Nowhere is this clear  than
    in  the  central  paragraph  of  the  determination,  where  the  judge
    disbelieves the account of the  Appellant,  namely,  at  paragraph  18,
    where the judge states that it was not plausible for the  Appellant  to
    have routinely repeated that she and IS  were  married  "to  the  wider
    world at large (including to the doctors who treated her) where no such
    stigma applied", thereby suggesting that the  Appellant  had  routinely
    chosen to lie about her relationship  with  IS.   In  fact,  the  judge
    accepts that, "there is no dispute the abuse occurred; the issue raises
    the allegedly inconsistent accounts the Appellant gives ..." (paragraph
    26).

28. The acceptance of the abuse,  especially  in  circumstances  where  the
    Appellant's account had been found to be orally inconsistent  in  large
    parts, is no less due to the judge bearing aware of the entirety of the
    evidence before him.  In any event, since the existence  of  the  abuse
    was accepted, such that it was not in contention that the Appellant had
    suffered emotional and physical traumas, the failure  to  set  out  the
    contents of the medical report at length was not material.

29. Second, if one looks at the psychiatric  report  of  Dr  Razia  Hussain
    itself, however, large parts of it are premised  upon  the  Appellant's
    self-reporting of what she went through.  For  example,  it  is  stated
    that, "NM says she had managed to keep her relationship secret from her
    parents in Pakistan...".  It is stated that when she was asked to abort
    the baby by IS that, "NM ended up aborting her baby  but  she  says  it
    devastated her...".  It points out how, "NM  says  IS  began  to  abuse
    her..." (see page 47).  In the same way the abuse  that  she  allegedly
    suffered from IS is referred to on the basis that, "she says  was  very
    painful".  It is also stated that, "NM says she was left with  numerous
    scars and bruising on her body".  In the same way there is a  reference
    to how, "NM says it is known  worldwide  that  the  Honour  Killing  in
    Pakistan  is  quite  common..."  (page  48).   The  point  about  these
    references to what the Appellant states, is that  it  would  have  been
    just as open to the judge, for example, to  consider  and  examine  the
    numerous scars and bruising that is referred to, rather than take  this
    at face value on the suggestion of the Appellant.   Under  the  section
    "Presenting Complaints" the judge describes how, "NM reported, she  has
    been living a very difficult life in the last few  years..."  (at  page
    50).

30. Third, and in any event, insofar as the report refers  to  any  medical
    prognosis, it is clear that this prognosis is not one which  points  to
    any particular disability on the part of  the  Appellant.   Indeed  the
    report observes that, "NM has not reported to  be  suffering  from  any
    physical illness and has physical  symptoms,  including  headaches  and
    poor physical health in general, is secondary to an  anxious  state  of
    mind.  There is also no previous  history  of  any  mental  illness  or
    disorder" (see Section 4 at  page  51).   Indeed,  whereas  the  report
    refers to the Appellant's speech being low in volume, slow  in  weight,
    coherent and rational, it also  states  that,  however,  there  was  no
    evidence of any formal disorder or any other psychotic symptoms at this
    stage.  Though her recent memory is intact, but  she  has  memory  loss
    symptoms, particularly she has short term memory loss.   It  ends  with
    the observation that, "she was, however,  well  orientated  with  time,
    place and person.  Her attention span was normal but her  concentration
    was poor at times..." (see Section 6.2 at pages 51 to 52).   The  point
    is that, even if one accepts that the Appellant has "short term  memory
    loss" the Appellant had been given enough time to  resolve  the  issues
    that were before the Tribunal.  As the judge recalled, "the  burden  is
    on the Appellant to demonstrate the reliability of those documents" but
    that this "has not been done and  I  place  no  weight  on  them"  when
    referring to the fact that there had been a summons produced which  was
    a year after the reference to it was made in the family advert  of  4th
    February 2016.  At best this could only have shown a contrivance on the
    part of the Appellant.  The original summons itself was  only  produced
    on the day of the hearing (see paragraph 27).   Any  mental  disability
    that is presently complained of, was amply compensated for by the judge
    in the final conclusion that, "I find that she not only failed to  make
    an asylum claim at the first opportunity but now refers to  matters  to
    support that application that were known to her at the  time  but  were
    not relayed" (paragraph 30).

31. Fourth, the same applies in relation to the crystalizing event  of  the
    "aunty" attending upon the Appellant at her home. The judge deals  with
    this in great  detail  (at  paragraph  19).   It  was  the  Appellant's
    evidence (and there can be no confusion about this) that when  she  had
    returned back to Pakistan in 2013, and told her mother that she was  in
    a relationship with IS, upon  being  told  in  no  uncertain  terms  to
    terminate that relationship, she agreed to do so, and she was  believed
    in that.  If this was the case, it did not make  sense,  as  the  judge
    found, for the family to go to the trouble of asking a  neighbour  next
    door to pay the Appellant a  visit.  As  the  judge  observed,  "in  my
    judgment there was a suggestion her family and aunty were suspicious of
    the Appellant's relationship.  Yet the Appellant assured  me  that  her
    parents believed her when she had previously reassured them  about  the
    nature of her relationship with IS" (paragraph 19).  If  this  was  the
    case, it did not make sense for the aunty to deliberately  turn  up  at
    the appellant's residence at a time  when  she  thought  the  Appellant
    would not be there.

32. In fact, if one looks at the Appellant's  rather  long  and  convoluted
    witness statement (of 34 paragraphs) her account in this respect  makes
    very little sense indeed.  In her witness statements, she states  that,
    "my parents were concerned about me and they knew that aunty also lived
    in the United Kingdom.  They requested her to visit me  in  London  and
    find out about me.  That is why that aunty came unannounced to find out
    about my whereabouts" (paragraph 17).  If  the  family  were  concerned
    about the appellant, and the family was tasked with going to  find  out
    about the Appellant, it does not make sense to say that this is why the
    aunty came unannounced.

33. For all these reasons, the determination of Judge Perry  was  one  that
    was entirely open to him.



Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.  The
determination shall stand.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th March 2018

