
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09195/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 March 2019                      |On 20th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     A F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Burnett (the judge), promulgated on 26 November 2018, in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human  rights  claims.   The  Appellant's
    human rights claim was based on the fact that he had been a  victim  of
    modern slavery whilst in Albania and that there was a  risk  of  either
    retribution or further enslavement upon return to that country.   Prior
    to the hearing before the judge the Competent Authority  had  concluded
    that the Appellant had in fact been a victim of modern slavery.



The judge's decision

 2. Quite rightly, the judge did not seek to go behind the conclusion  that
    the Appellant had been a  victim  of  modern  slavery.   He  noted  the
    Appellant's vulnerability, in light of the fact that the Appellant  was
    born in 2000 and by the time of the hearing had only just  reached  his
    majority.  The Appellant was not called to give oral  evidence  at  the
    hearing.

 3. In [48] the judge sets out aspects of the  evidence  and  reaches  some
    findings on these, although the wording is not as  clear  as  it  might
    otherwise have been.  Of more significance is [50] in which  the  judge
    notes the importance of a family unit in  cases  involving  trafficking
    (and presumably modern slavery as well).  The  judges  notes  that  the
    Appellant had in fact been assisted by family members in the past: when
    his difficulties with the gang which had used him came to light, family
    members had taken him in and  then  arranged  for  his  departure  from
    Albania.

 4. The judge notes the Appellant's own evidence  that  the  gang  had  not
    caused any problems during the period after he stopped working for them
    and whilst he remained in Albania for the next month or so.  The  judge
    was of the view that this was an indication that there was  no  ongoing
    risk to the Appellant, particularly if, as the judge found would be the
    case, family members could assist him on return.

 5. The judge cites passages from the country guidance case of  TD  and  AD
    (trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC), noting  that  each  case
    would be fact-specific.  At [54]  he  considers  a  number  of  factors
    relevant to the Appellant's circumstances.  Having done  so,  he  finds
    that there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  either  the  Appellant's
    family or the Appellant himself had been actively  sought  out  by  the
    gang.  The judge goes on to  emphasise  once  again  the  fact  of  the
    familial support on return and notes that the Appellant would now be an
    adult.

 6. At [57] the judge brings the various proceeding elements  together  and
    concludes that the Appellant would not be at risk  from  the  gang  and
    that in any event there would be a sufficiency of protection  and/or  a
    viable internal relocation option.

 7. Finally, the judge concludes that there was no prospect of an Article 8
    claim succeeding.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. The grounds of appeal make  a  number  of  criticisms  of  the  judge's
    approach to the Appellant's case.  In summary, they assert that:

      i) the judge failed to have proper regard to the Appellant's young age
         at all material times;

     ii) the judge failed to consider the issue of  family  support  in  its
         proper context and given what had happened to the Appellant in  the
         past;

    iii) the judge's conclusions on sufficiency of protection  and  internal
         relocation were inadequately reasoned;

     iv) the judge failed to assess whether the Appellant would be  at  risk
         of being re-trafficked either by the original gang or another;

      v)  the  judge  failed  to  give  proper  consideration  to  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies on
    28 December 2018.  Whilst the grant of leave was  not  restricted,  the
    only comment made by Judge Davies relates to the fact that there was  a
    three-month delay between the  hearing  and  the  promulgation  of  the
    judge's decision.



The hearing before me

10. At the outset Mr Collins helpfully confirmed that he was not relying on
    the judge's delay in getting the decision written and promulgated as  a
    freestanding ground of challenge.  This point had  been  noted  in  the
    grounds simply as an indication that the judge had failed to adequately
    consider the Appellant's appeal generally.

11. Mr Collins relied on his grounds of appeal, emphasising  the  following
    matters.  In respect of the Appellant's age, there had simply not  been
    enough consideration of this important factor.  There was a  real  lack
    of reasoning in [57] as regards sufficiency of protection and  internal
    relocation.  The consideration  of  the  potential  family  support  on
    return was inadequate given that the family had failed to  protect  the
    Appellant from becoming a victim of modern slavery in the first  place.
    Mr Collins referred  me  to  three  particular  answers  given  by  the
    Appellant in his substantive interview and paragraph 4  of  his  appeal
    witness statement in respect of his view that the gang had  connections
    with the Albanian police.

12. For his part, Mr Bramble relied on the Respondent's rule  24  document.
    He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  had  the  Appellant's   age   and
    vulnerability well in mind  when  considering  the  evidence,  and  the
    findings and conclusions set out in [50] and [54] were sustainable.  In
    respect of the risk from the gang, I was referred  to  [48],  [50]  and
    [54].  Again, the findings and conclusions were all open to the  judge.
    In relation  to  the  potential  risk  of  re-trafficking,  Mr  Bramble
    referred me to the extract from TD and AD cited at paragraph 12 of  the
    grounds of appeal.  In contrast to the situation of the  Appellants  in
    the country guidance decision, this Appellant  would  not  be  socially
    isolated as he had family support.

13. By way of reply, Mr Collins reiterated his submission that family  help
    would not be enough to show sufficient protection to the Appellant  and
    there had not been enough analysis in respect of internal relocation.

14. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.




Decision on error of law

15. After a careful and holistic consideration of the judge's decision, the
    grounds of challenge  and  the  submissions  made  at  the  hearing,  I
    conclude that there are no material errors of law  in  this  case.   My
    reasons for this conclusion are as follows.

16. In my view Mr Collins was right to have accepted that there was  not  a
    causal nexus between the delay in  writing  up  the  decision  and  any
    alleged errors of law.  To this  extent  I  take  no  account  of  this
    particular factor

17. In my view the judge was well-aware  of  the  Appellant's  age  at  all
    relevant times.  This fact was never in dispute between the parties and
    the judge makes reference to his young age at  various  points  in  the
    decision (see [32] and [43] in particular).  In addition, the judge was
    aware of the Appellant's vulnerability, both  as  a  victim  of  modern
    slavery and  on  account  of  his  age,  and  applied  the  appropriate
    Presidential Guidance (see [44]).  Despite the fact that the  Appellant
    was not called to give evidence at the hearing, it is clear  enough  to
    me that the judge had in mind these relevant factors and  there  is  no
    sound basis on which it can be said that the judge had  simply  allowed
    these matters to have escaped his mind when assessing the evidence as a
    whole.

18. I turn to the issue of the Appellant's family.  There is  no  challenge
    to the judge's finding that the  Appellant  did  in  fact  have  family
    members in Albania and that they  did  in  fact  assist  him  when  his
    problems with the gang came to light.  Those findings were clearly open
    to the judge.

19. Mr Collins has emphasised the fact that the family members were  unable
    to prevent the Appellant becoming involved with the gang in  the  first
    place.  As a simple matter of fact, that must be correct. However,  the
    point must be seen in its proper context.  Nobody knew about him  being
    drawn in by the gang: he did not disclose it (and no criticism  of  him
    is meant by this in any way) and indeed,  he  tried  to  cover  it  up.
    Therefore, it was not a case in which the family had been aware and had
    tried to take steps, but to no avail.  Rather, this was a case in which
    the family members were entirely ignorant of  the  problems  until  the
    Appellant himself stopped "working" for the gang in question.  Once the
    family members did become aware they took action, housed the  Appellant
    until arrangements could be made for him to leave the country, and then
    actually facilitated the departure.  This context supports the  judge's
    view that the family had provided in the past, and could provide  again
    in the future, effective assistance to the Appellant.

20. This context must also be seen in combination with the judge's finding,
    which has not been challenged and which in any event was open  to  him,
    that during the period between the Appellant getting away from the gang
    and his departure from Albania (a period  of  approximately  a  month),
    there was no adverse attention from the gang. In my view, the judge was
    entitled to regard this as being an indication that there  was  not  an
    ongoing adverse interest in the Appellant.

21. In addition, the judge was entitled to find that there was no  reliable
    evidence to suggest that there had been subsequent adverse interest  in
    the Appellant following his departure from Albania.  On this particular
    point, although Mr Collins has referred me to certain  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's  evidence  in  the  substantive   interview   and   witness
    statement, the grounds did not contain any specific challenge  alleging
    a failure to take relevant evidence into account on the judge's part.

22. Having looked at this specific evidence for myself, and again with  all
    due respect to the Appellant given his age at the material time, a fair
    reading of it suggests that he was expressing a  subjective  belief  on
    possible links between the gang and the police rather than a view based
    on direct knowledge or other sources of reliable evidence.  There is no
    error by the judge in respect of this specific matter.

23. Turning to the country guidance decision in TD and AD, this was  before
    the judge and he considered it, albeit in the context  that  of  course
    the Appellant was not a female victim of trafficking. In my  view,  the
    judge was entitled to have regard to it in respect of its relevance  to
    the wider issue of state protection and/or internal relocation.

24. What of course was all-important were the particular  circumstances  of
    the Appellant if returned to Albania.  In  my  view,  relevant  factors
    have been properly taken into account by the  judge  in  [54].   It  is
    adequately clear that important matters  such  as  his  age,  his  past
    experiences, the  familial  assistance,  and  the  absence  of  ongoing
    threats, were all properly considered.  In  turn,  these  fed  into  an
    assessment of future risk,  sufficiency  of  protection,  and  possible
    internal relocation.

25. On the issue of future risk, the judge was entitled, having  regard  to
    his findings and conclusions, to say that there was no  risk  from  the
    particular gang that had enslaved the Appellant in the past.

26. It is right that he has not specifically addressed the issue of whether
    another gang  would  seek  to  re-enslave  or  traffic  the  Appellant.
    However, the paragraph of TD and AD cited in Mr Collins' grounds refers
    to possible victims being  "socially  isolated".   On  his  sustainable
    findings of fact and conclusions, particularly those contained in [50],
    [54] and [56], the judge was entitled to conclude (in  effect,  if  not
    stated expressly) that the Appellant would not fall into this category,
    albeit he would clearly still be a young man who had been a  victim  of
    modern slavery in the past.  The failure to address the issue  of  risk
    from other unspecified gangs does not therefore render the decision  as
    a whole unsound.

27. In terms of sufficiency of protection, whilst the reference  to  it  in
    [57] is brief, it must be seen in the context  of  the  decision  as  a
    whole, including the findings on family assistance, the fact  that  the
    problems had not been reported to  the  police  in  the  past  and  the
    relevant passages from TD and AD cited by the judge at [51]  and  [52].
    If the decision is read in this way, the judge's overall conclusion  is
    adequate.

28. In respect of internal relocation,  again  the  reference  in  [57]  is
    brief, but again must be seen in context.  As I have already said,  the
    judge took a number of relevant characteristics into account  in  [54].
    In light of these, it was open to the judge to conclude that relocation
    would, if necessary, be a reasonable option.   It  must  of  course  be
    borne in mind that the judge has, as a primary conclusion, stated  that
    there would not be any risk in the home area  in  any  event  and  thus
    internal relocation did not, strictly speaking, arise at all.

29. Finally, in respect of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules, Mr Collins
    accepted that this provision requires an assessment of circumstances as
    at the date of the claim.  In this case, the Appellant made  his  human
    rights claim on 20 January 2016.  At that time he was only 15 years old
    and therefore was unable to rely on this provision of the Rules, as  it
    applies only to those aged between 18  and  25  years  old.   No  other
    specific challenge in relation to  Article  8  has  been  made  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

30. In light of the above, the decision of the judge shall stand.

31. In respect of the favourable decision of the Competent  Authority,  any
    grant of leave is a matter for the Respondent.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 17 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

