
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09523/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 January 2018                            |On 26 April 2018              |
|Prepared 24 January 2018                      |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [S A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Masih, counsel instructed by Rodman Pearce
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Iraq, date of birth  [  ]  2000,  appealed
    against the decision of the Respondent, dated  14  September  2017,  to
    refuse an asylum/humanitarian protection claim.  At the  material  time
    the Appellant was a minor and was granted leave  to  remain  until  his
    17th birthday.

2.   The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson (the  Judge)  who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  14
    November 2017, dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  Permission to  appeal
    that decision was granted on 8 December  2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ransley on the basis that the Judge had made arguable  errors  of
    law.  Before me Mr Jarvis fairly and correctly identified matters which
    bear on the Judge's assessment of credibility  and  the  issue  of  the
    reasonableness of return.

3.   In respect of the Judge's  decision  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    credibility were as Mr Jarvis identified, significantly  undermined  by
    the findings the Judge had made in paragraph  14  of  the  decision  in
    concluding, bearing in mind at the material time the  Appellant  was  a
    child, that the Appellant had not given a proper explanation as to  his
    claim  to  have  essentially  lost  contact  with  his   family:    His
    explanation was  not  believed  and  that  was  certainly  key  to  the
    assessment of credibility of the Appellant and the risks  he  faced  on
    return.  The Judge did not accept that the Appellant  would  return  to
    Iraq as a lone child, as submitted, and did not  accept  the  Appellant
    did not have the means to contact his family in Iraq (D19).

4.   However the position has changed vis a vis the home area of Jalawla  in
    Diyala province in Iraq.  Mr Jarvis properly  accepted  that  at  least
    some consideration needed to be given as  to  whether  the  previously-
    contested area was still, at the time the matter was before the  Judge,
    an area which was safe to return to, and whether the Appellant could do
    so with the necessary documentation.  In the  circumstances,  Ms  Masih
    indicated her general challenge to the decision  and  reliance  on  the
    grounds of appeal but did not develop those arguments in the  light  of
    the remarks made by Mr Jarvis.

 5. For my part, I was satisfied that, bearing in mind the Appellant was  a
    child at the material time he was interviewed and at the material  time
    in  his  appeal,  and  therefore  the  Judge  needed  to  address  with
    considerable  circumspection  the   criticisms   of   the   Appellant's
    credibility.  I find that the grounds disclose material errors of  law.
    The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

    DECISION.

 6. The appeal is allowed to the extent the matter will be  remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal (IAC)

DIRECTIONS:

    (1)  The matter will be considered in the First-tier Tribunal.


    (2)  Time estimate two hours.


    (3)  Interpreter in Kurdish Sorani required.


      4) Any further documentation and material to be provided to be subject
         to directions by the First-tier Tribunal.


      5) Return to Birmingham  Hearing  Centre  but  not  before  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Robertson.


    (6)  No findings of fact to stand unless agreed between the parties.



Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




PS The delayed promulgation of this is due to  the  case  file  being  miss-
    located.

