

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/09229/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|on 30 April 2018                       |on 3 May 2018                       |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     AY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Frantzis, Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.


Introduction

   1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers to
      his international protection claim.


   2. This is an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan,  against
      a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 24 October 2017  in  which
      it dismissed his asylum appeal.


   3. In a decision  dated  18  December  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Chamberlain granted permission to appeal observing it to  be  arguable
      that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to adjourn the  hearing,
      given  the  appellant's  claimed  difficulties  in  understanding  the
      interpreter, as corroborated by the record of proceedings.

Hearing

   4. The matter came before me as a case-management review ('CMR') hearing.
        Although  originally  listed  as  an  error  of  law  hearing,   the
      appellant's solicitors had been unable to obtain  legal  aid  as  they
      were unable to provide confirmation that the appellant  receives  NASS
      support.  Ms Petterson agreed that it would be straightforward for the
      respondent to provide such confirmation.


   5. As the appellant was represented, and I had considered the  background
      to the appeal in depth prior to the hearing being converted to a  CMR,
      I enquired with Ms Petterson as to whether she was able to agree  that
      there was an error of law in failing to adjourn the hearing, given the
      appellant's  articulated  difficulties  with  the   interpreter.    Ms
      Petterson conceded that the approach to the  appellant's  difficulties
      demonstrated an error of law and agreed that the decision needs to  be
      remade in its entirety.  She was entirely correct to  do  so  for  the
      reasons I set out below.


   6. Both representatives agreed that the error of law  is  such  that  the
      decision needs to be remade completely.  I had regard to para  7.2  of
      the relevant Senior President's Practice Statement and the nature  and
      extent of the factual findings required in remaking the decision,  and
      I decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

Error of law discussion

   7. I can state my reasons briefly given Ms Peterson's concession.   I  am
      satisfied that the appellant, who was unrepresented before the  First-
      tier Tribunal, clearly raised important concerns regarding his ability
      to understand the interpreter.  This is recorded within  the  decision
      itself and in the record of proceedings.  It is very difficult to see,
      how the First-tier Tribunal  was  able  to  satisfy  itself  that  the
      appellant "did not have any particular difficulties  in  understanding
      the interpreter", when the appellant consistently  indicated  that  he
      did and in circumstances wherein the First-tier Tribunal regarded  his
      oral evidence to be vague, lacking in detail and evasive (see [27]  to
      [29]).   As  observed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   when   granting
      permission to appeal, the appellant has been able to demonstrate  that
      a straightforward aspect of his evidence was recorded erroneously (the
      number of sisters he has), in  support  of  his  claim  regarding  the
      interpreter.    Given  the  absence  of  any  evidence  impugning  the
      appellant's claim that he did not understand the dialect used  by  the
      interpreter, fairness demanded that the First-tier Tribunal  at  least
      enquired further into the dialect being used by the interpreter.    As
      Ms Petterson conceded there was procedural unfairness in not doing  so
      or alternatively in not adjourning the hearing.

Decision

   8. The First-tier Tribunal  decision  contains  an  error  of  law.   Its
      decision cannot stand and is set aside.

       9. The appeal shall be  remade  by  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Atkinson, in the First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

   1) The respondent shall as soon as possible but before 12noon  on  4  May
      2018 provide the appellant's solicitors with written confirmation that
      he is entitled to NASS support.




   2) The appellant's solicitors shall as soon as possible, but in any event
      within  28  days  take  instructions  from  the  appellant  using   an
      interpreter, with a view to  providing  written  confirmation  to  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  regarding  the  specific  type  of   interpreter
      requested.




   3) The hearing shall be relisted before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
      first available date with an Afghan  Pashto  interpreter  (unless  the
      appellant's solicitors specifically indicate an  alternative  type  of
      interpreter is required).


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
30 April 2018
