
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber   Appeal Number: PA/09090/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |         Decision and Reasons       |
|On 30 August 2018               |Promulgated                         |
|                                |On 1 November 2018                  |
|                                |                                    |
|                                |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     RH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

 This decision is amended as indicated under Rule 42 of the Tribunal (Upper
                            Tribunal) Rules 2008

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, instructed by Kesar & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal that is Mr H as the  appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The respondent was granted permission  to  appeal  a  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sethi, which allowed the appellant's  appeal,
    on human rights grounds, against a decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 9th August 2016.   That decision refused his protection and human
    rights claim pursuant to a Deportation Order made under  Section  32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007 signed on 8th August 2016.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK in 2001 aged 13  years  accompanied  by
    his 2 older brothers (also minors).  The appellant, together  with  his
    brothers, was refused asylum on 19 February 2001 but on 22 August  2001
    he was granted exceptional leave to  remain  valid  until  8  September
    2005. On 3 May 2007 the  appellant  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

 4. The Metropolitan police cautioned the appellant in January 2006 for the
    possession of cannabis a class C controlled drug  and  on  22  November
    2016 he was convicted at  Stratford  Magistrates  Court  of  possessing
    cannabis and a non-recordable non-motoring offence  for  which  he  was
    fined on each count. On 2 March 2012 he was convicted  at  the  Central
    Criminal Court for "conspiracy to steal" for an offence committed on 19
    September 2011 and for which he was sentenced on 1  June  2012  to  two
    years imprisonment. He was served  with  a  liability  for  deportation
    letter in 2012 and he made representations  outlining  his  asylum  and
    human rights claim. A  further  liability  to  deportation  letter  was
    issued on 8 July 2013 which included  details  of  section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. The respondent noted the appellant's protection claim  that  he  had  a
    fear of persecution should he return to Ethiopia. It was noted  he  had
    been consistent in his claim to be an Ethiopian  national  and  it  was
    noted he was able to speak the languages of both Ethiopia and  Eritrea,
    but the respondent rejected the appellant's claim his parents had  been
    taken by government officials and killed.  It  was  asserted  that  the
    account he had given contained discrepancies and the  account  was  not
    credible even though he may not have had much recollection  of  certain
    details given his relatively young age and leaving Ethiopia.

 6. The respondent placed a reliance on the country guidance  given  in  ST
    (ethnic Eritreans - nationality -  return)  Ethiopian  CG  [2011]  UKUT
    00252. It was noted that he had  initially  claimed  that  he  and  his
    parents had been born in Ethiopian and were Ethiopian nationals  albeit
    his grandparents were of Eritreans origin.  It was not accepted that he
    was Eritrean as there was no evidence to suggest he had  been  deprived
    Ethiopian nationality or was denied the right to  return  to  Ethiopia.
    There was no evidence  to  suggest  he  had  approached  the  Ethiopian
    authorities in London.

 7. In relation to a human rights claim noted he had two  brothers  in  the
    United Kingdom, but his deportation was conducive to  the  public  good
    and in the public interest because he had been sentenced to a period of
    imprisonment of at least 12 months but less  than  four  years.   Under
    paragraphs 398 and 399A of the immigration rules  he  did  not  have  a
    family life with a partner or child and it was not accepted that he was
    socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom. He had  not
    provided evidence of any positive contribution to the  society  of  the
    United Kingdom. It  was  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  a  very
    significant obstacles to his  return  to  Ethiopian  to  where  it  was
    proposed he would be deported.   It  was  acknowledged  that  he  spoke
    Amharic as well as English and Tigrinian. It was possible that  he  had
    family remaining in Ethiopia. These conclusions were based, inter-alia,
    on a screening interview dated 30 October 2013 and an asylum  interview
    record dated 15 October 2014.   Nor  were  there  any  very  compelling
    circumstances.

 8. A supplementary reasons letter was provided whereupon  the  photographs
    and  the  passport  of  his  claimed  Eritrean  grandmother,  MBW,  was
    considered. It was not accepted  that  he  was  of  Eritrean  heritage.
    Specifically, it was noted at no point had he previously claimed to  be
    Eritrean.

 9. The appellant's claim was that he was forced to  flee  Ethiopia  during
    the war between Ethiopia and Eritrea when his parents  were  taken  and
    although he was born in Ethiopian he was of Eritrean ethnicity.  He had
    now lived the majority of his life in the UK and he was fully  socially
    and culturally integrated within British society. Since his release  he
    had completely disassociated himself from  his  old  contacts  and  was
    intent on leading a law-abiding life  and  was  not  a  danger  to  the
    public; he had been in prison and learned his lesson.  He had undergone
    numerous courses whilst in prison to build a better  life  on  release.
    He was now the father of a two-month-old daughter and he  maintained  a
    relationship with the mother and daughter although they were not living
    together.

10. The judge made the following findings

         (i)      it  was  clear  from  the  length  of  sentence  that  the
         appellant was deemed to have committed a particularly serious crime
         but before the appellant could be excluded from the  protection  of
         the Geneva Convention he must be shown  to  be  a  "danger  to  the
         community"  and  that  the  presumption  that  he  was  such,   was
         rebuttable. The judge noted that the OASys risk  assessment  report
         completed on 12 November 2013, which assessed the appellant to be a
         low risk of reoffending  with  no  presentation  of  likelihood  of
         serious harm to others. The  report  noted  he  had  at  all  times
         complied  with  the  requirements   of   contact   and   with   his
         licence/order, and did  not  identify  any  triggers  to  offending
         behaviour that required attention.

         The judge considered the oral evidence of his family  and  that  he
         had continued to lead a law-abiding life. There was  no  suggestion
         that the appellant had reoffended since the  offence  committed  in
         September 2011 and that  he  had  disassociated  himself  from  his
         previous contacts. The judge noted  the  respondent  relied  on  no
         further evidence to support the certification under section 72. The
         judge considered the whole of the appellant's offending history and
         concluded that the appellant no longer posed a risk of serious harm
         to others and a low risk of reoffending and that he did not present
         the person who was a danger to the community.

         (ii)     the judge found the appellant had  given  a  credible  and
         reliable account as to his ethnicity. At its time  of  arrival,  he
         was a minor age 13 years. The evidence advanced in relation to  the
         initial asylum claim was that provided to  his  solicitors  by  his
         elder brother also a minor, not the appellant himself.

         (iii)    the judge took into account the background information  on
         Ethiopian and  Eritrea  and,  noted  that  at  the  time  when  the
         appellant was born in 1988, was the time  when  Eritrea  was  still
         part of Ethiopian and not a  separate  country  and  it  became  so
         following the referendum on Eritrea independence in May 1993.

         (iv)     the judge took into account from the time of  his  arrival
         in the UK the appellant's claim was  advanced  on  the  basis  that
         although born in Ethiopian he was a person  of  Eritrean  heritage.
         The judge referred to RB A 14 which  showed  that  when  questioned
         about his ethnicity it was recorded that the  appellant  stated  he
         was 'Ethiopian but of Eritrean descent'.  The judge recorded

             'in the respondent's first decision  dated  19  February  2001
             [RBB 1] it was noted at paragraph 6 that the appellant had not
             submitted any evidence in support of his application, nor "any
             proof that your parents were  arrested  solely  in  connection
             with their ethnicity other than that your father was called  a
             ''traitor"  which  could  be  attributed  to   a   number   of
             reasons...". The same decision at paragraph 8  with  reference
             to the referendum on Eritrea independence proceeds to conclude
             that it was not accepted that he "would  be  denied  entry  to
             that country because of your parents' inability to  take  part
             in the voting". There  is  nothing  within  that  decision  to
             indicate that the  respondent  had  rejected  the  appellant's
             claimed ethnicity advanced at the time of his arrival  in  the
             UK now some 17 years ago. I find that  I  have  no  reason  to
             believe that as a child aged 12 that the appellant would  have
             had any reason to  advance  a  dishonest  account  as  to  his
             ethnicity'. [50]

             I also take into account that at the time of  his  arrival  in
             the UK the appellant spoke  both  Amharic  and  to  Tigrynian,
             which I find to be consistent with his claim to have been born
             in  Ethiopian  to  parents  of  Eritreans   ethnicity...   The
             appellant was placed in the foster care of  Mrs  E,  a  person
             Eritreans origin who in her oral evidence, stated that at  the
             time of his placement she had been informed by social services
             that he was on Eritrea child from Ethiopia' [51].

         (v)      the judge was satisfied the appellant had been  consistent
         from a young age as to his ethnicity. She considered his replies at
         his asylum  interview  of  15  October  2014  specifically  at  AIR
         question 8, question 13 and  question  22  and  that  his  evidence
         supported by that of  his  brother  and  foster  mother.   She  was
         satisfied the appellant was person of Eritreans ethnicity  born  in
         Ethiopia.

         (vi)     his account, provided on entry to the United  Kingdom,  of
         his parents being taken by the Ethiopian authorities owing to their
         ethnicity  was  "entirely  plausible  and   consistent   with   the
         background country information as to the treatment of Ethiopians of
         Eritreans origin. The judge cited 2.2.1  -  2.2.3  of  the  Country
         Information Country Guidance Ethiopia: people of mixed Eritrea  and
         Ethiopian nationality, which  identified  that  during  the  border
         conflict 1998-2000 the  government  expelled  approximately  70,000
         Ethiopians of Eritreans origin.  Further Ethiopians were subject to
         arrest harassment and discrimination.  The appellant's  account  in
         2001  was  that  at  that  time  his  parents  were  taken  by  the
         authorities his family home was  searched  and  that  although  his
         parents' house was ransacked, and his parents arrested he  and  his
         brothers were  left  behind.  The  report  concluded  a  number  of
         Ethiopians of Eritrean  origin  was  stripped  of  their  Ethiopian
         nationality and expelled. [54] Further in the CIG report  at  6.1.4
         "there are even some cases of children being  expelled  alone'  and
         "numerous reports of children being left behind in Ethiopia in many
         cases without any relative to look after them  when  a  parent  was
         expelled" [my italics].

         The judge found that at all  times  the  core  of  the  appellant's
         account as to  his  ethnicity  was  consistent,  the  fact  of  his
         parents' arrests and his claim that he has not  seen  or  heard  of
         them since the events of May 2000 had at all times been consistent,
         and, plausible in the light of the background country  information.
         There was no inconsistency in the  account  that  he  believed  his
         parents to be killed. The judge applied AM (Afghanistan) [2017] CWC
         1122.

         (vii)    the judge was assisted by the evidence of the  appellant's
         older brother who was able to provide a fuller and coherent account
         as to the reasons and circumstances in which he  and  his  siblings
         were forced to leave Ethiopian and that his account was  consistent
         with the account provided in 2001. He  had  not  been  asked  about
         whether he had family in Eritrea. The parents may have been born in
         Eritrea but there was only one country and that was Ethiopian  when
         they were born. His father had been born in Asmara and he  and  his
         brothers had been born in Addis Ababa. The judge accepted there was
         a mistake in  the  screening  interview  record  in  2001  and  the
         explanation of the appellant that he had not noticed this error  in
         2001, in the context of the minority of the appellant. [57]

         (viii)   the judge applied paragraphs 74 and 76 and 129 of ST. This
         confirmed that the credibility of the appellant was likely to  have
         a bearing on the assessment of how one views the  present  attitude
         of the Ethiopian authorities and that

             'a person who is regarded by the Ethiopian authorities  as  an
             ethnic Eritreans and  he  left  Ethiopian  during  or  in  the
             immediate aftermath of the border  war  between  Ethiopia  and
             Eritrea  is  likely  to  face   very   significant   practical
             difficulties in establishing  nationality  and  the  attendant
             right to return stemming from the reluctance of the  Ethiopian
             authorities to countenance the return of someone at guards  as
             a foreigner'. [129 (4)].

             'A person who left Ethiopian as  described  in  (4)  above  is
             unlikely to be able to reacquire Ethiopian  nationality  as  a
             matter of right by means of the 2003 nationality  proclamation
             and would be likely first to have to live in Ethiopian  for  a
             significant period of time (probably four years)'.

         (ix)     the judge found that the account of events provided by the
         appellant at the time of his arrival when  considered  against  the
         background country information and ST caused her  to  be  satisfied
         that there was a "real likelihood  that  as  persons  of  Eritreans
         origin living in Ethiopian his parents, when arrested in  2000,  at
         their personal identity documents confiscated consistent with  that
         described in ST  'such as to make it very likely that this was done
         with  a  view  to  impeding  his  ability  to  establish  Ethiopian
         nationality in the future'''.

         (x)      as the appellant was a minor at the time he  was  unlikely
         to have had possession of any personal identity document and he and
         his  brothers  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  personal
         documentation.  Although  the  appellant  had  not  approached  the
         Ethiopian Embassy she was satisfied having regard to his age at the
         time of his arrival and because "as an ethnic Eritrean and who left
         Ethiopian during or in the immediate aftermath of  the  border  war
         between Ethiopia and Eritrea" that he is the person "is  likely  to
         face  very  significant  practical  difficulties  in   establishing
         nationality and the attendant right to return".

         (xi)     As such the judge specifically found that there  would  be
         no utility in the appellant approaching the  Ethiopian  embassy  on
         the factual matrix arising in his case

         (xii)    the judge found that the  appellant  had  established  his
         claim  protection  grounds  and  went  on  to  find  that  in   the
         alternative that is claim fell  to  succeed  under  paragraph  399A
         because he was socially and culturally integrated and  there  would
         be very significant obstacles to his integration into  the  country
         to which it was proposed he would be deported.  The  appellant  had
         undertaken all of his mandatory secondary school education  in  the
         British school system, had been employed in the UK, had grown up in
         British society, had two older siblings in  the  UK  and  a  foster
         family and now had a British child albeit only two months old.  The
         judge accepted the term of imprisonment served by the appellant did
         weaken the level of integration, but  this  was  a  custody  of  14
         months as against 17 years of lawful residents. In addition,  there
         would be significant obstacles to his integration in the country to
         which to be returned. He had little knowledge of life there but had
         demonstrated that the requirements of paragraph 399 A were met. The
         judge specifically addressed the question of the public interest in
         section 117C. The judge specifically noted they the deportation  of
         foreign criminals was in the public interest and the  more  serious
         the offence committed  by  the  criminal  the  greater  the  public
         interest in his deportation, but she was satisfied  paragraph  399A
         was mirrored in section 117C (4).

    The appeal was allowed on all grounds.

Application for Permission to Appeal


11. The application for permission contended

         (i)      the judge  had  failed  to  give  clear  reasons  why  the
         appellant should not approach the Ethiopian embassy  in  line  with
         ST. The onus was on the appellant  proves  that  he  would  not  be
         accepted for  return  and  this  had  not  been  addressed  in  the
         determination.  The  appellant  and  his  siblings  registered   as
         Ethiopian national is confirmed by the CID records and at  no  time
         prior to the current proceedings has this issue been raised

         (ii)     the judge had failed to deal with  the  major  credibility
         issue in the supplementary letter regarding the claimed  photograph
         from Eritrea conflicted with the written evidence the appellant had
         never been to Eritrea

         (iii)    the judge failed to give clear reasons of 57 as to  how  a
         qualified interpreter could mix up  Addis  Ababa  and  Asmara  when
         taken with the other issues.

    The application for permission to appeal was initially refused by first-
    tier Tribunal Judge Saffer who  determined  that  the  application  was
    nothing more than  a  disagreement  with  the  findings  of  judge  was
    entitled to make.

    Those  grounds  were  renewed  to  the  upper  tribunal  and   it   was
    additionally submitted that the appellant's claim under 399 A  that  if
    the appellant was found to be an Ethiopian national there would be  the
    no very significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  Ethiopia  and  his
    integration in the UK should be based on more than merely the length of
    residence.  The judge had not given clear reasons why  the  appellant's
    circumstances outweighed the public interest.

    Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ  Kebede  who  found  there  was
    arguable merit in the assertion that the judge erred in accepting  that
    the appellant without relevant supporting evidence would be  unable  to
    return to Ethiopian or would be subjected to ill-treatment on return.

The Hearing


12. At the hearing, Miss Isherwood submitted that the appellant had  always
    stated that he was an Ethiopian national. The judge  had  not  followed
    ST.

13. The appellant's legal representative stated that the account  had  been
    accepted overall and it was the mistake of the representative  who  had
    referred to the photograph  as  being  taken  in  Eritrea  rather  than
    Ethiopia.  That did no however undermine the overall  findings  in  the
    decision.

Conclusions


14. The judge set out in full the objections the Secretary of State made to
    the claim of the appellant.  She also set out in full the documentation
    considered the appellant's and his witnesses' oral evidence.  The judge
    applied the relevant  country  background  material  and  the  relevant
    country guidance.  I am not persuaded that she failed to direct herself
    appropriately or give proper and adequate reasoning.  The  question  of
    the photograph does not appear to have been put to the appellant and Mr
    Smith  submitted  that   it   was   apparently   a   mistake   by   the
    representatives.  Overall and in the context of the judge's findings  I
    am  not  persuaded  that  this  undermines  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

15. It was clearly not the case, as submitted in the hearing before me  and
    in the grounds for permission that the first  time  the  appellant  had
    raised the issue of being of Eritrean nationality was  in  his  appeal.
    The judge, as can be seen from the findings above,  carefully  assessed
    the evidence and noted the interview given by the appellant when he was
    13, his brothers' evidence and his foster mother's evidence.  They  all
    referred to the Eritrean heritage.   In  the  original  asylum  refusal
    letter dated 2001, and which was not previously subjected  to  judicial
    scrutiny, the Secretary of State  accepted  that  the  appellant  spoke
    Amharic and Tigrynian, and  that  social  services  placed  him  as  an
    Eritrean child. That was significant in the assessment of the ethnicity
    of the appellant.  Further as the judge legitimately found, she did not
    accept 'that as a child aged 12 that the appellant would have  had  any
    reason to advance a dishonest account as to his ethnicity'.

16. The judge also identified the observations with regard to  the  parents
    made in the reasons for refusal letter of 2001 and which I  have  cited
    more fully above.  That letter did not  appear  to  discount  that  the
    appellants' parents were Eritrean.

17. The judge mapped the account of the appellant, which she  found  to  be
    consistent, against the country background material.  She  was  obliged
    to consider the evidence in the round which  she  did.   She  was  also
    obliged to apply AM (Afghanistan) to the evidence of the appellant  and
    his brothers bearing in mind that they all entered  the  UK  when  they
    were only minors.  The standard of proof in protection claims is to the
    lower standard of proof and this applies to the assessment of key facts
    in relation to an appellant's claim.

18. When assessing the credibility of  the  asylum  claim  the  judge  also
    rightly  assessed  the  evidence  in  the  round.    Some  of  the  key
    documentation was that dating from when the appellant entered the UK in
    2001 when he was a minor of  13  years  old.  For  cogent  reasons  she
    accepted  the  account.   The  judge  addressed  the   issue   of   the
    inconsistency of the error of the place of the parents'  birth  and  it
    was open to her to accept that a minor may  not  have  identified  this
    error.  His brothers it should be remembered were also minors  at  that
    time and having been granted leave have had no  need  to  revisit  this
    point for many years until now. Interpreters can make mistakes but  the
    length of time since the interview makes revisiting this point  largely
    redundant.

19. The judge carefully set out ST, against the background as set out,  and
    it is not the case that she merely  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
    without supporting evidence. It is correct to state that the judge  did
    not receive evidence from the Ethiopian Embassy that the appellant  had
    applied but she was entitled, as she put it, on this factual matrix, to
    find that the appellant was likely to experience persecution  and  very
    significant difficulties in establishing his  claim  to  be  Ethiopian.
    As stated in the judgment whether deprivation of  citizenship  amounted
    to persecution is a question of fact.  The judge cited paragraph 76  of
    ST onwards.  The findings in relation to the facts prior  to  departure
    from Ethiopia were relevant and the appellant's  account  found  to  be
    credible. What is expected is that each claimant must demonstrate  that
    he or she has done 'all that could be reasonably  expected'.   In  this
    instance the judge found that what  had  been  undertaken  was  in  the
    circumstances  reasonable,  against  the  practices  of  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy in London.  As the judge stated, a person who  is  regarded  by
    the Ethiopian authorities as an ethnic Eritrean, which the judge  found
    this appellant would be, and who left Ethiopia in the aftermath of  the
    border war was likely to face very significant  practical  difficulties
    in establishing nationality.

20. I appreciate headnote (5) of ST which states  in  terms  that  judicial
    fact finders will expect a person asserting  arbitrary  deprivation  to
    approach the embassy with documentation, or write  a  letter  with  all
    relevant details, but the judge found the appellant  and  his  brothers
    had no documentation emanating from Ethiopia  and  further,  the  judge
    also stated, despite head note (5), that a person who left  Ethiopia  ,
    as in (4) would be unlikely to re-acquire Ethiopian  nationality  as  a
    matter of right.

21. In the circumstances of this case, and I note that ST  emphasised  that
    tensions between Ethiopia and Eritrea 'remain high', it was open to the
    judge to make the findings she did. A critical  feature  was  that  the
    appellant had always claimed Eritrean ethnicity and  left  as  a  minor
    with no documentation.

22. The judge did not merely give the appellant's length  of  residence  as
    the overwhelming factor when finding in the  appellant's  favour.   She
    noted at paragraph 70 that the appellant had a  lengthy  residence  but
    also that he had no ties remaining in Ethiopia. The judge made a  broad
    evaluation  of  his  circumstances  in  the  United  Kingdom  and   the
    difficulties on return. She found he was  still  culturally  integrated
    and because of his age would have little knowledge of any society other
    than the UK where his immediate family  reside  including  his  British
    citizen child (although very  young  at  2  months).   He  was  granted
    settlement in 2007 prior to which he was an unaccompanied  minor.   The
    judge did remind herself of the public interest and identified that the
    deportation of foreign criminals was in the interests of society.   She
    weighed the public interest into the balance.   Nonetheless  the  judge
    found that the appellant had fulfilled one of  the  exceptions  to  the
    general rule and, on the evidence, it was open  to  her  to  allow  the
    appeal.

23. I find no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and it will stand.  Mr RH's appeal stands allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed      Helen Rimington  Date
      25th October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
