
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09754/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7th November 2019               |On 16th December 2019              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   mrs Z m
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed instructed by Aman Solicitors Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell promulgated on 29  August  2019  on  seven
    differing grounds.

 2. The appellant is a Lebanese national born on 20th June 1993, who claims
    to fear persecution if she is returned to Lebanon because she married a
    man against the wishes of her  father.   She  claimed  asylum  on  17th
    November 2017 having been granted temporary admission whilst in transit
    to the USA.  Her asylum claim was refused on 25th  July  2018  and  her
    appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 7th  December  2018.
    An error of law was found in that decision and the matter remitted back
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Mitchell is therefore the second attempt at deciding this matter.

 3. The grounds of appeal were discursive but as follows: -

Ground 1

 4. The judge made various errors which cumulatively amounted to  an  error
    of law as they show that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  appeal
    properly.  The judge referred to the country evidence at paragraphs  10
    and 11 as being out of date which was not  correct.   The  respondent's
    Operational Guidance Note was dated from June 2009 but still  the  most
    up to date for Lebanon.

 5. The obtaining of the audio recording was not raised by  the  respondent
    or during the hearing and the appellant was denied the  opportunity  to
    address the issue, whereby she could have explained whether she had  an
    audio recording and whether it supported her version of events.

 6. At paragraph 26c of the decision, the appellant was not asked when  she
    last had contact with her husband but why she was not able  to  contact
    him if needed.  This mistake was repeated at 52g and 60.

Ground 2

 7. The  judge  applied  the  wrong  approach  to  paragraph  339L  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 49b it was  perverse  to  suggest  the
    appellant should have obtained a witness  statement  from  her  husband
    when he was no longer responding to her efforts to  contact  him.   The
    issues raised at 49d in relation to 'no attempt' being made  to  obtain
    information about the reporting of  the  incident  and  the  subsequent
    investigation was not raised at the hearing and she was thus denied any
    opportunity to explain whether she had made any attempts prior to  2018
    to obtain documentary evidence.  The respondent did  not  cross-examine
    the appellant about documents provided and merely relied on the reasons
    for refusal letter which did not raise the  issue.   Honour  crimes  in
    Lebanon are rare but that did not mean that the appellant's account ran
    counter to the general information.

 8. It was irrelevant that the appellant failed to claim asylum in  Nigeria
    because paragraph 339L only required  consideration  of  asylum  claims
    within the EU.

Ground 3

 9. It was  unfair  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  the  appellant
    displayed a lack of candour about her trips to Beirut when she was  not
    asked about them in her asylum interview.  The first time she was asked
    during cross-examination was in the appeal hearing.

Ground 4

10. At paragraphs 45 and 61 of the decision, it was submitted the judge had
    erred in the assessment of evidence and had given inadequate  reasoning
    for the decision to attach little weight  to  it.   The  appellant  was
    criticised for not providing a witness  statement,  but  she  gave  her
    evidence-in-chief about the voicemail and the conversation.  It is  for
    the appellant to choose  how  she  gives  her  evidence.   The  judge's
    finding at 45b of the decision was perverse.  The  transcripts  of  the
    conversations provided context and content of the recording, albeit  it
    was served late.  The conclusion that the respondent could have decided
    to arrange for its own transcription went beyond the  respondent's  own
    case.  At the hearing the respondent stated that the evidence  had  not
    been served on the respondent and he could not accept service, but this
    was not true as the respondent was served the day before.  The  judge's
    reasoning was inadequate.

Ground 5

11. The judge found that  the  hostility  was  directed  only  towards  the
    appellant's husband in Lebanon but there was no reasoning for this, and
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the risk to the appellant on
    the basis that she entered into a relationship  that  her  family  were
    hostile towards.  The judge  did  not  explain  why  the  risk  to  the
    appellant would now be lower than it was before.  There was no evidence
    that returning to Lebanon after a passage of time without  her  husband
    would diminish the risk to her.

Ground 6

12. Owing to the errors the finding that  the  appellant  could  internally
    relocate was unsustainable.

Ground 7

13.  The judge's findings at paragraph 66 were contrary to the judgment  of
    the House of Lords in EM (Lebanon) v The Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2008] UKHL 64 where the  House  explained  that  women
    have no rights under the family law system in Lebanon.   There  was  no
    sufficiency of protection available.

The Hearing

14. At the hearing the appellant's representative relied on  his  extensive
    written grounds for permission to appeal. He submitted that issues were
    not raised by the judge such as that relating to the  audio  recording.
    He took the Tribunal through the detail of the decision identifying the
    arguable errors of law.  He submitted that the interview was unreliable
    because of the differing dialects.



Analysis

Ground 1

15. In relation to ground 1 the judge at paragraph 10 stated,

           "The country evidence supplied by Mrs M's solicitors was largely
           irrelevant or out-of-date".

16.  The  appellant's  representatives  complained  that  the   Operational
    Guidance Note for Lebanon dated 10th June 2009 had not  been  withdrawn
    and at paragraph 3.9.13  the  conclusion  states  as  follows  in  that
    report: -

         "Domestic violence  and  honour  crimes  are  serious  problems  in
         Lebanon and the authorities are not  always  able  and  willing  to
         provide sufficiency of  protection.   However,  protection  may  be
         available  in  individual  cases  from  the  authorities,  NGOs  or
         extended family. Alternatively, internal  relocation  to  escape  a
         localised threat from a husband or member of the family may  be  an
         option and would not be unduly harsh in many cases. Factors such as
         the economic, social and professional background of  an  individual
         claimant as  well  as  other  factors  including  the  individual's
         support network must be carefully considered when  determining  the
         viability  or  otherwise  of  internal  relocation.    A  grant  of
         Humanitarian Protection may be appropriate in some cases".

17. The judge stated this at paragraphs 11 and 12 of the decision: -

         "11.     The most up-to-date and relevant evidence supplied by  Mrs
             M's solicitors was a  paper  from  Azzra  Charara  Baydoun,  a
             professor of social psychology  at  the  Lebanese  University,
             produced for a UN expert group  meeting  in  New  York  on  12
             October 2011 convened by the UN rapporteur on violence against
             women.  This paper is detailed and extensively referenced.  It
             states honour crimes in Lebanon are rare and that while  there
             may be some underreporting:

            ... widespread urbanisation, the proliferation of media and  the
             changing roles of women in Lebanon has made it  difficult  for
             such crime to go unnoticed.  Furthermore, those  reported  are
             thoroughly investigated and the accused is tried in a court of
             law.

         12.      Reliance was  placed  by  Mr  Saeed  upon  an  Operational
             Guidance Note  (OGN)  relating  to  Lebanon  produced  by  the
             Respondent in 2009 and subsequently withdrawn.  In particular,
             Mr Saeed placed reliance on paragraph 3.9.13 which states:

             Conclusion: domestic violence and honour  crimes  are  serious
             problems in Lebanon and the authorities are  not  always  able
             and willing to provide sufficiency  of  protection.   However,
             protection may be  available  in  individual  cases  from  the
             authorities, NGOs or extended family. Alternatively,  internal
             relocation to escape a localised  threat  from  a  husband  or
             member of the family may be an option and would not be  unduly
             harsh in many cases. Factors such as the economic, social  and
             professional background of an individual claimant as  well  as
             other factors including the individual's support network  must
             be carefully considered  when  determining  the  viability  or
             otherwise of internal relocation.   A  grant  of  Humanitarian
             Protection may be appropriate in some cases."

18. Albeit that at the hearing it was confirmed before me that this OGN had
    not been withdrawn it was clearly written some ten years ago and dated.
     That is evidenced by the fact that at paragraphs  54  and  55  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter that Operational Guidance  is  not  referred
    to.  It would appear that it is not longer relied upon by the Secretary
    of State.

19. That said, the judge as can be seen at paragraphs 13, 14 and 15 did  go
    on to consider the import of the Operational Guidance as relied  on  by
    Mr Saeed at the hearing.  It is clear from paragraphs 13 and 14 of  the
    judge's decision that he concluded that as far  as  the  honour  crimes
    were concerned the basis for the  report  reaching  the  conclusion  at
    3.9.13 was because: -

         "13.     In so far as honour crimes are concerned,  the  basis  for
             reaching that conclusion was: (i) as of 2008, the legal system
             remained discriminatory in its handling of  honour  crimes  as
             there was the potential for a reduced sentence if a crime  was
             in response to 'unacceptable sexual relations conducted by the
             victim'; and, (ii) every year a number of women were killed by
             male relatives under the pretext of defending family honour.

    Thus, the judge addressed the Operational Guidance but continued in his
    reasoning;

         14.      As to point (i), Professor Baydoun's paper  explains  that
             between 1999 and 2007 courts rarely reduced sentences on  this
             basis.  As for point (ii), the OGN also says honour crimes are
             not widespread and the authorities are  willing  and  able  to
             offer sufficiency of protection in some cases.  The evidential
             basis for saying 'some cases' and not most or all cases is not
             explained in the OGN."

20. It is clear that the  judge  analysed  the  basis  of  the  Operational
    Guidance Note and the reference to  the  discriminatory  legal  system.
    However, as he spelt out in paragraph  14,  Professor  Baydoun's  paper
    explains that between 1999 and 2007 the courts discriminatory  approach
    to sentences was ameliorated, but moreover  the  evidential  basis  for
    saying the authorities gave sufficiency of protection in  "some  cases"
    and not most or all cases was not explained in the  OGN.   Clearly,  on
    the basis of Professor Baydoun's report, which the judge  was  under  a
    duty to consider, the judge found in line with Horvath  v  SSHD  [2000}
    UKHL 37  that there was an effective legal system and security services
    willing to implement  the  law  of  which  the  appellant  could  avail
    herself.  The phraseology  of  the  judge  might  have  contained  more
    clarity but as Horvath  points  out  "no  state  can  achieve  complete
    protection against isolated and random  attacks"  and  it  was  clearly
    concluded that the authorities in Lebanon were,  on  more  up  to  date
    evidence  on  which  the  judge  relied,  able  to  provide   effective
    protection to the standard set out in Horvath.

21. Although he may have erred in  his  reference  to  the  guidance  being
    withdrawn it is not the case that the judge simply ignored the OGN.

22. With respect to the issue of the audio recording it  was  open  to  the
    judge to  take  the  approach  that  he  did.   The  issue  as  to  the
    consistency was raised by the appellant's representatives themselves in
    the  skeleton  argument  and  they  must  have  been  aware  that   the
    appellant's asylum interview was audio recorded from the outset because
    the interview record states that it was.  Having asserted,  and  it  is
    clear at page 2 of the asylum interview that it was  recorded,  it  was
    open to the appellant's solicitors to obtain a recording from the  date
    that the interview had taken place which was on  1st  May  2018.   This
    does not appear to have occurred.

23. It is also clear from the decision of  the  judge  when  assessing  the
    issue,  for  example,  of  marriage  that  there  were  some   distinct
    inconsistencies in the evidence and contrasts between  the  answers  to
    some very straightforward questions between the asylum interview,  such
    as how many witnesses were at the wedding, and her  witness  statement.
    The  responses  clearly  demonstrate  the  appellant   understood   the
    question.  In the interview she volunteered, without being asked,  that
    there were two witnesses [AIR 68], whilst  in  her  subsequent  witness
    statement, as the judge recorded [24b], she stated that there  were  no
    witnesses.  It was open to the judge to consider the interview  record,
    albeit, as he did, with caution which he referenced.

24. The point made in relation to the contact with the husband, Mr  H,  was
    that her contact appeared to be in a developing process,  or  rather  a
    fluid process, but ultimately at 26d the judge  found  that  there  was
    contact via the Beirut-based  lawyer  who  had  sent  the  appellant  a
    document on 24th August 2018 in which he states that his client (Mr  H)
    "wants to discuss with you about  meeting  his  child  K  and  visiting
    rights".  The record of the information in  the  determination  records
    that she was asked to be more specific about when she last had  contact
    with Mr H, but this is not inconsistent with being asked  why  she  was
    not able to contact him if needed, particularly in  view  of  the  fact
    that he had instructed a lawyer.

25. The judge is not obliged  to  record  each  and  every  piece  of  oral
    information that is given Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)  [2014]
    UKUT 00341: judges needed to resolve the key conflicts in evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their reasons for preferring one  case
    to the other so parties could understand why they had lost .  The judge
    clearly recorded that she had "not had contact with him  [the  husband]
    for 'a few months' and the reason for the lack of contact was  that  he
    had stopped responding to her".  The point being made that it was  only
    in re-examination she disclosed she had been in contact with him  until
    relatively recently.  That  finding  does  not  undermine  the  overall
    credibility finding.

Ground 2

26. It was argued that the judge applied the wrong  approach  to  paragraph
    339L, for example, at paragraph 49b in relation to the reasonability of
    expecting her to obtain a  witness  statement  from  her  husband.   As
    stated, this appellant had access to a lawyer and her husband's  lawyer
    and, at the very least, could have disclosed an  attempt  to  obtain  a
    statement from the husband via the lawyer, particularly bearing in mind
    the ample time that she had.  The judge makes the point that given  the
    failure  of  her  appeal  the  appellant  would  have  appreciated  the
    significance of evidence  in  January  2019  and  her  solicitors  were
    notified of a rehearing in March 2019.   Mr Saeed  submitted  that  the
    approach of the judge in expecting the appellant to  obtain  a  witness
    statement from the husband was perverse.  Not only is the threshold for
    perversity high, and not met here but in view of the contact  with  the
    lawyer the attempt at least was reasonably expected.

27. As the judge states at paragraph 45g, "The duty of the parties to  help
    the Tribunal further the  overriding  objective  includes  the  earlier
    exchange of evidence".  In relation to this document together with  the
    audio transcripts the Tribunal  had  "specifically  directed  that  all
    documents to be relied upon at the hearing had to be filed  and  served
    no later than five days before the hearing".  They were not.

28. As regards paragraph 49d the judge pointed out, and he  was  reasonably
    entitled to do  so  without  committing  an  error  of  law,  that  the
    appellant had waited for over five years before  making  any  enquiries
    about the subsequent investigation to the murder attempt and  he  notes
    that the lawyers' recent attempt to obtain records did not explain  the
    steps he took.  It was thus open to the judge to take the  approach  he
    did in relation to paragraph 339L.  In particular it  is  open  to  the
    judge to make observations about the evident fact that no  attempt  had
    been made to locate the documentation of a murder investigation  within
    the five  years  since  the  claimed  incident  took  place.   This  is
    adequately explained and reasoned by the judge.

29. The judge also sufficiently explained at paragraph 50 that the  country
    evidence indicated honour crimes were rare but that "this does not mean
    Mrs M's description of events must be wrong".  The judge, in  fairness,
    acknowledged that to run counter to the  general  information  did  not
    mean that it was totally out of the question but as the judge  proceeds
    to observe, the coherence of her account such as the  almost  immediate
    disclosure of the marriage to her family and  the  decision  to  travel
    towards rather than away from the danger on 30th August  2012  was  not
    believable or credible.

30. It is not an irrelevant consideration to  state  that  she  might  have
    claimed asylum in Nigeria.   Nothing  in  Article  4  of  the  European
    Directive suggests that  Nigeria  is  an  excluded  country  for  these
    purposes.

Ground 3

31. It was entirely open to the judge to criticise the appellant about  her
    trips to Beirut from Nigeria and her lack of candour.  In her screening
    interview at 4.1 she clearly states, "We both fled to Nigeria where  we
    lived for  five  years".   Moreover,  at  Question  21  of  her  Asylum
    interview she was asked 'what date did  you  leave  Lebanon?'  and  she
    replied, 'I can't remember but September  2012'.   That  was  a  direct
    question which she  clearly  understood,  and  her  answer  was  simply
    incorrect.  There was a clear inference that she left in 2012 not  that
    she returned every six months to obtain further visas.  She had a  duty
    under paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules to provide  all  material
    factors and she did not.

32. Throughout her interview, for example at question 25 she stated,  "What
    do you fear would happen to you if you returned?" - "I will be killed".

33. At question 127 she was asked: -

         "127.    How many days did you remain  in  Lebanon  following  this
                incident?

                Response - Less than one month.

         128.     So why couldn't you return  to  Lebanon  and  relocate  to
                Tripoli?

            Response - I am not safe anywhere in Lebanon.

         129.     How would they know if you returned?

            Response - Anybody can tip on us  and  everybody  aware  of  the
                situation".

34. Nowhere does she identify that she had returned to Lebanon. She  states
    she only remained there for one month following the incident.   Indeed,
    she confirmed, in  sequence,  that  she  could  not  return.  Mr  Saeed
    submitted that the interview was unreliable because  of  the  differing
    dialects but at the end of the interview the appellant specifically was
    asked and stated that she had understood the questions.  As  the  judge
    found for cogent reasons, at paragraph 52g he was concerned  about  her
    failure to mention her trips back to Beirut until she was being  cross-
    examined.  Second, that it was only  in  her  re-examination  that  she
    disclosed that she had been in  contact  with  Mr  H  until  relatively
    recently.

35. It was thus open to the judge to criticise the appellant on  the  basis
    of paragraph 339L and that she  had  failed  to  provide  all  material
    factors at her disposal.  The fact of her return to Beirut from Nigeria
    to which they had fled to renew her visit  visa  clearly  supports  the
    judge's view of her "lack of candour" and this is adequately  explained
    by the judge on a careful reading of the decision.

Ground 4

36. It may be that the appellant chose not to disclose the audio  tapes  or
    the evidence thereto until the very last minute but the  judge  gave  a
    raft of reasons at paragraph 45 for finding the  manner  in  which  the
    evidence had been supplied unsatisfactory, not least because there  was
    no explanation of how the telephone call came to be recorded, such that
    it could be sent to the solicitors,  the  transcripts  appeared  to  be
    extracts of a longer message with no context, the audio  files  of  the
    recordings had not been supplied  to  the  Home  Office  and  that  the
    explanation from the appellant's solicitors, such that in the past  the
    Home Office did not want audio files, was inadequate  bearing  in  mind
    the appellant had been in possession  of  the  audio  files  for  seven
    months.  The judge found that the explanation for the late  production,
    transcription and provision of the audio tapes  was  unsatisfactory  in
    the overall context  that  the  appellant  had  already  experienced  a
    previous appeal and would "have appreciated the  significance  of  this
    evidence in January" (paragraph 45g).  As pointed out by Mr Clarke  the
    judge did not draw an adverse inference per se because of  the  failure
    to provide the recording but attached less weight to the evidence.

37. Indeed, it was open to the judge to place less weight on  the  evidence
    bearing in mind the evidence had not been provided in  accordance  with
    the Tribunal directions and the Secretary of State had been denied  the
    opportunity  to  examine  this  evidence,  which  must  in  itself   be
    prejudicial.  To state that the analysis went beyond  the  respondent's
    own case is not sustainable.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
    observation  and  take  the  approach  he  did,  bearing  in  mind  the
    respondent complained that the evidence was  not  served  properly  (as
    indeed it was not), as the judge pointed out, in  accordance  with  the
    Tribunal directions. This ground is without merit.  The  weight  to  be
    given by the judge  to  evidence  is  a  matter  for  the  Judge.  Mere
    disagreement about the weight to be accorded to the evidence, which  is
    a matter for the judge, should not be characterised as an error of law,
    Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412.

Ground 5

38. The reasoning given for the statement that the hostility  was  directed
    towards her ex-husband was explained at paragraphs 28  and  29  of  the
    determination, specifically that the car of  Mr  H  had  been  shot  at
    whilst the father of the appellant and her ex-husband and an intervenor
    by the name of S L were inside in Mr L's house.  The judge reasoned  as
    follows at paragraph 29: -

         "29.      Mrs  M  provides  two  documents  which   are   said   to
             substantiate her account of this incident:

            a.    A document in Arabic which, at her asylum interview, Mrs M
                  described as Mr H's  statement  taken  by  the  police  in
                  Jowaya.   However,  the  translation  supplied  by  Mrs  M
                  indicates this document is dated  1  September  2012,  two
                  days after Mrs M says she and Mr H left Jowaya.  In  fact,
                  based upon the translation, this document appears to be  a
                  letter from Mr  H  to  the  General  Prosecutor  of  South
                  Lebanon.  In the letter, Mr H complains his car  was  shot
                  at and 'afterwards they tried to invade the house to  kill
                  me'.  He does not suggest they were interested in  harming
                  Mrs M.  He also says 'the respondents ambushed me in Daeir-
                  Kifa town three hours prior to this incident.  There  were
                  two cars full of armed  personal  who  tried  to  kill  me
                  there'.  Again, he does not suggest Mrs M was at risk.

            b.    The second document is also in Arabic.  According  to  the
                  translations supplied by Mrs M, this is an affidavit  from
                  Mr I,  the  lawyer  in  Beirut  to  whom  I  have  already
                  referred.  The translation says the affidavit is dated  11
                  February 2018.  As most of the events referred to  in  the
                  affidavit are events which are unlikely to be  within  the
                  direct knowledge of  Mr  I,  and  as  the  source  of  the
                  information he refers  to  is  not  identified,  I  attach
                  little weight to this evidence.  The points to which I  do
                  attach weight, because they appear to  be  within  Mr  I's
                  direct knowledge, are that at the time the  affidavit  was
                  produced he was assisting Mrs M as well as Mr H,  that  he
                  had  recently  attempted  to  obtain  from  the   Lebanese
                  authorities records relating to the investigation into the
                  29 August 2012 incident, and he was told no records  could
                  be found.  No details are given about these enquiries such
                  as who was contacted, and any  explanations  supplied  for
                  the lack of records."

39. It is clear that the judge did not accept that there was a real risk of
    persecution to the appellant, for a variety of  reasons  which  can  be
    found throughout the determination, not the least because he found  her
    not to be credible and this was adequately explained.

Ground 6

40. This is a composite ground.  For the reasons given above the judge gave
    adequate explanation and reasoning for his findings that the  appellant
    was not at risk.  Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
    explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal
    is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a
    whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge,
    Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  (IAC).
    That is what the judge did.

41. The above criticisms in relation to the specific parts of evidence even
    if sustainable, which I find they are not, are not material because  as
    the judge states at paragraph 66: -

         "Were Mrs M to relocate, I am satisfied there would be  sufficiency
         of protection in relation to  any  residual  risk.   I  reach  this
         conclusion primarily in light of the country evidence.  It is  also
         relevant that Mrs M has failed to  establish  that  there  was  not
         sufficient protection available to her in 2012 and it  is  relevant
         that Mrs M made trips back to Beirut for 3 or  4  years  after  she
         moved to Nigeria."

    Those findings were open to the judge and  run  to  the  heart  of  the
    decision. Nothing in this statement runs counter  to  EM  (Lebanon)  as
    cited above and which relates principally to  family  law.   The  judge
    specifically found that there was a sufficiency of protection available
    to her in 2012 and indeed  he  records  that  the  police  removed  the
    appellant's brother for questioning to a police station.  Moreover,  he
    notes specifically, on her own  indisputable  evidence  that  she  made
    trips back to Beirut for three or four years after moving to Nigeria in
    which she appeared to have suffered no harm.

42. Overall the judge carefully  addressed  the  relevant  facts,  directed
    himself appropriately and gave sound and cogent  explanations  for  his
    findings.

Notice of Decision

43. For the above reasoning I find that there is no error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision and the decision will  stand.  The  appeal
    remains dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 12th December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


