
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/09534/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 15th October 2018                  |On 22nd October 2018                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     OJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Toora, (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant in relation to a Decision and Reasons of  Judge  Cox  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, promulgated on  28th  March  2018,  by  which  she
    dismissed the appeal.  It relates to an asylum application by a Gambian
    woman, born on 20th January 1989 and her dependant daughter born in the
    UK on 2nd March 2017.

 2. The Appellant left The Gambia on 11th November 2016, arriving in the UK
    using a visit visa which had been issued on  26th  October  2016  valid
    until 26th April 2017.

 3. She claimed  asylum  on  9th  March  2017  with  her  daughter  as  her
    dependent.

 4. The basis of her claim is that her daughter would be at risk of FGM  in
    Gambia.

 5. The Secretary of State accepted that women in Gambia form a  particular
    social group and parents in Gambia  who  oppose  their  children  being
    forced to undergo FGM also form a particular social group. So much  was
    established by the country guidance case of K and others  (FGM)  Gambia
    CG [2013] UKUT 62 (IAC). The Secretary of State rejected the  claim  on
    the basis that the family did not support FGM and the Appellant and her
    husband could protect their daughter.

 6. The Appellant's husband, she  claimed  was  in  the  United  States  of
    America and she has two sons who remain in Gambia.

 7. The Appellant says that she is a member of the Fula  tribe.  She  is  a
    qualified nurse having attended college and qualified  in  Gambia.  The
    Appellant claimed not to know her husband's circumstances  in  the  USA
    and claimed that her husband did not support her concerning  the  issue
    of their daughters FGM. The Judge noted inconsistencies in  her  claims
    about  her  husband's  attitude  which  differed  between  her   asylum
    interview and her oral evidence.

 8. The Appellant claimed not to realise there  was  a  risk  or  that  she
    should claim asylum until told by social workers in the  UK  after  her
    baby was born.

 9. She said that her husband had been twice to the United Kingdom prior to
    going to the USA but she was unable to recall when.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge acknowledged the gravity of FGM but found
    the Appellant's claims to be without credibility. The Judge did  accept
    the Appellant was a member of the Fula  tribe.  However,  she  did  not
    accept that there was a rigidity of gender roles within the Appellant's
    family, particularly as she is a  working  woman  educated  to  college
    standard. The Appellant's husband played a role  in  caring  for  their
    twin sons and the Appellant was able to travel on holiday away from the
    family leaving her children. All of this led to the Judge finding  that
    the strict gender roles did not apply within the Appellant's family  in
    Gambia. That was not the  family's  own  departure  from  their  tribal
    culture; the family did not cut their faces with tribal markings.

11. However, the finding that the Appellant is a member of the  Fula  tribe
    is where the positive credibility findings end. The Judge did not  find
    it credible that being a nurse, already the mother of two children  and
    having had three scans on the child when pregnant, she was  unaware  of
    the gender of the baby.

12. The Judge did not find it credible that a woman due to  give  birth  in
    February 2017 would have chosen to holiday in the UK in November 2016.

13. While the Appellant had given evidence that she only intended to  visit
    UK for three weeks, her return  ticket  costs  for  6th  January  2017,
    considerably more than the three-week period she suggested.  The  Judge
    found  it  not  credible  that  the  Appellant  was  unaware   of   the
    significance of pregnancy on foreign travel given that she is  educated
    and a nurse.

14. Coming from the culture that the Appellant does, the Judge  also  found
    it not credible that she did not know of the risks of FGM for a  female
    child, if as she claimed both her own and her husband's family were  in
    favour of it and her niece had been subjected to it.  She did not  find
    it credible that the Appellant was ignorant of the risk until  told  of
    it by the midwives and social workers after she gave birth.

15. The Appellant has a sister in the UK but there was no evidence from her
    which the Judge found  to  be  striking.  The  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer had made a submission that her husband had entered  the  UK  in
    April 2017 which was not challenged by the Appellant. That meant he had
    been in the UK since his daughter was born.  She  therefore  found  the
    Appellant's claim that her husband had  never  seen  his  daughter  was
    untrue and that the Appellant was not a witness of truth.

16. The Judge also did not accept the Appellant's claim about the nature of
    her relationship with her husband and lack of knowledge of his life and
    employment  in  the  USA.  She  said  that  she  had  been  vague   and
    inconsistent in that area.  She did not accept that men  in  Gambia  do
    not tell their wives what is happening in their lives and  specifically
    that it was not the case for the Appellant.

17. The Judge did not find it credible that the Appellant had not discussed
    with her husband the possibility of the family being united  in  either
    the USA or the UK.

18. The Judge noted that while the Appellant tried to persuade her that her
    relationship  with  her  husband  was  distant,  the  emails   provided
    disclosed a great deal of affection.

19. With regard to letters from the husband suggesting  there  would  be  a
    risk in the Gambia, the Judge found  those  were  plainly  designed  to
    bolster the claim as they concentrated almost solely on the law and the
    issues before her and lacked any natural content. She noted there  were
    no references  to  natural  events  such  as  asking  for  photographs,
    commenting on the same or passing on any other news.

20. The Judge found that a letter  claiming  to  be  from  the  Appellant's
    sister in Gambia carried little weight. The claims in that letter  that
    the sister could not  take  her  own  daughter  to  a  health  facility
    following FGM for fear of prosecution and sentencing was at  odds  with
    the Appellant's husband's assertion that the family do not  care  about
    being sentenced for undertaking FGM

21. The Judge also notes that the letter indicates the sister's child,  the
    Appellant's niece was subjected to FGM in February 2016,  more  than  a
    year before the birth of the Appellant's daughter. On  that  basis  the
    Judge could not accept the Appellant and her husband  had  not  thought
    about the prospect of FGM before her child was born.

22. The Judge found the Appellant's claims that her daughter  was  at  risk
    was not credible.

23. Furthermore, she found there was no satisfactory  evidence  to  suggest
    that the maternal and paternal grandparents were insisting upon FGM, an
    illegal act.

24. She found that the young niece of the Appellant had not been  a  victim
    of FGM, there being no satisfactory evidence even to the  low  standard
    about  that  and  she  was  not  satisfied  the  extended  family  were
    determined to carry out the procedure.

25. The Judge found that the couple lived in an urban area  and  were  both
    highly educated, professional people who travelled widely and would  be
    able to protect their daughter if indeed there was any risk  which  she
    found there was not.

26. She noted the Appellant had an independent life visiting the  UK  alone
    whilst pregnant and she found that the husband opposes FGM and did  not
    find it credible that he would be unable to protect his  daughter  from
    any risk that might exist.

27. Given the paucity of evidence  coming  from  the  Appellant  about  her
    husband's whereabouts the Judge found she was not satisfied that he was
    even in the USA. Nevertheless, the Judge found that even if he were not
    in Gambia he could return to protect his daughter.

28. The Judge noted there was no evidence in  the  form  of  the  husband's
    passport to suggest the terms of his visa for the USA.

29. The Judge found the Appellant, her husband and two sisters all  opposed
    FGM and that the family clearly did not follow all  the  traditions  of
    the tribe as they had not made tribal markings to their faces.

30. The grounds seeking permission to appeal argued only in  inadequacy  of
    reasoning in the Judge's decision. The  Judge  who  granted  permission
    thought that  the  reasons  were  based  on  plausibility  rather  than
    credibility.

31. The Decision and Reasons as I have set out above,  is  a  detailed  and
    careful  assessment  of  all  of  the  evidence  and  reaches  reasoned
    conclusions based on the evidence. It cannot  be  said  that  there  is
    inadequacy of reasoning in the decision.

32. Neither can it be said that the findings are based on plausibility  not
    credibility. I can see no reference anywhere  to  plausibility  in  the
    Decision and Reasons and  indeed  the  Judge  refers  to  the  lack  of
    credibility repeatedly.

33. The Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an
    error of law material or otherwise and the appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    is therefore dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 16th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




















