
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/09722/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 April 2018                          | On 03 May 2018                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                    B S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T D Hodson, Elder Rahimi solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of  Congo,  born
    on 22 October 1997.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on or  around  28
    October 2014 at which time he was still a minor.  He claimed asylum  on
    the same day on the basis that his father had been a supporter  of  the
    UDPS and he had also supported  them and had attended  a  demonstration
    in 2011 and was subjected to teargas by the police and that he had been
    arrested in 2014 for distributing leaflets, during which  he  had  been
    whipped  and  abused.  He  claimed  that  his  father  had  died  as  a
    consequence  of  beatings  and  torture  by   the   authorities.   This
    application was refused on 15 September 2017 essentially on  the  basis
    that his credibility was not accepted.

 2. The Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Geraint Jones QC  for  hearing  on  22
    November 2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  28  November
    2017, the appeal was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in time
    on 12 December 2017 on the basis of the following grounds:

      1) that the judge erred  in  devoting  a  large  and  disproportionate
         amount of attention to the content  of  the  Appellant's  screening
         interview  conducted  when  he  first  arrived  in  the  UK  as  an
         unaccompanied minor.  Reliance was placed on the  decisions  in  GM
         (risk on return family) Democratic Republic of Congo  [2002]  UKIAT
         06741 and YL (Rely on  SEF)  China  [2004]  UKIAT  00145.   It  was
         submitted that the judge's approach amounts to a material error  of
         law in circumstances in which the Appellant was a minor  and  there
         were no special procedural safeguards in place  for  the  interview
         and no allowance given for his age by those interviewing him;

      2) ground 2 asserted that the judge had given scant attention  to  the
         Appellant's lengthy witness statement adopted as evidence-in-chief;



      3) ground 3 asserted that the judge gave scant  consideration  to  the
         Appellant's asylum interview held on 19 June 2017 and  had  made  a
         material error of fact in that at [26] the judge  held  as  follows
         "the Appellant made no claim to the effect that he had ever come to
         the notice of anybody in authority  whilst  distributing  leaflets.
         During his interview he did not claim that  that  had  brought  him
         into any kind of  trouble".  This  is  plainly  wrong  in  that  at
         question 44 of the Asylum Interview Record the Appellant made clear
         he was supporting his father and he said in  response  to  question
         93: "when we were going out to distribute leaflets people from  the
         party in power were coming to threaten us when we were doing  these
         things.  They were beating people", "we were distributing leaflets,
         we go to a place where these Kulunas were.  They  arrested  us  and
         threatened us" and at question 99: "when  the  police  arrested  me
         they didn't just arrest me they arrested the group of other  people
         ... they were questioning us why we are doing propaganda for that".
          When asked where he was arrested the Appellant replied to question
         100: "I was in the market and we were distributing  leaflets".   It
         was submitted that this was indicative of the lack of  proper  care
         and scrutiny given by the judge to any source of  evidence  in  the
         appeal other than the screening interview;

      4) ground 4 asserted that the judge had erred in his consideration  of
         the letter from the Mr Punza, President of the FUMA  Federation  of
         the UDPS, dated 3 October 2017, and that the judge had  carelessly
         misread the translation when finding at [39] that the letter was of
         scant evidential weight and significance; and

      5) fifthly that the judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the  detailed
         medical  report  prepared  by  Dr  Turvill  of  the  Helen   Bamber
         Foundation and that the judge  failed  to  follow  the  established
         jurisprudence in  respect  of  assessing  the  credibility  of  the
         account in light  of  the  medical  report  following  JL  (medical
         reports credibility) China 2013 UKUT 00145  (IAC)  and  SA  Somalia
         [2006] EWCA Civ 1302.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    25 January 2018 in the following terms

         "Ground 3 has merit as the judge appears to  have  made  a  factual
         error regarding whether the Appellant has claimed he  had  come  to
         the adverse attention of the authorities while leafleting.  This is
         not a peripheral issue.  All grounds may  be  argued  although  the
         rest appear to me to be weaker".

 5. There was no Rule 24 response lodged on behalf of the Respondent.

     Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Kotas indicated that he accepted  that  the
    judge had made a material error of law  for  the  reasons  set  out  in
    ground 3 of the grounds of appeal in respect of the judge's finding  at
    [26] of his decision that the Appellant had never made a claim that  he
    had come to the notice of  anybody  in  authority  whilst  distributing
    leaflets.  He submitted that  this  was  sufficient  to  undermine  the
    decision as a whole.

 7. Mr Hodson in response accepted Mr Kotas's concession albeit he asserted
    there was merit in the other grounds of challenge.



Notice of Decision

8.   I find in light of the concession by Mr  Kotas,  which  I  consider  to
have been properly     made, that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge contains a fundamental and a  material error  of  fact,  at  [26],  in
relation to the judge's misapprehension of  the  role    the  Appellant  had
played in assisting his father in distributing UDPS leaflets and the    fact
that the Appellant's claim was that this had  caused  him  to  come  to  the
attention     of the authorities.

9.   In light of that decision, it did not prove necessary  to  engage  with
the other grounds      of  appeal.   The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Geraint Jones QC is set aside and      the appeal is remitted back  to
the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a  hearing  de   novo  before  a
different First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date: 29 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

