
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09535/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34 without a     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|29th June 2020                       |On 13th July 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     HM
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in  this  determination  identified  as  HM.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. FtT Judge Phull dismissed HM's appeal against the  refusal  of  his
         international protection and human rights claim for reasons set out
         in a decision promulgated  on  21st  January  2020.  Permission  to
         appeal was granted by FtT Judge  Scott-Baker  on  3rd  March  2020.
         Directions for the further conduct of the appeal were sent and,  in
         the circumstances surrounding COVID 19, provision was made for  the
         question of whether there was an error of law and if so whether the
         decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside to be  determined  on
         the papers.

      2. Both parties complied with the directions; neither party sought  an
         oral hearing.

      3. I am satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the appellant
         and the respondent  together  with  the  papers  before  me[1]  are
         sufficient to enable me to be able to take a  decision  on  whether
         there is an error of law in the decision  of  the  FtT  and  if  so
         whether the decision should be set aside, on the papers and without
         hearing oral submissions.

      4. The grounds of appeal centred around the claimed failure of the FtT
         judge to place adequate or any weight upon the reports dealing with
         the authenticity of the police warning letter. The  FtT  judge  had
         accepted the appellant had been detained in 2005 and 2011 and thus,
         it was submitted, the judge erred  in  law  in  not  accepting  the
         authenticity of the warning letter  he  claimed  to  have  received
         which went to the heart of his claim that he would be  at  risk  on
         his return to Ethiopia.

      5. The FtT judge held as follows:

         21. I accept the appellant's evidence  as  credible  that  he  was
             beaten and tortured in 2005 because he is  an  Amhara  and  in
             2011 because he was perceived to be affiliated with Ginbot  7.
             I find the background CPIN corroborates his evidence at 10.5.4
             that, "... it has historically been  impossible  to  determine
             whether a detainee was in reality a member  of  an  opposition
             group, a sympathiser or without any connection  156  UN  Human
             Rights Council, according to  representative  of  the  British
             Embassy ...[2]". Having considered this evidence as a whole, I
             find the appellant's evidence of  his  arrest,  detention  and
             torture in 2005 and 2011 to be credible, as supported  by  the
             scarring and CPIN report. I should point out that none of this
             evidence was challenged during cross examination.

         22. The appellant alleges that in 2018 he was arrested  and  later
             released on payment of a bribe and then left the  country.  He
             has recently found that there  is  a  police  letter  for  his
             arrest. His wife  sent  him  the  document  via  a  friend.  A
             translation of the arrest warrant is filed in  evidence  (page
             23, ASB). The appellant assets that the letter is genuine, and
             he will be arrested on return to Ethiopia.

         23. The appellant relies on the  expert  and  addendum  report  of
             Professor Mario Aguilar dated the 9 April and 5 December  2019
             on the authentication of the arrest warrant. Professor Aguilar
             has set out his qualifications and experience at length in his
             report. Briefly, he is a fellow of the  Royal  anthropological
             Institute, and is a direction of the Centre for the  study  of
             Religion and Politics at the  University  of  St  Andrews.  He
             follows the history and contemporary developments in  Ethiopia
             in the context of his research on the Oromo  of  Ethiopia  and
             Kenya and  has  published  extensively  on  this  subject.  He
             teaches and conducts research at St Andrews.

         24. Hi instructions were to outline the methodology used to assess
             the  authenticity  of  the  document  and  to  outline  clear,
             unambiguous and detailed reasons for  confirming  whether  the
             document is genuine or not. Ms Arif submitted that the  report
             should not. Be relied upon because Professor Aguilar  was  not
             an expert in authenticating documents. At paragraph 12 of  the
             report, the professor sets out his methodology. He states that
             his expertise lies within  the  knowledge  of  socio-political
             matters and considers within such expertise the examination of
             certain documents including arrest warrants. He states that he
             has asked  Dr  Zewde  an  Ethiopian  scholar  with  first  had
             knowledge of Amharic to examine the documents and  comment  on
             the accuracy of the translation.

         25. I find that the Professor has  failed  to  attach  Dr  Zewde's
             curriculum vitae and details of his experience  and  expertise
             to comment on the police letter as well as a hard copy of  the
             latter's comments. Dr Zewde has not set out his  expertise  in
             authenticating  logos  used  by  the  Ethiopian   authorities.
             Professor Aguilar relies partially on the comments made by  Dr
             Zewde that the police report is authentic.

         26. I find there is a  lack  of  cogent  evidence  of  Dr  Zewde's
             expertise to make the comments relied on by Professor  Aguilar
             in  his  report.  I  therefore  find  the  appellant  has  not
             satisfied to the required standard that the police  report  is
             authentic, as claimed. As I find  the  police  report  is  not
             authentic, I find the appellant does not satisfy that there is
             a reasonable likelihood he would not be of adverse interest to
             the Ethiopian police on return.

         27. ... I accept that he has attended meetings and  demonstrations
             in  London  to  raise  international  attention,  against  the
             arrest, killings in Ethiopia.

         28. I find there is a reasonable  likelihood  that  the  appellant
             supported Ginbot 7 in the past and the  Ethiopian  Authorities
             considered it to be a terrorist organisation...

         29. ...

         30. I find the background evidence satisfies that whilst Ginbot  7
             was a proscribed  group,  the  opposition  parties,  including
             Ginbot 7, have dissolved and the focus now is on stability  of
             the country and democratisation. I  find  therefore  that  the
             appellant  would  not  attract  adverse  attention  form   the
             authorities on return to Ethiopia for his past involvement  in
             Ginbot 7.

         31. Turning to the appellant's Sur Place activities, I find  would
             not attract adverse attention on return ....

         32. I find the appellant would not be at risk on  return  for  his
             Sur Place activities because the background evidence satisfies
             that under the  new  prime  minister  the  situation  for  the
             diaspora is less threatening and those who  decide  to  return
             are allowed to reintegrate into society  and  set  up  private
             business Ethiopia. I therefore find can  return  to  his  home
             area or move to Addis Ababa, where many Amhara live.

      6. In written submissions the appellant's solicitors  reinforce  their
         ground that had adequate weight been given to  the  expert  report,
         the outcome would have different.

      7. The FtT judge set  out  the  evidence  and  accepted  much  of  the
         appellant's account. There is no requirement on a judge  to  accept
         the totality of an account because part or much of  an  account  is
         accepted. In this case, the  appellant  relied  upon  a  report  to
         authenticate an arrest warrant. The absence  of  identification  of
         expertise of Dr Zewde  and  the  area  of  expertise  of  professor
         Aguilar were matters that the judge was entitled to consider, which
         he did holistically in  the  context  of  the  background  evidence
         before him. The conclusion that the arrest warrant was not reliable
         was a conclusion that was open to him on the evidence before him.

      8. In any event, the judge considered  the  potential  return  of  the
         appellant in the context of the situation in Ethiopia  now,  taking
         full account of the appellant's sur place activities and  his  past
         support for Ginbot 7. For reasons substantiated by  the  background
         evidence, the judge found the appellant was not at risk. It follows
         that even if the judge were incorrect in his conclusion as  to  the
         authenticity of an arrest warrant, issued  some  2  years  ago  and
         prior to the changes in the country and the dissolution  of  Ginbot
         7, the appellant is not at risk of being persecuted on  his  return
         to Ethiopia.

      9. There is no error of law in the FtT decision such that the decision
         is set aside to be remade.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision; the decision of the FtT stands

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Jane Coker    Date 29/06/2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------

[1]  (a) the respondent's bundle; (b) the two bundles filed on behalf of
the appellant and the 'authentication' report; (c) the decision of FtT
judge Phull; (d) The application for permission to appeal; and (e) the
grant of permission to appeal.

[2]  It seems this extract from the FtT judge's decision includes footnote
156 of the CPIN

