
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/09484/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                       |
|On: 28 September 2017                  |       On: 17 October 2017        |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR HE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR GIZIM DAUTI
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of  State  for
   the Home Department and the respondent is a citizen of Kosovo born on  17
   January 1977.  However, for the sake of convenience, I shall continue  to
   refer to the latter as the "appellant" and to the Secretary of the  State
   as  the  "respondent",  which  are  the  designations  they  had  in  the
   proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.



2.     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the  respondent  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and
   humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom and pursuant to  Article  8
   of the European Convention on Human  Rights.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Fletcher Thomas "allowed the appeal" without  specifying  the  law  under
   which he allowed the appeal.




3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert gave permission for the  respondent  to
   appeal and found there was arguably an error of law in  the  decision  as
   the Judge having found  that  the  appellant  understandably  not  having
   pursued the asylum application made in 2000 "with vigour" and is not  now
   a refugee and that he did not meet the human rights requirements  of  the
   rules but stated that his return to Kosovo, after 17 years in the  United
   Kingdom, was disproportionate under Article 8 outside the rules.




4. Thus, the appeal came before me.




5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the appellant's claim that  he  was
   23 years old when he arrived in the United Kingdom and he is now 40 years
   old. He has forgotten Kosovo and considers the United Kingdom to  be  his
   home and he  feels  British.  He  has  no  criminal  convictions  and  no
   involvement in antisocial behaviour. He has many close  friends,  who  he
   considers to be his family. He has not been able to work because  of  his
   status and has relied on the Albanian community to help him.




6. The respondent's case is that she has accepted the appellant's  identity,
   nationality and ethnicity. She stated that the appellant's  asylum  claim
   was based on his fear of the absence of state protection and the unstable
   political situation in Kosovo in the year  2000.  The  respondent  stated
   that law and background information, she accepts that  the  situation  in
   Kosovo has been troubled in recent years, but does not  accept  that  the
   appellant would be at risk solely because of his presence in the country.
   She stated that the appellant can relocate within Kosovo if he  does  not
   wish to return to his home country. The respondent  further  stated  that
   the appellant does not have a partner and is not a parent.  He  does  not
   meet the requirements for leave to remain under  Appendix  FM  on  family
   life grounds. She found that there are no very significant  obstacles  to
   the appellant's integration into Kosovo and any skills he has obtained in
   the United Kingdom would benefit him in  Kosovo.  The  respondent  stated
   that the appellant does not meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of
   the immigration rules. The respondent stated that the appellant  has  not
   raised any exceptional circumstances, and his application does  not  fall
   to be considered for leave outside the rules.



7. The Judge having considered all the evidence stated that the  appellant's
   claim for asylum was not pursued with vigour, understandably  because  it
   was made in 2000, and there is no evidence to prove that he faces a  risk
   of persecution for a  Convention  reason  on  return  to  Kosovo  now.  I
   therefore find that  the  appellant  is  not  entitled  to  international
   protection or humanitarian protection and is  not  a  refugee  under  the
   qualifying Regulations.




8. So far it is abundantly clear that the Judge  found  that  the  appellant
   cannot  succeed  in  his  claim  under  the  refugee  Convention  or  for
   humanitarian protection which he  made  in  the  year  2000  because  the
   situation has changed  and  he  can  be  safely  returned.  There  is  no
   ambiguity in these findings that the appellant is not a  refugee  and  is
   not entitled to humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.




9. The Judge then went on to consider, at  paragraph  18,  and  stated  that
   "the crux of this appeal lay in the appellant's  claim  on  human  rights
   grounds. He said that the appellant does not  meet  the  requirements  of
   Appendix FM for leave to remain on family grounds under  the  immigration
   rules".




10. The  Judge  found  that  there  are  no  significant  obstacles  to  the
   appellant's reintegration into Kosovo because of the  fact  that  he  was
   born there, speak the national language and as an adult  in  good  health
   and can re-establish himself in his home country. The  judge  also  found
   that the appellant does not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276  ADE
   for leave to remain on private life grounds under the immigration  rules.
   Once again there is no ambiguity in these  findings  that  the  appellant
   does not meet the requirements of the immigration rules. It  is  implicit
   in these findings that the Judge found that the appellant's  appeal  must
   be dismissed to the extent that the appellant relies on  the  immigration
   rules.




11. The Judge then went on to consider the appellant's appeal under  Article
   8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.  He  states  that  he  has
   considered the appellant's appeal in line with the case of Razgar  [2004]
   UKHL 27 and Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SS HD [2016] UKSC 60. This indicates that
   the Judge is now considering the five steps in Razgar and finds that  the
   appellant's private life deserves respect under Article 8 of the European
   Convention on Human Rights and the respondent's decision  which  although
   lawful amounts to interference with the appellant's right  to  a  private
   life in the United Kingdom. The Judge was correct in his finding that the
   appellant  having  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  16  years,   has
   established a private life in the United Kingdom.




12. The Judge then proceeds to consider whether  the  respondent's  decision
   is proportionate.  The  Judge  then  in  his  proportionality  assessment
   considers the respondent's interests set out in  paragraph  117B  of  the
   2002 Act. At paragraph 23 the Judge  states  that  effective  immigration
   control is in the  public  interest.  He  stated  that  he  balances  the
   appellant's private life which  he  has  developed  when  his  leave  was
   precarious.  He  stated  that  while  the  appellant's  leave  has   been
   precarious,  it  has  not  been  unlawful  because  he  made  an   asylum
   application on arrival in  2000  and  would  have  been  given  temporary
   admission pending the outcome of his application.




13.  The  Judge  considered  in  his  proportionality  assessment  that  the
   appellant has waited for 16 years for the resolution of  his  application
   and that his representatives have during that period consistently  sought
   to  regularise  his  status.  He  stated  that  the  respondent   accepts
   responsibility for the delay and has acknowledged  that  the  appellant's
   details were confused with those of another individual which resulted  in
   an already late decision in 2014 being withdrawn. The Judge  also  stated
   that the appellant was not responsible for the delay  in  any  manner  or
   form.




14.  The  Judge  was  entitled  to  consider  within   the   proportionality
   assessment, the respondent's admission of responsibility of a delay of 16
   years in respect of the respondent's interests of  an  orderly  and  fair
   immigration control. The Judge also considered that  had  the  respondent
   decided the appellant's application  in  2000,  soon  after  the  war  in
   Kosovo, his application for asylum may well have succeeded.





15. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant  has  established  and
   developing a private life in the United Kingdom and that he has developed
   deeper roots as is evident from his ability to speak  English.  He  found
   that the delay caused by  the  respondent  is  inordinate  and  does  not
   reflect a fair, firm and  effective  immigration  control  and  that  the
   appellant's interest must prevail over that of the respondent.






16. The Judge considered the case of EB (Kosovo), JL (Sierra  Leone)  [2006]
   EWCA Civ. 1713 to clarify the law on the effect of delay by the Secretary
   of State on claims that rely on Article 8  to  resist  removal  from  the
   United Kingdom. Buxton LJ summarised the law  in  relation  to  delay  at
   paragraph 24 as follows:


         "i)     Delay in dealing with an application  may,  increasing  the
             time that the claimant spends in this  country,  increase  his
             ability to demonstrate family or  private  life  bringing  him
             within article 8(1).  That however is a question of fact,  and
             to be treated as such.

         ii)     The application to an article 8 case of immigration  policy
             will usually suffice without more to meet the requirements  of
             article 8(2) [Razgar].  Cases where the demands of immigration
             policy are not conclusive will be truly exceptional [Huang].

         iii)    Where delay is relied on  as  a  reason  for  not  applying
             immigration policy, a distinction must be made between persons
             who have some potential right under immigration policy  to  be
             in this country (for instance, under marriage  policy,  as  in
             Shala and Akaeke); and persons who have no such right.

         iv)     In the former case, where it is sought to apply  burdensome
             procedural rules to the consideration of the applicant's case,
             it may be inequitable in extreme cases, of  national  disgrace
             or of the system having broken down [Akaeke], to enforce those
             procedural rules [Shala; Akaeke]

         v) Where the applicant has no potential rights  under  specifically
             immigration law, and therefore has to rely on his rights under
             article 8(1), delay in  dealing  with  a  previous  claim  for
             asylum will be a relevant factor under article  8(2),  but  it
             must have very substantial effects if it is to  influence  the
             outcome [Strbac at para. 25].

         vi)     The mere fact that delay has caused an  applicant  who  now
             has no potential rights under  immigration  law  to  miss  the
             benefit of a hypothetical hearing  of  an  asylum  claim  that
             would have resulted in his obtaining ELR does  not  in  itself
             affect the determination  of  a  subsequent  article  8  claim
             [Strbac, at para. 32].

         vii)    And further, it is not  clear  that  the  court  in  Strbac
             thought that the failure  to  obtain  ELR  on  asylum  grounds
             because of failure to make a timely  decision  could  ever  be
             relevant to a decision on the substance,  as  opposed  to  the
             procedure, of a subsequent article 8 claim.  Certainly,  there
             is no reason in logic why that fact alone  should  affect  the
             article 8 claim.  On this dilemma, see further para. 6 above.

         viii)   Arguments based on the breakdown of immigration control  or
             of failure to apply the system properly are likely only to  be
             of relevance if the system  in  question  is  that  which  the
             Secretary  of  State  seeks  to  rely  on   in   the   present
             proceedings: for instance, where  a  procedural  rule  of  the
             system  is  sought  to  be  enforced  against  the   applicant
             [Akaeke].  The same arguments do not follow  where  appeal  is
             made in article 8 proceedings to earlier failures in operating
             the asylum system.

         ix)     Decisions on proportionality made by tribunals should  not,
             in the absence of errors of principle, be interfered  with  by
             an appellate court [Akaeke].


17. I therefore find that the Judge who relied on these principles  to  find
   that the respondent's  delay  was  so  excessive  and  inordinate  as  to
   demonstrate a breakdown in the system of immigration control  was  within
   reason and there is no hint of perversity. He came to the legally correct
   decision on the evidence before him. No differently constituted  Tribunal
   would find differently on the same facts.




18. I find that the Judge made an error of law by  not  specifying  the  law
   under which he allowed the appellant's appeal. It is however evident from
   the reading of the full decision that he dismissed the appellant's appeal
   in so far as it  related  to  the  Refugee  Convention  and  humanitarian
   protection grounds but allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the European
   Convention on Human Rights. Therefore, the error is not a material error.




19. I therefore dismiss the respondent's appeal and make it clear  that  the
   appellant's appeal was appropriately allowed pursuant to Article 8 of the
   European Convention on Human  Rights  and  dismissed  under  the  Refugee
   Convention and humanitarian protection grounds.





DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Signed by


Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper  Tribunal                            Dated  this
15th day of October 2017









