
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09508/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                IBRAHIMA [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Capel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co.
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who claims to be a citizen of Guinea but has been  found
    to be a citizen of Sierra Leone, was born on 2 October 1994.  He  first
    entered the United Kingdom in or about November 2010. He claimed asylum
    in 2011 but his claim was refused. A subsequent appeal was dismissed on
    7 October 2011. The appellant became appeals rights  exhausted  at  the
    end of the 2011. The appellant has made fresh submissions on  a  number
    of occasions but these submissions were rejected  without  a  right  of
    appeal. Proceedings for judicial review brought by the  appellant  were
    terminated  by  consent  in  May  2018,  the  respondent  agreeing   to
    reconsider his decision to refuse further representations  as  a  fresh
    claim. On 18  July  2018,  the  appellant's  further  submissions  were
    refused but were deemed to be a  fresh  claim  attracting  a  right  of
    appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a
    decision promulgated on  14  March  2019,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing at Bradford on  4  June  2019,  I  informed  the
    representatives that I intended to set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal and return the appeal to  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision. I gave brief reasons at the hearing and I provide my  reasons
    in greater detail.

 3. The judge in the First-tier Tribunal had to consider the application of
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v  D  (Tamil)  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702 *. The Tribunal which had dismissed the appeal on 7 October  2011
    had made findings in  respect  of  the  appellant's  credibility  as  a
    witness. In part, the fresh representations made by the  appellant  and
    which have led to the current litigation  relied  upon  medical  expert
    evidence by which the appellant sought to provide  an  explanation  for
    the inconsistent evidence which he had given before the  2011  Tribunal
    and which led it  to  find  that  he  was  an  unreliable  witness.  In
    addition, the appellant  had  obtained  country  expert  reports  which
    questioned the 2011 Tribunal's conclusions as regards  the  appellant's
    nationality.

 4. I find that the First-tier Tribunal in its decision of March 2019 erred
    in its application of D (Tamil) (otherwise known  as  Devaselaan).  The
    judge has set out  in  extenso  the  guidance  provided  in  Devaseelan
    indicating the way in which new evidence should  be  treated  following
    findings  of  fact  by  a  previous  Tribunal  which  have   not   been
    successfully challenged. The judge in  the  instant  decision  at  [35]
    found that 'there is simply no medical evidence sufficient to  persuade
    me that any proper assessment can  presently  be  made  concerning  the
    appellant's psychological state at the  date  of  the  previous  appeal
    hearing [i.e. in 2011].' At [37], the judge went on to say:

         "There might be some merit in the basis of the appeal that Ms Capel
         seeks to advance to the effect that the  appellant's  psychological
         condition may have had an influence upon  the  reliability  of  his
         evidence, if this  was  a  case  of  failures  of  recollection  or
         confusion. However, I have to see  this  in  a  context  where  the
         appellant, regardless of whether he had himself practised deceit to
         procure a false  passport  and  deceptive  entry  into  the  United
         Kingdom was, I have no doubt whatsoever, a willing  party  thereto.
         In saying that I keep in mind that in November 2010 he was 16 years
         of age; not an adult, but old  enough  to  know  that  forgery  and
         falsehood was being used to his advantage."

 5.  This  passage  is  problematic.  First,  the  judge  appears  to  have
    overlooked the fact that the new medical evidence did  indeed  seek  to
    explain 'a case of failures of recollection  or  confusion.'  Secondly,
    without engaging at all with the medical evidence, the  judge  has,  in
    effect, ignored it or attached no weight to it because he  has  already
    made up his mind that the appellant, a 16-year-old boy when he  entered
    the United Kingdom, was a  willing  participant  in  the  'forgery  and
    falsehood' being employed by others to the  appellant's  advantage.  It
    does not necessarily follow that, because the appellant may  have  been
    aware that deceit had been employed to gain him  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom, any new medical evidence  would  inevitably  have  nothing  of
    relevance to say about the appellant's state of mind  at  the  time  he
    made his claim to the Secretary of State or subsequently  at  the  2011
    appeal hearing. Moreover, without engaging with it at  all,  the  judge
    was, in my opinion, in no position to declare that no medical  evidence
    could cast light upon the appellant's mental state at some date in  the
    past. The judge erred in law by failing to engage at all with  the  new
    medical evidence for the reasons which he has given.

 6. In addition to the medical evidence, the appellant sought to rely  upon
    expert country evidence from Dr  Anita  Schroven  and  Karen  O'Reilly.
    Rather than engage with that evidence in accordance with the principles
    set out in Devaseelan, the judge rejected it entirely and  without  any
    consideration of its contents. He appears to have done  so  because  he
    believed that it was wrong in principle to admit opinion  evidence  the
    'sole purpose  of  which  is  designed  to  discredit  previously  made
    judicial findings of fact.' I do not consider it was open to the  judge
    not to engage with this  evidence  entirely;  rather,  he  should  have
    analysed it holistically with all the other evidence, approaching  that
    task assisted by the guidance provided by Devaseelan. By failing to  do
    so, the judge erred in law.

 7.  The  judge's  errors  penetrate  to  the  heart  of  his  findings  on
    credibility  and,  as  a  consequence,  there  will  need   to   be   a
    determination of the appeal de novo. Whilst this is inevitable,  it  is
    also unfortunate given the very considerable length of time which  this
    appellant has spent in the appeal system. A hearing de novo is  a  task
    better performed in the First-tier Tribunal to which the appeal is  now
    returned for that Tribunal to remake the decision  at  or  following  a
    hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 14 March 2019 is  set
aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is  returned  to
the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Jones QC) for  that  Tribunal  to  remake
the decision.


Signed                              Date 4 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

