
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/09604/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  On:   |
|On: 6th December 2017                    |7th December 2017                       |
|                                         |                                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     ZSP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Greer, Broudie Jackson and Canter
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni,   Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran, born  in  1996.  He  appeals  with
    permission[1] against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Alis) to dismiss his appeal on protection and human rights grounds.


    Anonymity


 2. This case concerns an application  for  international  protection  from
    Iran, turning in part on whether the Iranian authorities could identify
    the  Appellant  as  someone  who  has  expressed  political  views   in
    opposition to the regime on the internet.  Having had regard to Rule 14
    of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and   the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. When the Appellant claimed asylum on the 11th March 2016 the  substance
    of his claim was he faces a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  Iran
    for reasons of his political opinion. He stated that he was  wanted  by
    the Iranian security services because they had discovered  leaflets  in
    his car produced by the banned Iranian opposition group the KDPI.  That
    claim was rejected on credibility grounds.


 4. The Appellant appealed and by the time  that  his  appeal  came  before
    Judge Alis, it had developed to include what is sometimes called a  sur
    place claim. The Appellant produced printouts from his 'Facebook'  page
    showing postings which he contended would place him at risk  should  he
    be returned to Iran.  The postings  included  'shared'  articles  about
    human rights abuses in Kurdish Iran, and a  picture  of  Qazi  Muhammad
    (the founder of the KDPI and the separatist Mahabad  Republic)  as  his
    'profile' picture.

 5. Judge Alis disbelieved the Appellant's account of involvement with  the
    KDPI in Iran. He gave several reasons for doing so and  those  findings
    are not challenged in this  appeal.    Of  the  Facebook  material  the
    determination says this:

         "52. Applying caselaw I accept that  there  would  be  an  enhanced
         interest in  him  because  he  would  be  returning  on  a  special
         passport. The issue for me is whether the extent of his  activities
         would place him at risk of persecution.


         53.  Mere  posting  of  messages  on   Facebook   does   not   mean
         automatically he will be at risk of persecution because  his  posts
         would not necessarily come to the attention of the authorities.


         54. Mr Greer's argument is that he could face hostile interrogation
         but in assessing this risk I have had  regard  to  my  findings  on
         whether he was active before he came here. His activities here  are
         limited and the Facebook articles were not written by him and  they
         are limited in number.


         55. I do not accept he is politically motivated and his  posts  are
         an attempt to bolster his asylum claim and whilst  the  authorities
         would not be concerned with  his  motivation  I  have  to  consider
         whether he is likely to keep his Facebook account active or whether
         knowing he could face  questioning  he  may  choose  to  amend  the
         settings on his account  or  delete  his  account  as  he  has  not
         demonstrated any other inclination to support the Kurdish cause.


         56. I have considered all the possible risk factors in his case and
         had regard to the Tribunal decisions and country evidence.


         57. taking those matters into account I find that  whilst  his  sur
         place activities in the United Kingdom may be viewed as  activities
         against the state it is not reasonably  likely  he  would  come  to
         their attention for the reasons I have given above".


 6. The crux of the appeal before me is whether Judge Alis was entitled, as
    a matter of law, to find as he did in respect of the Facebook posts. Mr
    Greer relied on the combined effect of three authorities to submit that
    the approach was unlawful. First, he relied  on  the  findings  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in AB  &  Others  (internet  activity  -  state  of  the
    evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 57 (IAC) that there is "clear evidence  that
    some people are asked about their internet  activity  and  particularly
    for their Facebook password" during the on-arrival questioning  at  the
    airport in Tehran. Second, he relied on the evidence of Iran expert  Dr
    Kakhki given to the Upper Tribunal, and recorded in Appendix 1, in  the
    country guidance case SSH & HR (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum  seeker)
    Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC). Dr Kakhki stated that the purpose of the
    on-arrival screening process was to check if the  individual  had  been
    involved in any political activities whilst abroad. Finally, he  relied
    on the authority of RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 to the effect that  an
    individual cannot be expected to lie in order to avoid persecution.  It
    was common ground that the posts, if discovered by the Iranian security
    services, could lead to a real risk of persecution.




    Discussion and Findings


 7. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal understood the significance
    of the Facebook material.   I  am  satisfied  that  it  understood  and
    applied the Iftikhar Ahmed principle, noting as it does at paragraph 55
    that  the  Iranian  authorities  would  not  be  concerned  about   the
    Appellant's motivation  ie  he  would  be  likely  be  transferred  for
    'enhanced interrogation' even if he disowned the material  or  admitted
    that it had been posted to try and get asylum.   I am further satisfied
    that the Tribunal applied the guidance in SSH & HR, since it  proceeded
    on the basis that as a Kurd returning to Iran on  an  emergency  travel
    document he would face some questioning on arrival.  It is implicit  in
    the reasoning between paragraphs 52 and 57 (set  out  above)  that  the
    Tribunal also accepted the contention in AB to  the  effect  that  this
    investigation can include perusal of the subject's  internet  activity.
    The reason that the appeal is dismissed, notwithstanding all  of  this,
    is that the Tribunal was not satisfied, to  a  standard  of  reasonable
    likelihood that this material would in fact still be on the Appellant's
    Facebook account when he lands in Tehran. As the  determination  points
    out at paragraph 55, he can delete the offending images and  links,  he
    could apply privacy settings or he could even close  down  the  account
    altogether.  No risk would therefore arise.


 8. When I made this point to Mr Greer he made three submissions.

 9. First, he contended that the Tribunal's findings were not clear on  the
    point. I accept that the determination does not state in  terms  "I  do
    not accept, to a standard of reasonable likelihood, that the  Appellant
    will leave this material on his publicly assessible Facebook page  when
    he is returned to Iran" but that this is its finding is tolerably clear
    from the passages I have set out above.

10. Second, he complained that the Tribunal  did  not  have  an  evidential
    foundation for its finding, since the Appellant had nowhere been  asked
    what he might do about the material if he were facing  return.  I  have
    not had regard to the  record  of  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal because I do not think I need to.  Even if this point was  not
    expressly put to the Appellant no unfairness has arisen.  The  Tribunal
    rejected the entire account advanced by the Appellant. It did not  even
    accept that he had any political sympathy for the Kurdish cause. Having
    found him not to be a credible witness, I find  it  inconceivable  that
    the Tribunal would have accepted evidence from the  Appellant  that  he
    would maintain the material in a public forum and thereby place himself
    at risk.

11. Finally, Mr Greer submitted that the Tribunal made no investigation  of
    whether the material, even  if  deleted,  would  be  available  to  the
    Iranian security services at some stage in the future. He then conceded
    that there was no material before the Tribunal one way or the other and
    he was unable to offer me any technical  explanation  as  to  how  such
    retrieval might be possible. It follows that there  can  have  been  no
    error on the part of the Tribunal in failing to  consider  evidence  it
    did not have.



    Decision


14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.

15. There is an order for anonymity.
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                         6th
                                                               December 2017
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 25th October 2017 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Lindsley

