
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
PA/09843/2016

                                                  PA/09866/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6th October 2017                       | On 18th October 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   mr j a
                                   mrs s a
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms J Hassan, Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are husband and wife, both Indian nationals, born on  25
    December 1977 and 5 December 1983 respectively.

 2. The first appellant's asylum claim was dismissed by L M Shand QC and at
    the same time she made a finding that  the  second  appellant  made  no
    claim for asylum in her own right and accordingly had no valid right of
    appeal but nonetheless even  if  that  was  incorrect  her  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 3. The grounds of appeal were twofold.

 4. First, it was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  materially
    erred in refusing to adjourn the hearing so the applicant could undergo
    a psychiatric assessment and obtain a medical report.

 5. The first appellant suffered from paranoid  schizophrenia  with  severe
    physical manifestations but, it was submitted, there was no evidence to
    assist the Tribunal in determining the extent and  the  degree  of  the
    appellant's mental health problems.

 6. A written application for an adjournment was refused  previously  by  a
    different judge on the basis that a medical report was unlikely  to  be
    of assistance on the narrow issue of whether  the  appellant  would  be
    entitled to international protection.  It appeared that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge agreed with this  assessment  at  paragraph  28  of  her
    decision.

 7. At paragraph 28 the judge stated:

        "I refused the motion to adjourn.  A ruling had already  been  made
        on the adjournment request made on 28th October 2016  and  I  agree
        with the reasons given  by  the  First-tier  Judge  who  made  that
        ruling."

 8. At paragraph  21  the  judge  clearly  set  out  the  reasons  for  the
    application on 28 October 2016 (the hearing was on 3 November 2016) for
    relisting for mid February 2017.  There was to be  an  application  for
    legal aid in order to  fund  preparation  of  a  report  on  the  first
    appellant's mental health by a psychiatrist.  The purpose of the report
    was said to be a report on "findings of fitness to give evidence at the
    court, his background information, his current medication and prognosis
    and his fitness to travel by air etc".

 9. The grounds for application for permission to appeal  stated  that  the
    application for adjournment was  renewed  on  the  same  basis  of  the
    written application and it was argued that  a  psychiatric  report  was
    required to fully assess the extent of  the  applicant's  illness,  his
    prognosis whether he would be fit to fly, whether he would be  able  to
    access treatment and to determine  whether  he  required  a  litigation
    friend.  It was in this context that the First-tier Tribunal determined
    that a medical report would not be of assistance to the main  issue  of
    protection and she enquired instead about the relevance of a litigation
    friend.

10. It was, however, argued that following the guidance given by UNHCR  and
    contrary to the First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  a  psychiatric  report
    would have assisted the Tribunal in determining  whether  and  to  what
    extent the appellant's  mental  illness  could  be  attributed  to  the
    harassment by his family, and to what extent he might be able to  avail
    himself  of  the  protection  of  the  Indian  authorities,   and   the
    appropriate approach to be adopted in assessing the  applicant's  claim
    under Article 3 and paragraph 276ADE(vi) (very significant  obstacles).
    More specifically at paragraph 207,  "...a  mentally  disturbed  person
    may, however, be a refugee and while  his  claim  cannot  therefore  be
    disregarded, it will call for different techniques of examination".

    In paragraph 208:

         "The examiner should, in  such  cases,  whenever  possible,  obtain
         expert  medical  advice.   The  medical   report   should   provide
         information on the nature and degree of mental illness  and  should
         assess the applicant's ability to fulfil the requirements  normally
         expected of an applicant in presenting his case...  The conclusions
         of  the  medical  report  will  determine  the  examiner's  further
         approach."

11. It was argued that in the present case the appellant's claim called for
    a different technique of  examination.   His  ill-health  rendered  him
    unfit to be interviewed and there was no interview  record  before  the
    Tribunal, there were no witness statements and the  appellant  was  not
    fit to instruct his representatives.  The appellant's asylum claim  was
    therefore determined solely on the basis of his wife's evidence without
    any  consideration   of   independent   evidence   which   could   have
    contextualised his claim and benefited him.

12. It was submitted that in the light of the above the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge materially erred in refusing to adjourn the hearing  despite  not
    having sufficient  information  about  the  appellant's  mental  health
    problems or claim.

13. Insofar as it was argued that Dr  Albanese's  report  would  have  been
    limited due to him having met the appellant only once, the Tribunal was
    referred to the fact that the  doctor  considered  the  possibility  of
    identifying the most appropriate professional to file the report in the
    event he himself could not.

14. The second ground of appeal was that there was procedural unfairness in
    that the appellant's  representative  had  requested  an  Indian  Tamil
    interpreter but the interpreter that was  in  fact  booked  was  a  Sri
    Lankan Tamil who spoke with a Sri Lankan dialect.  This matter was  not
    brought to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's attention at the time.   The
    Tribunal had asked the appellant's wife and  interpreter  to  speak  to
    each other about the journey that  morning  and  the  appellant's  wife
    thought they did  understand  each  other  despite  the  difference  in
    dialect but it was only when she started to give her evidence that  she
    realised the interpreter was miscommunicating her responses and she was
    struggling to understand.  She tried to  correct  him  and  repeat  her
    answers but the Tribunal was unaware of the communication difficulties,
    therefore those difficulties were not brought to the attention  of  the
    judge.

15. It was only after  the  hearing  that  the  appellant's  wife  informed
    Counsel of such difficulties  and  the  representatives  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal on 25 November 2016 for the attention of the judge in order to
    bring the matter to her attention. Resident Judge Conway  responded  on
    15 December 2016 stating that the judge was still considering the  case
    and he could not interfere with the independent process.

16.  In  the  light  of  the  significance  of  the  issues  concerned  and
    considering the correct interpreter was requested but not provided, the
    error being that of  the  Tribunal's  service  it  was  submitted  that
    permission  to  appeal  should  be  granted.   This  particularly   was
    important as the appellant's account was not considered and  his  claim
    was rejected on the basis of adverse credibility findings of his wife's
    account.

17. Ground 3:  The judge was invited to consider the appeal in the light of
    Paposhvili v Belgium (Application No. 41738/10) and in the light of the
    above it was clear that the threshold for the engagement of  Article  3
    was not limited to near death cases.

18. Permission was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  stating
    that "it is arguable in the light of AM  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1123 that First-tier Tribunal Judge L M Shand QC erred in  not
    adjourning the appeal to permit the production of psychiatric reports.

19. It was also arguable that there was a procedural error in  relation  to
    the interpreter, albeit that this was not brought to the  attention  of
    the judge during the hearing.  There  is  considerably  less  merit  in
    ground 3 but I do not refuse permission on that ground.  Further, it is
    my preliminary view that the first appellant ought to be treated  as  a
    vulnerable person.

20. As such there was a direction that the solicitors were  to  inform  the
    Tribunal in writing within fourteen days of the issue of the notice  as
    to whether the appointment of a litigation friend was necessary and  to
    make an application to that effect within 21 days of the issue  of  the
    direction.

21. At the hearing Ms Hassan submitted that the  first  appellant  had  not
    expressed himself in detail and the idea was to obtain a report and  go
    through his mental health difficulties to assist the Tribunal  to  look
    at his capacity  in  the  round.   If  PTSD  was  diagnosed,  what  its
    causation was and whether the condition was attributable  to  what  had
    happened in India.  The report was relevant to his  asylum,  Article  3
    and Article 8 claim.

22. The adjournment was also required on the basis that if he was found  to
    lack capacity to instruct to participate in the proceedings he may need
    a litigation friend.  There was still no  psychiatric  report  but  the
    second appellant could not  be  given  the  position  of  a  litigation
    friend.  It may be that he had not told the wife  everything.   It  was
    clear he lacked capacity but ultimately the appellant  did  not  get  a
    fair hearing.  The appellant had not been enabled to  get  evidence  to
    assist with his case.

23. In relation to ground 2 it was accepted that when the issue  arose  the
    judge was not made aware of it.  It was a fact that  dialects  differed
    and the appellant was afraid during the  hearing  to  give  her  proper
    evidence and it was only afterwards that  she  raised  the  issue  with
    Counsel.

24. I raised the issue of the examination-in-chief which  was  lengthy  and
    the Record of Proceedings but Ms Hassan stated that she did  not  speak
    the language and was not aware that there were difficulties.

Conclusions

25. In relation to ground (i) the key issue is the  authoritative  guidance
    in SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]
    EWCA Civ 1284 and that establishes that "the test  and  sole  test  was
    whether it was unfair".  In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT
    00418 (IAC) the President emphasised the  importance  of  the  test  of
    fairness and the question of whether a party would  be  deprived  of  a
    fair hearing if an adjournment was refused.

26. AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD  stresses that consideration must be  given  to
    the Practice Direction 'First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable
    Adult Witnesses' issued by the Senior President, on 30 October 2008 and
    the joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010.  The  aforementioned
    guidance appears as annexes to that decision.

27. I am not persuaded that the judge failed to treat the  first  appellant
    as a vulnerable witness. She was  fully  aware  of  his  mental  health
    issues and was content that the report, in the  circumstances  sufficed
    and that the wife, could give evidence.  There was no  suggestion  that
    the husband would either before the Tribunal or  in  the  future  would
    give evidence.

28. It is quite clear that the  judge  set  out  the  application  for  the
    adjournment in some detail between paragraphs 21 to 28  and  she  noted
    the  reason  for  the  adjournment  request.   As  the  judge   rightly
    identified the letter of Dr Timehin had considered that  the  diagnosis
    of the first appellant's condition was one of established schizophrenia
    (and I note he did not identify PTSD).  What he did state in his letter
    of 22 April 2016 was:

         "They are being supported by church, their Pastor and  are  not  in
         contact with extended family here or abroad.   His  wife  explained
         that they have a lawyer  working  on  his  asylum  status  and  she
         wondered if his condition was mostly due to family  disharmony  and
         may be past history of abuse.  I am disinclined to think that  this
         is the case, given that he was educationally quite able and that it
         was only after his arrival in the UK that signs of illness began to
         emerge.  I do  not  think:  his  diagnosis  is  one  of  PTSD  with
         psychosis but  one  of  established  Schizophrenia  and  given  the
         presence of both positive and negative symptoms."

29. The judge rightly noted however that the email  correspondence  between
    the appellant's representatives and Dr Albanese from whom  they  wished
    to obtain a report.  She reasoned:

         "22.     One of the items of correspondence attached by  the  first
             appellant's solicitors to the request for an  adjournment  was
             an e-mail from these agents to Dr Albanese dated 27th  October
             2016.  In that e-mail Dr Albanese stated  that  he  had  'very
             little personal knowledge of [the first appellant]'  and  that
             fact  might  'complicate  my  assessment  and  preparation  of
             report'.  Dr Albanese further observed that since he had  seen
             the first appellant the first appellant had moved to  live  in
             Stoke Newington which was very distant from his team base.

         23.      The letter of referral of 22nd April 2016 from Dr  Timehin
             referring the first appellant to Dr Albanese was also attached
             to the adjournment request.  In this letter Dr  Timehin  noted
             that when he had seen the first appellant on 22nd  March  2016
             the first  appellant  he  had  remained  quite  paranoid  with
             persecutory beliefs that people are out to get  him,  that  he
             was distracted by auditory hallucinations, could not  tolerate
             too many people around him and had a  persistent  belief  that
             people were not good.  Dr  Timehin  further  recorded  in  the
             letter of 22nd April that the second appellant had reported to
             Dr Timehin that the first appellant used  to  be  'quite  able
             with a first class Masters  in  building  sciences'  and  that
             ability had disappeared.  Dr Timehin further recorded that the
             second appellant had reported to him that the first  appellant
             sat at home all day, mute and could not tolerate watching  the
             TV, and that he was unable to  attend  to  his  activities  of
             daily living without prompting; and that the  first  appellant
             was reported by the second appellant  to  display  significant
             apathy, avolition, a motivation and alogia.

         24.      The request for an adjournment was refused by a  judge  of
             the First-tier Tribunal on 31st October 2016.  In the  refusal
             notice it was stated that if the appellant was unfit  to  give
             evidence a short letter should suffice,  and  a  full  medical
             report on  the  first  appellant  was  not  likely  to  be  of
             assistance on the narrow issue of whether he was  entitled  to
             international protection.

         25.      When the case came on for a hearing before me on  the  3rd
             November the first appellant was not present, but  the  second
             appellant was present.  As already noted Wimbledon  solicitors
             had intimated a witness statement from  the  second  appellant
             and that she was to be a witness in the appeal.   The  request
             for an adjournment was renewed before me by Ms Hassan.

         26.      When I asked what was the reason for the  new  adjournment
             request Ms Hassan said that the solicitors were in a difficult
             position.  They did not know if they were properly instructed.
              She said that a litigation friend may have to be  instructed.
             I asked what would be the purpose of instructing a  litigation
             friend.  Ms Hassan  said  that  the  litigation  friend  could
             'consider to what extent the matters before the  Tribunal  are
             properly presenting the appellant's case and can speak for him
             in a way that S A cannot'.  She did not elaborate on what  she
             contended a litigation friend could say on behalf of the first
             appellant which the second appellant could not say.  Ms Hassan
             also suggested that a litigation friend could conduct a search
             of the first appellant's papers to see if there  was  anything
             therein that might help his appeal.

         27.      The motion for an adjournment was opposed  by  Ms  Chopra.
             She submitted  that  a  litigation  friend  should  have  been
             considered before now, and in any event the view  appeared  to
             have been taken that the second appellant would represent  his
             interests.  As far as the reasons for the earlier  adjournment
             request  were  concerned  she   observed   that   other   than
             confirmation of the diagnosis and treatment it was  not  clear
             what a report from a psychiatrist would add.  The respondent's
             position was that the first  appellant's  condition  could  be
             treated in India.  There had been no suggestion to  date  that
             the first appellant was not fit for travel.  In any event that
             was a matter that would only arise if the appeal was refused.

         28.      I refused the motion to adjourn.   A  ruling  had  already
             been made on the adjournment request made on 28th October 2016
             and I agree with the reasons given by the First-tier Judge who
             made that ruling.  There was clear evidence before me that the
             first appellant was unfit to attend the hearing.   No  further
             medical report was required to confirm  that.   There  was  no
             suggestion that the first appellant would be fit to attend  at
             any adjourned hearing in the near future, or indeed at all.  A
             psychiatrist's report was not required to advise on the  first
             appellant's medication.  A medical  report  was  not  required
             simply to bring that information before the Tribunal.  In  any
             event it was not a ground of appeal that the  first  appellant
             was prescribed a particular  medication  which  could  not  be
             obtained in India.  As  far  as  the  question  of  the  first
             appellant  travelling  is  concerned,  there   had   been   no
             suggestion to date that the first appellant  was  not  fit  to
             fly.  In any  event,  as  Ms  Chopra  submitted,  that  was  a
             consideration that would only arise after the  appeal  if  the
             appeal was refused.  It was unclear  what  was  meant  in  the
             letter of 28th October when it was stated that a report by  Dr
             Albanese could comment on the first  appellant's  'back-ground
             information'.  Any 'background information' that  Dr  Albanese
             could obtain could only come from the first appellant  himself
             or his wife, the second appellant.  The second  appellant  was
             in a position to give evidence, so  far  as  relevant  to  the
             issues  under  appeal,  about  what  she  knew  of  the  first
             appellant's  'background  information'  including  information
             which she had obtained about that from  the  first  appellant.
             As far as a litigation friend was concerned  it  was  entirely
             speculative whether a  trawl  through  the  first  appellant's
             personal  possessions  would  have  thrown  up   anything   of
             assistance to his appeal.  It is  reasonably  to  be  expected
             that the second appellant would have conducted such  a  search
             herself if there was any  reason  to  believe  that  it  would
             contain anything that assisted the first  appellant's  appeal.
             I was not persuaded by the vague assertion that  a  litigation
             friend could 'consider to what extent the matters  before  the
             Tribunal are properly presenting the appellant's case and  can
             speak for him in a way that S A.  The second appellant  claims
             to have shared the first appellant's  experiences  of  alleged
             persecution and ill-treatment in India.  It seemed to me  that
             the second appellant was a person best placed to speak for the
             first appellant where  he  was  not  in  a  position  to  give
             evidence himself.

         29.      After I gave my ruling on the motion  for  an  adjournment
             the second appellant gave evidence.  The language  was  Tamil.
             The second appellant confirmed that her witness statement  had
             been read to her in a language which she understood, that  she
             had signed it, and that she was  happy  to  adopt  it  as  her
             evidence."

30. What was identified by the judge was that the first  appellant  sat  at
    home all day and was mute.  I note that not only had the solicitors not
    in fact obtained legal aid for the purpose of obtaining  a  report  but
    that the report from the psychiatrist that they wished to instruct  had
    indicated that a report was likely to be complicated by the  fact  that
    he had very little  personal  knowledge  of  him.   Not  only  was  the
    appellant  stated  to  be  mute  but  also  the   psychiatric   medical
    professional was apparently resisting his instruction.   There  was  no
    indication that his instructions could be obtained in any  other  form.
    The judge took the view that his wife would be the best person  to  put
    his case forward.  That was open to the judge in the circumstances.

31. The question is whether at paragraph 24, where the  judge  stated  that
    the previous adjournment was refused and a full medical report  on  the
    first appellant was not likely to be of assistance on the narrow  issue
    of whether he was entitled to international  protection.   Was  that  a
    fair assessment?  The judge had explored the avenues in relation to the
    request for the psychiatric report and when she asked  the  reason  for
    the new adjournment request at  the  hearing,  she  recorded  that  the
    representative did "not elaborate on what she  contended  a  litigation
    friend could say on behalf of the  first  appellant  which  the  second
    appellant could not say".  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  first
    appellant was the wife of the second appellant and it was always  their
    case that they had been through the events together.  Indeed  that  was
    the representation made by Counsel on behalf of the Secretary of State.
     In view of the medical evidence which was already before the  Tribunal
    and in view of the limitations on legal aid and in  view  of  the  fact
    that the wife was able to give  information  on  behalf  of  the  first
    appellant, as the judge recorded it was not clear what  a  report  from
    the psychiatrist would add.  It was the respondent's position that  the
    first appellant's condition could indeed be treated in India.

32. Although the judge did not, at paragraph 28, specifically  mention  the
    word fair she did accept that the  medical  evidence  showed  that  the
    first appellant was unfit to attend the hearing and that there  was  no
    suggestion that the first appellant would be fit to attend  any  future
    hearing.  She explored the reasons why any further  psychiatric  report
    would be required  noting  that  it  was  not  required  to  advise  on
    medication and there was no  question  or  suggestion  that  the  first
    appellant  was  not  fit  to  fly.   In  any  event  this  was  only  a
    consideration that would arise if the appeal was refused.  As the judge
    found, any "background information" that Dr Albanese could obtain could
    only come from the first appellant himself  or  his  wife,  the  second
    appellant and she was in a position to give that  evidence  so  far  as
    relevant to the issues under appeal including information which she had
    obtained about that from the first appellant.  The judge found that  as
    far as the litigation friend was concerned it was entirely  speculative
    whether withdrawal through the first appellant's  personal  possessions
    would have thrown up anything of assistance.   The  judge  was  clearly
    aware that the first appellant was legally  represented  and  that  his
    wife was in attendance at court, albeit that she did not have a  formal
    appeal before the  Tribunal.   In  the  circumstances,  the  judge  was
    entitled not accept that the vague assertion that the litigation friend
    "could consider to what extent the  matters  before  the  Tribunal  are
    properly presenting the appellant's case" and  noted  that  the  second
    appellant claimed to have shared the first  appellant's  experience  of
    the alleged persecution and ill-treatment in India.  That to my mind is
    a critical issue in this case and  the  judge  indeed  found  that  the
    second appellant was the best person best placed to speak for the first
    appellant where he was not in a position to give evidence himself.

33. There was medical evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in  the  form
    of a letter from the South London and Maudsley  NHS  Hospital  from  Dr
    Clive Timehin dated 22  April  2016  and  which  set  out  the  medical
    difficulties of the appellant.  I note that this appeal was  lodged  by
    the appellant's solicitors on 15 September  2016  and  from  the  email
    correspondence it would appear that Dr Albanese was sounded out  for  a
    further report on 27 October 2016.  This suggests that had  the  report
    been more pressing the solicitors would have identified that this was a
    requirement before  that  date.   Indeed,  as  the  judge  recorded  at
    paragraph 20, the letter from Wimbledon Solicitors lodging  the  appeal
    was dated 14 September 2016 and the request  for  the  adjournment  was
    dated 28 October 2016 when the hearing had been set down for 3 November
    2016.

34. Overall I consider that the  judge  found  that  there  was  sufficient
    medical evidence  together  with  the  evidence  given  by  the  second
    appellant, the wife, in order to conduct a fair hearing.

35. I have considered AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department but it is clear that there was no possibility that the first
    appellant would give any evidence and there  had  been  ample  time  to
    obtain a witness statement if that had been possible.  As identified at
    paragraph 21(d) of AM  expert  medical  evidence  can  be  critical  in
    providing explanations for  difficulties  and  giving  a  coherent  and
    consistent account of past events  and  for  identifying  any  relevant
    safeguards required to  meet  the  vulnerabilities  that  can  lead  to
    disadvantage in the determination process, for example, in the  ability
    to give oral testimony and under what conditions.   It  is  nonetheless
    the case that the appellant was not  to be a witness in his case but it
    was his wife who had experienced the same events  with  him,  who  gave
    oral evidence.   Critically  the  appellant's  vulnerability  had  been
    recognised by the judge but those were not factors which were  relevant
    to the limitation of oral testimony because he did not  give  any  oral
    testimony.  There was a focus in  the  Tribunal  determination  on  the
    credibility but the focus was on the wife's account and bearing in mind
    the letter report given by Dr Timehin, which  did  not  attribute  past
    events  to  the  appellant's  problems,  and  the  observations  of  Dr
    Albanese, the judge was not persuaded that a  full  report  would  have
    taken this matter further.  At all points  the  appellant  was  legally
    represented.

36. I therefore do not conclude that the judge's overall decision to refuse
    to adjourn was in the circumstances unfair;  she gave adequate  reasons
    for refusing to so adjourn.  Fairness was implicit in her reasoning.

37. I turn to the second ground of challenge.  It is incorrect  to  suggest
    that the solicitors requested a  specific  dialect  when  requesting  a
    Tamil speaker.  The reply notice dated 17 October 2016 is on  file  and
    this identified that an interpreter would be needed and in response  to
    the question of whether an interpreter was required, 'if yes',  'please
    tell us what language and  dialect  you  require',   the  response  was
    merely "Tamil".  This is  important  because  the  solicitors  had  not
    indicated that a specific  dialect  was  required  and  if  it  was  so
    important I would expect that that would indeed  have  been  requested.
    Secondly, at no point did Counsel before the judge raise any  issue  in
    relation to the appellant's difficulties with an interpreter.

38. I pointed out that in the Record of Proceedings  there  were  at  least
    four pages recorded of examination-in-chief of the appellant's wife  by
    Ms Hassan and some detailed questioning  at  the  commencement  of  the
    hearing.  Ms Hassan submitted that she did not speak  Tamil  and  would
    not understand whether the appellant had understood her or not but  the
    Record of Proceedings do not identify any repeated questions during the
    examination-in-chief and no recorded requests to re-clarify.  I do  not
    accept that by the end of four pages of examination-in-chief  that  the
    judge and Counsel would  not  have  identified  difficulties  with  the
    interpretation or that during the opportunity which was afforded to  Ms
    Hassan to re-examine that those issues would not have been  identified.



39. The Record of Proceedings details a flow of examining  questions  which
    do not reflect  difficulties  with  understanding.   I  note  that  the
    solicitors wrote to the Tribunal on 25 November 2017, some three  weeks
    after the Tribunal hearing to point out prior to the refusal that:

         "The appellant's wife speaks some English and she  understood  that
         some of what the interpreter was communicating to the Tribunal  but
         when she tried to correct him, she was advised to limit the answers
         she was  giving.   Indeed  we  understand  from  Counsel  that  the
         appellant's wife was on  many  occasions  throughout  her  evidence
         asked to answer the question asked and to limit her responses."

40. This letter also acknowledges that both  Counsel  and  the  appellant's
    wife  confirmed  that  the  judge  checked  the  interpreter  and   the
    appellant's wife's ability to communicate by asking questions about the
    appellant's travel that morning.  The appellant's wife asserted in  her
    appeal before me that  there  were  no  initial  problems  but  as  the
    questions  became  more  detailed  she  struggled  to  understand   the
    interpreter.  That the appellant's wife did not  say  anything  to  the
    Tribunal out of fear but  she  would  be  considered  to  be  rude  and
    disruptive does not bear  close  scrutiny  on  the  facts.   I  am  not
    persuaded that during the hearing which took  place  over  three  hours
    that the appellant would not have signalled difficulties to  the  legal
    representative.

41. Turning to the third ground I  find  no  merit  in  this  ground.   The
    domestic law at present is that set out by N v UK [2005] UKHL  31   and
    the high threshold remains.  The judgment of Paposhvili v  Belgium  (no
    4173810 GC) in the European Court of Human Rights may be persuasive but
    it has not been incorporated into domestic law.   I  do  not  therefore
    find criticism of the judge in this respect.  The judge did not accept,
    [63]-[64] of the decision, on the evidence presented, that  there  were
    inadequate medical facilities in India to treat the appellant.

Notice of Decision

42. I find that the decision contains no material  error  of  law  and  the
    decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings. This  order
is imposed as the appellant has mental health difficulties.

Signed

Helen Rimington
Upper                Tribunal                Judge                 Rimington
                       16th October 2017
