
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA099342016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 May 2017                        |On 26 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                            mrs Farjana Akter Ema
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  15
    January 1988.  The appellant claimed asylum on 2 February  2016  having
    arrived in the UK on 16 August 2011.  That claim  was  refused  by  the
    respondent in a decision dated 6  September  2016.   In  decisions  and
    reasons promulgated on 1  December  2016  following  a  hearing  on  19
    October 2016, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J K Swane dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission granted by
    a Judge of the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

    Ground 1 - failure to engage with material evidence in the case;

    Ground 2 - flawed assessment of the evidence and basis of the claim.

Error of Law Hearing

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Symes made a Rule 15A application to  admit
    into  evidence  the  respondent's  position  in  relation  to  internal
    relocation  and  state  protection  in  the  form  of  a  copy  of  the
    respondent's country information and guidance - Bangladesh:  Background
    Information, including actors of  protection  and  internal  relocation
    dated 28 November 2014.  Mr Kotas had  no  specific  objection  to  the
    admission of this evidence. He did not dispute that the respondent  had
    a duty to  put  this  material  into  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, EB (Sri Lanka) [2007] EWCA Civ 85 applied.

 4. In any event such was ultimately unnecessary as the same  guidance  was
    already included in the appellant's bundle at paragraphs 109 to 137.

 5. Mr Symes referred me to the appellant's bundle at pages 42 and 43 where
    the appellant's uncle's written evidence was  set  out  including  that
    during a trip back to Bangladesh on 8 January  2005  he  met  with  the
    appellant's father.  Mr Symes submitted this was one piece of  evidence
    which was overlooked and  in  addition,  at  pages  48  to  52  of  the
    appellant's bundle, the witness statement  of  the  appellant's  sister
    Miss AAS was set out.  Mr Symes submitted that this  statement  was  in
    relation to primary fact and not  just  retelling  of  the  appellant's
    account.  At page 48 paragraph 3, the appellant's sister set  out  that
    the appellant's husband had tortured her; at page 49  paragraph  4  the
    appellant's sister recounted the  complaint  made  by  the  appellant's
    father to the Union Council  Chairman;  at  page  49  paragraph  7  she
    recounted threats made by the appellant's then husband after  she  went
    to London and at page 50 paragraph 9,  the  appellant's  sister  stated
    that leaders of the Awami League arranged a meeting which insulted  the
    appellant's father and that the appellant's father was involved in  BNP
    politics.  At page 51, paragraph 12 the outstanding  case  against  the
    appellant's brother was set out and page 50 paragraph 10, set out  that
    her father was falsely implicated.

 6. Mr  Symes  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  overlooked  this
    evidence.  At paragraphs 27 and 28 the judge set out the live  evidence
    of the appellant's uncle although not that which  was  in  his  witness
    statement but made no findings.  It was  submitted  that  most  of  the
    appellant's problems were asserted to have arisen after her divorce  on
    3  December  2012  and  that  the  judge  did  not  reject  credibility
    specifically and that the judge had overlooked the evidence which was a
    material error of law.

 7. It was submitted that this was relevant in assessing whether protection
    was  available  to  the  appellant.   The  respondent's   own   country
    information and guidance confirmed at  paragraph  1.2.3  and  paragraph
    1.2.7 that a fact-sensitive assessment  must  be  made  as  to  whether
    effective protection would be available in the particular circumstances
    of the person and that past persecution  and  past  lack  of  effective
    protection  may  indicate  that  effective  protection  would  not   be
    available and that careful consideration had to be made in relation  to
    the relevance and reasonableness of internal relocation on  a  case  by
    case basis taking full account of the individual circumstances  of  the
    particular person.  It was submitted that it was not  the  Home  Office
    case that these cases can never succeed and  therefore  the  particular
    circumstances must  be  considered  very  carefully.   It  was  further
    submitted that the error was not  cured  by  the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 44 and following, that even if the appellant could not return
    to her home she and her husband could relocate within Bangladesh.

 8. Mr Kotas submitted that the judge had undertaken a  very  comprehensive
    and  careful  consideration  of  the  evidence  in  relation   to   the
    information that it was alleged was missed.   The  judge  recorded  the
    oral evidence of the appellant's uncle at paragraph 27 and the  witness
    statement confirms that the uncle was not saying  anything  further  to
    what the appellant said.  The judge recorded at 28 that the appellant's
    uncle confirmed that "aside from what happened  what  happened  at  his
    meeting with the appellant's father,  everything  he  knows  about  the
    appellant or her family is  what  the  appellant  has  told  him."   In
    relation  to  the  statement  from  the  appellant's  sister  Mr  Kotas
    submitted that this did no more than confirm  that  the  appellant  had
    problems with her father and with her former husband  and  stepbrother.
    Mr Kotas further submitted that there were numerous credibility  issues
    in the appellant's case and that the best the judge could have done, in
    respect of the sister's statement, was consider this in the round.   Mr
    Kotas referred to the fact that at [12] in the decision  the  appellant
    stated that her fears started one week after she arrived and then  that
    she replied to cross-examination that when she arrived she did not have
    a fear.  The judge also took into consideration the  appellant's  delay
    in claiming asylum at  [40]  where  the  judge  found  the  appellant's
    account in relation to a delay of some five and  a  half  years  to  be
    unlikely and that she has not given a cogent reason for her failure  to
    claim asylum.  Mr Kotas noted that  this  was  not  challenged  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

 9. Mr Kotas outlined that at [14] of the decision the judge  recorded  the
    inconsistencies  including  that  the   appellant   stated   that   her
    stepbrothers and ex-husband and his brother were threatening her father
    but then stated that her father had  not  been  threatened  with  harm.
    This completely contradicted paragraph 62 of her witness statement,  at
    page 37 of the appellant's bundle, where she stated that her father had
    been threatened.  At paragraph [15] of the  decision  and  reasons  the
    appellant was unable to say why she had not provided any evidence as to
    her husband or his family's influence in the Awami League and the judge
    noted the inconsistency between her oral evidence where  she  said  she
    knew they were supporters but did not know their positions  whereas  in
    her written evidence she had said that they were  influential  members.
    At [18] the judge noted the inconsistency in the evidence  in  relation
    to the names of her brothers and at  [19]  the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant was asked why her brother would have acted as  a  witness  in
    the divorce if he supported her father and was unable  to  provide  any
    explanation other than the divorce had to  be  properly  witnessed  and
    that it was true.  At [20] the appellant indicated  that  her  siblings
    were too busy to give evidence and could not get time off but that  her
    uncle had come.  At [23] a further discrepancy  in  the  names  of  the
    appellant's brothers was noted  in  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    husband.  At [25] the judge noted that the appellant's husband did  not
    find it contradictory that the appellant would be both forced to  marry
    another man and be stoned to death.

10. In any event Mr Kotas submitted that none of these issues were material
    as in effect the judge accepted the appellant's case including that she
    was the victim of domestic violence from her  first  marriage  at  [39]
    which was consistent with the steps taken by her father, to report  her
    ex-husband and when that failed, to act as a witness  in  the  divorce.
    Mr Kotas submitted that the appellant  feared  non-state  actors.   She
    feared her in-laws.  The judge made findings that her own family  would
    not have any further interest in her.  The judge found at 43  that  "it
    is likely her siblings would be willing to support her if she  returned
    to Bangladesh given her evidence that they  have  forgiven  her".   The
    judge also noted that the circumstances had changed in relation to  her
    own family as her father is deceased and her sisters and  brother  have
    forgiven her.

11. Taking the case at its highest Mr Kotas submitted that even if it  were
    accepted the most that the appellant has is a problem with her in-laws.
     The appellant would return as a  family  unit  with  her  husband  and
    daughter as recorded by the  judge  at  [43].   There  was  nothing  to
    contradict the finding that the appellant could go  home  to  her  home
    area.  However even if the judge was wrong in this Mr  Kotas  submitted
    that internal relocation was a viable option and  that  the  additional
    information from her uncle and her sister did not change the position.

12. Mr Symes in reply relied on his central submission that the  judge  had
    overlooked evidence of post-divorce animosity held by  the  appellant's
    ex-husband's family and that the appellant's sister's witness statement
    was not just historic but spoke to the  one-sided  arbitration  between
    the families in September 2016 and involving the Awami League.

Discussion

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge, as noted, accepted  that  the  appellant
    was a victim of domestic  violence.   The  judge  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's explanation for her delay in  claiming  asylum  until  some
    five and a half years after she claims her fear arose.   There  was  no
    substantive challenge to the judge's findings that the appellant's risk
    from her own family was no longer an issue given that  her  father  had
    died and that their main problem was the fact that it was suspected she
    was having a relationship outside of marriage after  she  divorced  her
    husband and had brought shame on the family and now she was married  to
    the man she was accused of having a relationship  and  her  father  had
    died and her siblings had forgiven her.

14. The appellant challenges the judge's findings primarily in relation  to
    her ex-husband's family.  The judge finds that  her  ex-husband's  main
    motivation appears to have been  money  and  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's father is now deceased means that the main source of  funds
    that the  appellant  gave  to  her  ex-husband  has  gone.   The  judge
    therefore found, at [41], to the lower standard that the appellant's ex-
    husband no longer had any ongoing interest in her following  the  death
    of her father and her remarriage of the decision.  There was nothing in
    either the witness statement or oral evidence of the appellant's  uncle
    or the witness statement of the appellant's sister (who was not present
    before the First-tier Tribunal) which spoke to any of these  issues  or
    could substantially challenge the judge's findings that there would  no
    longer be any ongoing interest following the death of her father on her
    remarriage.

15. There was nothing in any of the evidence which the  judge  is  said  to
    have overlooked which substantively challenges the judge's findings  at
    [42] that her ex-husband's family and stepbrothers were not influential
    within the Awami League as  claimed  by  the  appellant.   Neither  the
    appellant's uncle nor the appellant's sister provided any evidence over
    and above that provided by the appellant and her husband in relation to
    the claims that they are influential.  The judge's primary  finding  on
    this was that the appellant and her husband had made assertions but had
    provided no evidence to  support  these  assertions.   The  appellant's
    sister's statement recounts the appellant's claimed version  of  events
    in Bangladesh but provides no additional  information  to  support  the
    claim that they were influential.

16. I have also considered that whilst the judge discussed the evidence she
    did not specifically in her reasoning  make  findings  on  the  uncle's
    evidence or the sister's witness statement, the  uncle's  evidence  was
    summarised at [27] and [28] and the  judge  at  paragraph  [8]  of  the
    decision and reasons  set  out  the  documentary  evidence  before  her
    including  the  appellant's  bundle  (which   included   the   sister's
    statement).  There is nothing in the sister's  witness  statement  that
    could cure the inconsistencies of the  appellant's  and  her  husband's
    evidence in relation to the claimed influence of  the  appellant's  ex-
    husband's family in the Awami League.

17. The judge also made a "catch-all" finding at [42] that she  could  "see
    no reason why the appellant's stepbrothers would have any  interest  in
    her" and went on to relate why this was including that  they  were  not
    related by blood and that there was no credible reason advanced  as  to
    why they would maintain any interest in  the  appellant  following  the
    death of her father.  I am satisfied considering the  judge's  decision
    in its entirety that  this  encompassed  a  consideration  of  all  the
    evidence before her.  Even if it did not, any error is not material  as
    nothing in that evidence speaks to  challenging  the  judge's  findings
    that there was no credible reason for any interest in the appellant now
    that her father is deceased, even though it was asserted that he was  a
    political opponent of her ex-family.  The judge  also  found  that  the
    appellant herself was not active politically and had  only  helped  her
    father in a minor capacity.

18. The judge gave careful  consideration  to  the  evidence  and  provided
    cogent reasons for finding that the appellant would not be at  risk  on
    return and that there would be no ongoing interest  in  the  appellant.
    Those findings were properly open to her and are not undermined by  any
    alleged failure to take into consideration the appellant's uncle's  and
    sister's evidence.

19. In addition the judge made alternative findings at [42]  that  internal
    relocation was open to the appellant particularly given  that  her  ex-
    husband's family do not have reach or influence at [44].

20. There is no merit in the submission that  the  judge  failed  to  fully
    consider the background country information which I  am  satisfied  was
    before the judge  and  her  decision  discloses  consideration  thereof
    including at [45] that she considered the background evidence which was
    not in dispute and noted that there was  no  background  evidence  that
    related specifically to the appellant or her  particular  circumstances
    and that the background evidence did not add anything in the  light  of
    her findings about the likelihood that she would face risk from her ex-
    husband, his family or her stepbrothers.  As I have already noted, that
    background  evidence  included  the  evidence  which  the   appellant's
    representative purported to introduce before me.

21. The judge made adequate findings which were properly open to her and it
    was not properly suggested that those findings were irrational.   I  am
    satisfied that they were not.

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error of law such that it should be set aside.

    No anonymity direction was sought or is made

Signed                                  Dated:  24 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

