
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09671/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 18 January 2021                           |On : 3 February 2021          |
|                                               |                              |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     SM
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna, instructed by Kilby Jones Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
refusing her asylum and human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 12 March 1989. She arrived  in
the UK on 13 November 2016 and claimed asylum shortly after her arrival.

The basis of the appellant's claim was  that  she  was  a  victim  of  human
trafficking and would be at risk on return  to  Albania  as  a  result.  She
claimed to have travelled to Italy with her partner,  S,  on  22  July  2016
after her family disapproved of her proposed marriage to  him.  She  claimed
that S left her with his friends in Rome whilst he went to  look  for  work,
that he called her to tell her that  he  had  been  arrested  and  that  she
should do what his friends told her to raise money for his legal  fees,  and
that his friends took her to a house where she  was  kept  under  guard  and
made to work as a prostitute. In October 2016 the police  raided  the  house
and helped her and she was sent back to Albania. She went home but was  told
by her mother that she needed to leave as she had shamed the family and  her
father may kill her on his return. She then went to stay with a  friend  and
she left Albania in November 2016. She feared her family if she returned  to
Albania, and also feared being re-trafficked.

Prior to the decision in her claim and following  a  referral  through  NRM,
the appellant was found by the Competent Authority, on 12  August  2019,  to
be a victim of human trafficking.

The appellant's asylum and human rights claim was refused  on  26  September
2019. The respondent accepted that she was a  victim  of  trafficking,  that
she feared her family and feared being re-trafficked and accepted  that  she
had a genuine subjective fear of return to Albania. However, the  respondent
did not accept that that fear was  objectively  well-founded  because  there
was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal  relocation   alternative
available to her.

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and her appeal  was
heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 6 November 2019 by  Judge  Traynor.  The
judge noted the appellant's evidence, that she had been told by  the  police
on entry into Albania to go somewhere where they would  offer  her  shelter,
but that she went home instead as the  police  told  her  that  the  shelter
would only be short-term and that many families  were  prepared  to  forgive
and offer  support  in  cases  like  hers.  The  appellant's  evidence  was,
further, that whilst she was staying with her friend after her  mother  told
her to leave, she was told by her  mother  that  two  men  had  visited  the
family house looking for her and she believed from the description that  one
was S her former partner and the other was a police  officer.  She  believed
that S  was  part  of  a  large  network  of  organised  crime  involved  in
trafficking and she therefore fled Albania to save herself  from  being  re-
trafficked.

The judge noted that the respondent's refusal decision did not seek to  draw
adverse inferences as to the  appellant's  credibility  and  that  the  only
issue before him was  risk  on  return.  However,  he  did  not  accept  the
appellant's account of her former partner coming to  look  for  her  at  her
home and did  not  accept  that  there  was  anyone  else  involved  in  her
trafficking except for her partner and his two  friends  in  any  event  and
found in the circumstances that she could relocate to another  part  of  the
country away from her home area. The  judge  considered  that  there  was  a
sufficiency of protection available to the appellant and that  she  was  not
at risk of being re-trafficked. He accordingly  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
judge noted that the appellant was pregnant and recorded her claim that  her
partner had left her when he found out about her  past,  but  he  considered
that she could safely  return  to  Albania  and  that  there  were  no  very
significant obstacles to her integration in that country.

The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge Traynor's  decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on the grounds that he  had  made  material  misdirection  in
law, that he had made irrational findings, that he had  failed  properly  to
apply the relevant considerations in TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG  [2016]
UKUT 92 and that he had made a material error of law  in  his  consideration
of Article 8. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.

The matter came  before  me.  Ms  Cunha  conceded  that  the  third  ground,
referring to the application of TD and AD, had been made out and  that  that
was a material error  of  law  requiring  the  decision  to  be  set  aside.
However, she asked that the judge's findings of fact otherwise be  preserved
and that the decision be re-made  only  on  the  issues  of  sufficiency  of
protection and internal flight. Ms Patyna's submission in response was  that
it was difficult to separate out the findings of fact from the judge's  lack
of assessment of relevant considerations under  TD  and  AD,  as  they  were
intertwined. Further, with regard to the first two  grounds,  she  submitted
that the judge's  plausibility  findings  were  made  without  reference  to
relevant parts of TD and AD and that adverse credibility findings  had  been
made without proper reason and despite  the  respondent  not  having  raised
credibility concerns. She requested that the matter be  remitted  for  a  de
novo hearing.

I find myself in agreement with Ms Patyna, that it  would  be  difficult  to
separate out the judge's failure properly to apply TD  and  AD  -  a  matter
conceded by Ms Cunha for the respondent - from his findings  of  fact.  That
is particularly so because, in conceding that  the  third  ground  was  made
out, the respondent accepts that the judge failed to  undertake  a  holistic
assessment of the appellant's circumstances in the light of  the  background
material and country guidance. Furthermore, I agree with Ms Patyna that  the
judge made findings rejecting aspects of the appellant's  account,  such  as
her claim that the traffickers were part of a larger  organisation,  without
providing any reasons for so doing and  having  previously  noted  that  the
respondent  did  not  raise  credibility  concerns  about  the   appellant's
evidence. In the circumstances I do not agree  that  there  are  aspects  of
this decision that can properly be preserved and it seems  to  me  that  the
matter has to go back to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

Accordingly, I set aside Judge Traynor's decision in its entirety,  with  no
findings preserved and remit the case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
heard de novo before a different judge.


DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge Traynor.

      Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:   S Kebede                                 Dated:      19 January
2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
