

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/09431/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 25 July 2019                      |on 02 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  HAMADAMEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the  decision  of  Designated  FtT  Judge
    Murray, promulgated on 29 October 2018.

 2. The appellant's grounds, set out in his application filed with  the  UT
    on 13 March 2019, are over lengthy, and contain much repetition of  and
    insistence upon the appellant's case, rather than clear  identification
    of error on points of law.  They  are  advanced  under  headings  -  1,
    failure to apply country  guidance  /  provide  adequate  reasons  [for
    departing from guidance], and 2, failure to grant an adjournment.

 3. Permission was granted on 22 March 2019, on the view  that  in  finding
    Kirkuk no longer to be a contested area, the judge  arguably  erred  by
    failing to apply AA [2015] UKUT 00544.  The grant does not specify  any
    other arguable issue, but is not restricted.

 4. Mr Forrest helpfully condensed and re-grouped  the  grounds  of  appeal
    into error on these issues - 1, departure  from  country  guidance  for
    insufficient or no reason; 2, no, or inadequate, reasons,  for  finding
    internal relocation not to be unduly harsh; and 3, not in the interests
    of justice not to adjourn the hearing.

 5. Mr Govan said at the start of the hearing that the respondent  accepted
    that error was disclosed by ground 1, but took  the  position  that  it
    would be immaterial, because the case turned on inability to  relocate.
    Mr Forrest said that failure to follow a  "factual  precedent"  was  an
    error which led to reversal.

 6. Having heard the submissions, I reserved my decision on issues 1 and 2.

 7. I indicated that issue 3, whether the judge erred  by  not  adjourning,
    would not be sustained.  I deal with that next.

 8. Paragraph 8 of the decision records that Mr Chaudry, for the appellant,
    asked to adjourn so that further attempts could be made  to  trace  his
    family.  The judge declined to adjourn, considering the time which  had
    gone by since he began trying to make contact  in  2016,  and  lack  of
    progress.

 9. The evidence of the appellant's efforts to trace his family begins with
    a referral to the Red Cross through his present  representatives  on  5
    April 2018, copied at pp. 12 - 14 of his first bundle in the FtT.  This
    provides the appellant's name  and  date  of  birth,  and  few  further
    particulars about him.  Under "reasons for referral" it states that  he
    seeks assistance to find his parents and sister, from whom he separated
    in Turkey, and a brother from whom he separated in France.   No  names,
    dates of birth, past addresses, telephone numbers, or other information
    is supplied about these persons.   No  information  is  provided  about
    relatives in Iraq, where the appellant has (at least) grandparents.

10. There was also before the FtT a  copy  of  a  "chaser"  email  sent  by
    solicitors on 13 August 2018,  when  asking  the  Red  Cross  also  for
    support for the appellant in the UK.

11. I was advised that solicitors sent a further  email  on  3  June  2019,
    without response.  It was accepted that the matter would be no  further
    forward if the decision were to be remade than it was before the FtT.

12. I observed that in light of the scanty  details  provided  to  the  Red
    Cross it was unsurprising that there had been no  result.   Mr  Forrest
    offered the explanation, on his  instructions,  that  regular  practice
    with the Red Cross is to make an initial  approach,  without  providing
    details, following which they revert  for  further  information.   That
    explanation does not advance the ground, because (a) it was not offered
    to the FtT; (b) the suggested practice of the Red Cross appears, on the
    face of it, unlikely, if not absurd; and (c) anyone  anxious  to  trace
    relatives could be expected to provide all available useful details  at
    the first opportunity.  Such effort as has been made does not look like
    a genuine attempt to trace.

13.  Refusal  of  the  adjournment  application  by  the  FtT  involved  no
    procedural unfairness, as matters then stood.  The passage of time, and
    information subsequently available, only reinforces the view that there
    was no good reason to adjourn.

14. I find ground 1 to be incidental, because despite the position taken on
    reversal, the submissions of both representatives  centred  on  whether
    the judge's findings on internal flight were supportable.  If  internal
    flight is available to the appellant, it does not  matter  whether  his
    home area was at the time of the FtT hearing a disputed  area  or  not.
    Nevertheless, I will consider the merits of the ground.

15. Country guidance, published in 2015, categorised Kirkuk as a  contested
    area.

16. The respondent's decision dated 12 July 2018 states at [17] that Kirkuk
    is no longer a contested area.   The  issue  was  squarely  before  the
    appellant from that time.

17. The refusal decision relies upon the respondent's "country  policy  and
    information note" (which, in turn, cites its sources).   That  was  the
    position taken by the respondent at the hearing.

18. The appellant's representative in response said, as recorded  at  [31],
    that AA [2017] EWCA Civ 944 "still applied", and so the guidance had to
    be followed.

19. The judge at [47] said simply that the appellant's area  is  no  longer
    contested.  That is presumably  based  on  accepting  the  respondent's
    position and rejecting the submission for  the  appellant,  but  it  is
    unreasoned - perhaps because this was not the crux of the case.

20. Country guidance is a  unique  species  of  "factual  precedent".   The
    Practice Directions are relevant:


      12.2  A reported determination of the Tribunal, the  AIT  or  the  IAT
      bearing the letters "CG" shall be treated as an authoritative  finding
      on the country guidance issue identified in the  determination,  based
      upon the evidence before the members of the Tribunal, the AIT  or  the
      IAT that determine the  appeal.  As  a  result,  unless  it  has  been
      expressly superseded or replaced by any later "CG"  determination,  or
      is inconsistent with other authority that is binding on the  Tribunal,
      such a country  guidance  case  is  authoritative  in  any  subsequent
      appeal, so far as that appeal:
           (a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and
           (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.


      12.3 A list of current CG cases will be maintained on the Tribunal's
      website. Any representative of a party to an appeal concerning a
      particular country will be expected to be conversant with the current
      "CG" determinations relating to that country.

      12.4 Because of the principle that like cases  should  be  treated  in
      like manner, any failure to  follow  a  clear,  apparently  applicable
      country guidance case or to show why it does not apply to the case  in
      question is likely to be regarded as grounds for appeal on a point  of
      law.


21. For obvious reasons, country guidance is liable to updating.   It  does
    not purport to freeze history. If the  evidence  about  the  issue  has
    changed, then the guidance is no longer authoritative and may be  shown
    no longer to apply: PD 12.2(a), 12.4.

22. See also Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice, 9th ed., 20.119.

23. The submission that AA in the  Court  of  Appeal  governs  the  current
    position in Kirkuk was  and  is  misconceived.   The  Court  of  Appeal
    engaged in legal analysis, not in updating the facts.

24. The appellant had been put on notice that it  was  contentious  whether
    the guidance remained factually accurate.  If he  did  not  agree  that
    Kirkuk is no longer contested, he required to counter with  a  critique
    of the evidence underpinning the respondent's position, or by producing
    further evidence on his side, not by reliance on guidance.  He did  not
    base his case, either in the FtT or in the UT, on any evidence.

25. The principle can be illustrated by the appellant's acceptance  in  the
    UT that, contrary to the position set out in guidance, and at the  time
    of the FtT hearing, there are now direct flights to the IKR, and it  is
    not necessary to travel through Baghdad.

26. On internal flight, the grounds generally reassert the appellant's case
    and say the judge's reasons  are  inadequate.   It  was  common  ground
    before me that possession of or ability to obtain  a  CSID  was  a  key
    issue.  It was said again for the appellant that he has "no  /  limited
    family members" in Iraq to obtain one for him,  that  he  "cannot  live
    with a family member", and that there was "no evidence  that  he  knows
    his family" in Kurdistan.  It was submitted that it was  irrational  to
    say that he might ask his grandparents to assist.


27. Mr Govan submitted that it was important to bear in mind  that  it  was
    for the appellant to establish the primary facts, and to look  at  what
    he proved, or failed to prove, rather than ongoing unproven assertions.
     Those points were well taken.


28. The judge found at  [47]  that  there  were  credibility  issues  under
    section 8 of the 2004 Act.  No error is suggested therein.


29. In the same paragraph, the judge found it to lack credibility that  the
    appellant lost his passport and CSID because his father had  them  when
    they became separated.  She thought that as the appellant is an  adult,
    there was no reason for his father to have those  documents.   That  is
    well within sense.  I do not accept that  it  is  not  legally  a  good
    reason.


30. At [48], the judge found no sense in the claim that the appellant might
    be the victim of an honour killing.  There is no error in that.  It was
    reasonable to hold in consequence at [49] that he  could  seek  support
    from his paternal grandfather's family.  It was also reasonable to note
    at [50] that the appellant made no  apparent  attempt  to  contact  his
    paternal grandfather, but there was no reason not to, and he was likely
    to be traceable.


31. Similarly, at [31], there was no  reason  for  the  appellant  to  have
    problems with his maternal family.


32. The judge did not find the appellant generally credible, and  no  error
    is shown in that.  She recorded his  evidence  that  he  had  lost  his
    passport and CSID, but rejected his explanation. She did not make  (and
    perhaps could not make) a positive finding that he still has them,  but
    her analysis  of  whether  he  could  obtain  replacements  is  in  the
    alternative.


33. The judge expressly rejected at [52] the contention  of  no  family  in
    Iraq to help.  That is a good reason for finding that the appellant was
    not assisted by the report from Dr Fatah, being  based  on  absence  of
    family.  She also says there that  she  does  not  understand  why  the
    appellant limited his tracing  request  to  the  Red  Cross,  which  is
    another sound  point.   The  finding  at  [53]  that  he  could  obtain
    replacement documents is well founded.


34. At the heart of this case there is not a failure by  the  FtT  to  make
    reasoned findings on internal flight, or any other legal error.   There
    is a failure by  the  appellant  to  give  candid  evidence  about  the
    availability to him  of  documents  and  of  family  contacts.   He  is
    concerned to conceal rather than to disclose the true position.  It  is
    unsurprising, and involves no error on a point of law, that the FtT did
    not make the findings in his favour which he sought.  His grounds  are,
    in essence, only insistence on matters on which he offered no  credible
    evidence.

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


36. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      26 July 2019
      UT Judge Macleman


