
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09176/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th October 2018                           |On 23rd October 2018          |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                mr saman [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Iran  born  on  29th  May  1990.   The
    Appellant left Iran in February 2016 arriving in the  UK  hidden  in  a
    lorry on 3rd March 2016.  He claimed asylum  the  following  day.   His
    claim for asylum was based on having a well-founded fear of persecution
    in  Iran  on  the  basis  of  his  religion  as  he  has  converted  to
    Christianity.  The Appellant's application was  refused  by  Notice  of
    Refusal dated 16th August 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Alty sitting at Manchester on  20th  April  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 3rd May 2017 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 10th May 2017 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was refused by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Woodcraft on 30th August 2017.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were
    lodged  on  18th  September  2017.   Those  renewed  grounds  addressed
    specifically the  refusal  to  grant  permission  by  Designated  Judge
    Woodcraft.

 4. On 4th October 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Finch  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Finch noted that in paragraph 40  of  her  decision  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had found that the Appellant's conversion  to
    Christianity was  not  genuine,  he  attended  services  at,  Liverpool
    Cathedral on a regular basis.  In paragraph 47 of her decision she  had
    also found that it was likely that the Appellant  would  be  identified
    for questioning when screened on arrival in Iran as he had been in  the
    United Kingdom since March 2016 and did not have a passport.   However,
    the judge did not go  on  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant cannot be expected to lie if he is asked whether  he  applied
    for asylum in the United Kingdom and if so on what basis.  Further,  he
    could also not be expected to lie about his conversion to  Christianity
    and therefore she did not fully consider whether his  Conversion  would
    place him at risk of persecution due to  his  religious  views.   As  a
    consequence, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch considered that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  arguable  errors  of  law  and
    granted permission to appeal.

 5. On 31st October 2017 the Secretary of state responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  It was submitted therein that the grounds had no
    merit and merely disagreed with the adverse outcome of the  appeal  and
    that the judge considered all the evidence that was  available  to  her
    and came to a conclusion open to her based upon that evidence  and  the
    relevant Rules on the lower standard of proof and did not disclose  any
    error.

 6. On 21st February 2018 the appeal came before me to determine whether or
    not there was a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.  At that hearing the Appellant  appeared  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Schwenk and the Secretary of  State  appeared  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Bates.  It is helpful to the continuity of
    this appeal that they continue to appear  before  me  today.   At  that
    hearing Mr Schwenk relied on his Grounds of Appeal stating  that  there
    are two problems with the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    Firstly, her approach to credibility and secondly her approach  towards
    the Appellant's  sur  place  activity.   He  relies  on  both  grounds.
    Turning to the issue of credibility, he points out that paragraph 36 of
    her determination the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  drawn  an  adverse
    inference from the fact that the Appellant has failed  to  produce  the
    warrants of the arrest of his cousins.  Mr Schwenk  submits  that  such
    reasoning appears to assume that it is possible for  the  Appellant  to
    provide such documents and that there was no evidence to support such a
    finding.  He contends that that is contrary  to  the  Respondent's  own
    country information and guidance, referring me to the July 2016 Country
    Guidance.  He reminded  me  that  that  guidance  points  out  that  in
    principle in criminal cases substituted service through  members  of  a
    family is not acceptable.  Consequently there was no evidence available
    to the judge from which he could reasonably  conclude  that  an  arrest
    warrant was available to the Appellant, family  members,  his  business
    partner or anyone else.

 7. Secondly Mr Schwenk takes me to paragraphs 8 and 9 of  his  Grounds  of
    Appeal and to the judge's conclusions at paragraph 32  with  regard  to
    the Appellant's claim relating  to  the  killing  of  his  dog  by  the
    authorities on 2nd May 2015 and that the conclusion  of  the  judge  on
    this point was unreasoned and thus an error in law.  Further  he  notes
    that at paragraph 34 of her determination Judge Alty  has  stated  that
    the Appellant's account of converting family  members  to  Christianity
    "is not  compelling  given  the  timescales  and  the  implications  of
    conversion".  Mr Schwenk submits that  the  judge's  use  of  the  word
    "compelling" reveals that she may have applied too high a standard  and
    that the Appellant only has to show that it was reasonably likely  that
    conversion has taken place.

 8. Mr Schwenk turns to the claims relating to the  Appellant's  sur  place
    activities, making out that that does not as a general principle depend
    on positive credibility findings.  He notes that the judge rejected the
    Appellant's claim to be a genuine convert to Christianity, however  she
    had accepted that he had been baptised in the UK and that he  regularly
    attended services at Liverpool  Cathedral.   He  reminds  me  that  the
    Appellant's case is that following the authorities of AB  and  SSH,  at
    the point of return the Appellant is  reasonably  likely  to  be  asked
    questions, true answers to which will lead  him  to  be  at  risk.   He
    submits that these questions would concern his involvement in Christian
    activities which are likely to be seen as  anti-Islamic,  whether  they
    are genuine or not.  He contends that at paragraph 47 in  her  findings
    the judge has misunderstood the Appellant's arguments.

 9.  He  makes  reference  to  the  unreported  authority  of  HM  v   SSHD
    AA/09450/2014 (5th  May  2017)  a  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer, contending that that case is  authority  for  the  proposition
    that engagement in Christianity activities in the UK can  constitute  a
    risk factor on return to Iran even if the Appellant in question is  not
    a genuine convert to Christianity.  It  was  his  submission  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred by failing to adequately assess risk on
    the basis of the facts as she found  them  to  be,  which  include  the
    Appellant's baptism and regular church attendance.

10. Mr Bates at that hearing addressed the Appellant's sur place activities
    and started by reminding me that HM v SSHD was not a reported  decision
    and was hardly unique.  He acknowledged that the Appellant could not be
    expected to lie on return although it would be open for him to  say  he
    was not a genuine claimant and merely an economic migrant.

11. I noted that the judge had made adverse  findings  of  credibility  and
    concluded that there was no error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in finding that the Appellant had  not  established
    his account of his conversion to Christianity and the interest  of  the
    authorities in him even to the lower standard of  proof.   However  the
    issue regarding a disclosure of the Appellant's activities and  whether
    they would be viewed with hostility by the Iranian regime in particular
    due to his activities on Facebook were not sustainable and I  found  in
    directions referring to paragraphs 11 to 14 of the amended  Grounds  of
    Appeal relating to the  Appellant's  sur  place  activity  disclosed  a
    material error of law and was set aside.  It is important to  emphasise
    that that was the only basis upon which I found a material error of law
    and as such the matter was retained by me within the Upper Tribunal for
    rehearing on  that  issue  alone  and  I  gave  appropriate  directions
    including directions that the Appellant should  attend  court  for  the
    purpose of cross-examination.

12. The matter reappeared before me on 19th June when there was  a  request
    made by the Secretary of State to admit in evidence  the  authority  of
    LKIK v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (PA/03758/2016).
    That decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson was not a country guidance
    authority then and that remains the position.   I  gave  directions  at
    that stage on the understanding that it  was  the  intention  that  the
    above case would be reported in the foreseeable future albeit  that  it
    subsequently turned out that it  was  not.   I  granted  leave  to  the
    Appellant to admit further evidence  regarding  his  Facebook  postings
    such evidence to  include  a  witness  statement  specifically  related
    thereto and for the Appellant to attend for cross-examination solely on
    the issue of his Facebook activities.

13. It is against that background that the matter comes back before me  now
    for rehearing on that issue alone.  It is  important  throughout  these
    proceedings to note that the starting point is that there is a  finding
    that the Appellant's conversion to Christianity is not credible and  is
    not sustained and it is against that background that this appeal has to
    be heard.  No further evidence is to be given on that point.   Both  Mr
    Bates and Mr Schwenk continue to act for their respective clients.   Mr
    Bates is  required  pursuant  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules  Practice
    Direction Part 4 - Section 11 to make formal application to admit  into
    evidence the unreported decision of LKIIK.  That application is acceded
    to.  Mr Schwenk feels it would be of benefit to  the  Tribunal  if  the
    again unreported authority of Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  in  HM  v
    Secretary of State (reference AA/09450/2014)  promulgated  on  5th  May
    2007 was also before the court.  In the interests of fairness  I  agree
    that that too may be admitted.  It is on the above basis  that  I  hear
    the evidence.

The Evidence

14. The Appellant has produced  a  bundle  of  documents  for  the  resumed
    hearing  including  a  witness  statement  of  26th  June  2018   which
    specifically relates to the history  and  activities  of  his  Facebook
    account.  He confirms that statement as his evidence.  I have read  it.
    Mr Schwenk asks some additional questions based thereon.  The Appellant
    claims in his statement to have 3,100 friends on Facebook many of  whom
    live in Iran.  He advises that that number has now risen to  5,000  and
    that approximately 2,000 of those Facebook followers live in Iran.   He
    also advises that he uses Telegram which he describes as a social media
    App popular in  Iran.   My  understanding  from  his  evidence  is  the
    Telegram is a cloud  based  instant  messaging  and  voiceover  service
    similar to WhatsApp or Facebook Messenger and by  which  you  can  send
    messages for free by using  a  wifi  connection  or  your  mobile  data
    allowance.  Further they have the benefit of  being  heavily  encrypted
    and the ability to self-destruct.  Mr [S] advises that he  puts  church
    schedules and related  subjects  on  both  Facebook  and  Telegram  and
    promotes church activities.

15. He states that if he deletes his account he will lose all his  Facebook
    data and memories and that all his photographs and posts will  be  lost
    for ever.  He submits that they are precious memories he wishes to keep
    and that he should not be expected to delete his life which he believes
    would go against his human and fundamental rights.

16. I am taken to the screenshot pages to be found at pages 11 to 71 in the
    Appellant's second bundle which illustrates extracts of the Appellant's
    Facebook activities  and  friend  requests.   I  am  also  referred  to
    extracts where there are people commenting on his  postings  and  to  a
    cartoon posting of Mohammed which he believes could be construed by the
    Iranian authorities as being blasphemous.

17. Under cross-examination the Appellant confirms to Mr Bates that he  has
    provided a printout of his Facebook activity log and that  his  profile
    has always  been  public.   The  Appellant  acknowledges  that  he  has
    continued to make Facebook  postings  after  his  original  appeal  was
    dismissed contending that he did so because he had become aware that by
    posting internet activity he could promote his religious  beliefs.   He
    confirms he is a member of a group who used to exchange data  and  that
    there were originally seven in  this  group  but  now  only  five.   He
    further confirms that some  members  of  that  group  are  also  asylum
    seekers.

18. He states that Facebook is accessible in Iran and they can be seen  via
    Apps and that so far as he is aware Facebook is not banned in Iran.  Mr
    Bates points to the earlier produced objective evidence in this  appeal
    which shows that Faceook and Twitter are available in Iran to which the
    Appellant responds that he did not mean to imply that  Facebook  itself
    was legal but that there are means regularly used in the country by use
    of Apps for people to obtain it.  When specifically asked if any of his
    2,000+ Facebook friends in Iran had  had  problems  since  reading  his
    Facebook account he responded that that was not something he  had  been
    informed about and when it was put to him as to whether he was  worried
    that anyone could be at risk for viewing his profile  he  responded  by
    saying that he had no option but to set out his beliefs  contending  it
    was his duty to evangelise all who viewed his site.

19. The Appellant stated that he had spoken to his mother but  he  did  not
    know the whereabouts of his father believing that he may well have died
    within the past twelve months.  He advises that his mother is aware  of
    his conversion and when specifically asked as to whether  she  had  had
    any problems with the authorities because  of  his  Facebook  posts  he
    responded that she  had  mentioned  that  plain  clothes  officers  had
    visited her at about the same time he opened his account.  However when
    asked whether that was in his witness statement he advised that it  was
    not.

20. The Appellant stated openly that he did not vet people who wanted to be
    his friends and that he never refused requests.  He  acknowledged  that
    there was "bound to  be"  (his  own  words)  members  of  the  security
    services who were his Facebook friends and that he was also aware  that
    he could adjust the priority setting on each post on his Facebook page.
     He confirmed that it was possible to convert his  account  from  being
    public to private but that he had chosen not to do so.

21. When asked as to whether he knew any of his 5,000 friends personally he
    replied that he did have a few friends  who  were  within  the  church.
    However he confirmed that he had not asked any of them to attend  today
    to give evidence claiming that he had not been  asked  to  do  so.   He
    states that he believes that his email address may have been hacked  or
    monitored for contacts in Iran on a mobile device but when it is put to
    him by Mr Bates as to why he  had  not  therefore  downloaded  pictures
    before deleting the account.  He was concerned he responded that if  he
    deletes them he would be "playing with his principles" and repeats that
    he is not prepared to delete his identity.

22.  When  questioned  about  his  purported  discussion  with  his  mother
    regarding her being questioned by officers he states that  he  was  not
    aware of any summonses against him and that she merely asked  where  he
    was and what he was up to.  He indicated that his Facebook account does
    however make it clear that he is in the UK.

Submissions/Discussions

23. Mr Bates' starting point is to rely on the Notice of  Refusal  and  the
    preserved finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that  the  Appellant
    was not a genuine convert.  He reminds me that there had  been  adverse
    findings of credibility against the Appellant  and  questions  why  the
    Appellant has only opened his Facebook account and become public  after
    the First-tier appeal was dismissed.  He submits that  any  contentions
    made by the Appellant lack credibility  based  on  the  fact  that  the
    account has only blossomed after it had been rejected by the First-tier
    Tribunal.  He submits quite strongly on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State  that  the  only  purpose  of  the  account  is  to  deceive  the
    immigration control and does not go to the  Appellant's  core  beliefs.
    He reminds me the account could be deleted  and  that  the  photographs
    could be  downloaded.   The  only  argument  he  points  out  that  the
    Appellant has raised is that as a Christian he should not be  required,
    nor would he be prepared, to delete his account.  It is  the  Secretary
    of State's submission that the Appellant uses  the  account  solely  to
    deceive the authorities.

24. Mr Bates poses the question that if the Appellant were  to  delete  his
    account would he be a  person  of  interest  to  the  authorities.   He
    submits that he would not and reminds me that on  the  Appellant's  own
    testimony he has 2,000 fans in Iran.   He  submits  that  there  is  no
    evidence that any of them have been targeted and would submit that they
    must theoretically be at greater risk as they  are  actually  based  in
    Iran but there is no evidence that any of them have been approached.

25. He stresses the Appellant seems unconcerned that his  Facebook  friends
    could be at risk which he does not consider  to  be  a  very  Christian
    approach bearing in mind the contentions as to  his  religious  beliefs
    made by the Appellant.  He notes the Appellant seemingly never  refuses
    anyone who wishes to be a Facebook friend and re-emphasises a number of
    friends he has in  Iran.   He  points  out  that  only  today  has  the
    Appellant suggested that his mother  was  visited  by  the  authorities
    after he had opened the account and that he has never  raised  this  in
    his witness statement and that his failure to do so lacks any  form  of
    credibility.  He submits that this goes to  the  proposition  that  the
    Appellant would not come to the attention of the authorities.

26. He takes with the authority of LKIK which whilst he acknowledges not is
    country guidance sets out sensible principles that can be  followed  in
    particular that it remains  open  for  all  individuals  to  have  full
    control of their accounts.  He specifically refers me to paragraphs 11,
    22 and 26 and to  the  expert's  report  and  reminds  me  that  expert
    evidence confirms that it is possible for a user  to  download  a  full
    archive of the entire content  of  their  active  Facebook  account  by
    accessing the settings page and to edit individual posts.  Consequently
    he reminds me that it is perfectly  open  for  a  Facebook  account  be
    manipulated by the account holder.

27. He emphasises that there is still no Dorodian  witness  or  a  Facebook
    friend who has come forward to show that the Appellant is  a  Christian
    and that the Appellant's evidence is undermined by what is in  his  own
    control.  At best he contends  he  would  be  considered  a  low  level
    individual even if it were believed that his postings have  raised  the
    awareness of the authorities.  He points out that there is no  evidence
    that he is subjected to any court action and to the guidance  given  in
    AB and Others (Internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015]  UKUT
    0257 (IAC).   He  submits  that  the  Appellant's  case  is  very  much
    dependent on his social media evidence and the reliability  of  it  and
    that the Secretary of State contends the Appellant has failed  to  show
    that he was an individual of profile who would come to the attention of
    the authorities.  He once again reminds me of the original findings  as
    to the Appellant's Christian conversion and beliefs remain and  submits
    the Appellant has failed to show he  would  come  to  the  authorities'
    attention even if he has a perceived case.  He submits that this is  an
    opportunist case aimed at deceiving the UK, that the Appellant  is  not
    of significant profile and that he is unlikely to be  targeted  by  the
    authorities reminding me that the Appellant is not a  journalist  or  a
    person of similar position who is likely to attract  the  attention  of
    the Iranian authorities.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

28. Mr Schwenk starts by pointing out that this  case  is  not  just  about
    Facebook and social media but a person engaged on a range of activities
    and that whilst there was no dispute about the core facts  the  hearing
    on the error of law was whether or not the Appellant was a disingenuous
    Christian and what would happen to him as a result of  questions  being
    asked to him.  He submits  that  if  the  Appellant  returns  with  his
    account undeleted he would be at risk reminding me that  the  authority
    of AB states that the Appellant would  be  asked  for  details  of  his
    Facebook password.  Further he submits that the Appellant  has  engaged
    in blasphemy in that the cartoon denigrates the  Prophet  Mohammed  and
    contends that asking him to delete his  Facebook  account  would  be  a
    breach of the Appellant's Article 8 rights in that Facebook is part  of
    the Appellant's private and social life.

29. However he goes on further to contend that even  if  the  account  were
    deleted it is not possible to be satisfied that the Iranians would  not
    be able to access it and that reliance on LKIK is  unreliable  in  that
    the judgment relies heavily on what Facebook says and there  are  other
    social media such as Telegram which is referred to  in  this  case  and
    there is nothing available on that.  He consequently contends there has
    to be a risk that the authorities would be able to access his  account.
    Further even if he deletes it he submits that the  Iranian  authorities
    already know of his activities as they monitor potential dissidents and
    therefore the real risk is already known and he could be picked  up  by
    the authorities and secondly he is likely to be questioned  as  is  the
    guidance given by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in  HM  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department and that if he tells the  truth  then  he
    would be at risk.

30. He refers me to the authority of  SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:  failed
    asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) and the suggestion  that
    the Appellant only has to be asked by the authorities what he has  done
    on the internet and once his activities are revealed he would be  found
    to be a refugee.  He submits that it is undisputed that the authorities
    monitor activities carried out by potential dissidents both inside  and
    outside Iran and that his activities on Facebook and the vast number of
    friends he has accumulated show that  he  is  likely  to  come  to  the
    authorities' attention.  He points out that there is evidence that  the
    Appellant had had threats and that it is  not  possible  to  completely
    erase a person's Facebook history if other people have seen your  posts
    and he relies on paragraphs 218 and 222 of AB.  Further he refers me to
    the factual findings set out in the third  bundle  of  the  Appellant's
    documents and that the Appellant's profile is given as  public  on  all
    Facebook accounts and on screenshots.  He asked me to look carefully at
    the second Appellant's bundle in particular pages  60  to  63  and  the
    evidence produced therein which he contends is clearly blasphemous  and
    has provoked adverse comment on Facebook.  He submits that this  is  an
    Appellant who has become involved in a number of arguments about  those
    posts and that his involvement in Telegram and  Facebook  needs  to  be
    assessed against the objective background.   Finally  he  submits  that
    even if his account is deleted he must be at risk from the  authorities
    because they know about him and that they will ask sufficient questions
    to identify him as being a person who is at risk.  He asked me to allow
    the appeal.

Findings

31. It is important to record  the  findings  of  fact  both  made  by  the
    previous Tribunal that have not been overturned and by myself:

      1) The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  findings  of  adverse  credibility
         relating  to  the  sincerity  of  the   Appellant's   practice   of
         Christianity in the UK given his finding that he has not provided a
         credible  account  of  his  conversion  in  Iran.   The  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge also found that his church activities in  the  short
         time he had been in the UK did not establish  that  his  conversion
         was genuine.  Those findings remain undisturbed.

      2) That I accept that the Appellant has a Facebook account and that he
         has 5,000 followers, 2,000 of whom are in Iran.

      3) That the Appellant is also active on Telegram.

      4) That the Appellant's Facebook activities have increased  since  the
         findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  the  Appellant
         has  posted  cartoons  online  of  the   Prophet   Mohammed   which
         potentially could be construed as being blasphemous.

32. Much is made by Mr Schwenk and by the Appellant in his  testimony  that
    it would be a breach of his human rights to require him to  delete  his
    Facebook account.  He insists on maintaining a public  profile.   I  do
    not find that to be a sustainable argument.  I have  previously  upheld
    the  finding  that  the  Appellant  is  not  a  genuine  Christian  and
    consequently there will be no breach of his human rights in deleting  a
    Facebook account which can only be considered as designed to bolster  a
    false claim.  It is not a reflection of  his  genuine  beliefs  and  he
    would not be obliged to disclose a deceit to the  Iranian  authorities.
    That is the approach that was taken by Upper Tribunal Judge  Hanson  in
    LKIK and one that seems to me to be perfectly sustainable.  Bearing  in
    mind the previous upheld findings it would only  be  a  breach  of  the
    Appellant's human rights if his beliefs had been found  to  be  genuine
    and a dishonest belief is not a genuine expression of  his  fundamental
    beliefs which is what would be protected.  Consequently for  the  above
    reasons I do  not  consider  that  deleting  the  Appellant's  Facebook
    account would in any way breach his human rights' claims.

33. The Appellant has sought to rely solely on his activities  on  Facebook
    and Telegram as being the basis for maintaining his claim.  He contends
    in his oral testimony that the authorities have approached  his  mother
    to enquire of his whereabouts.  This is an Appellant who has  extremely
    experienced and competent solicitors.  They have provided on his behalf
    and no doubt with his assistance, a detailed further witness  statement
    dated  June  2018.   Nowhere  within  that  witness  statement  is  any
    reference made to this purported interest of the authorities.   Further
    the Appellant has admitted that he has friends within  the  church  who
    are also active on Facebook.  No attempt has been made to call them  as
    witnesses on his behalf.  It is of course for the Appellant  to  choose
    what witness evidence he wishes to  adduce.   However  the  culminating
    conclusion of these factors further damaged the Appellant's credibility
    particularly bearing in mind the adverse findings  previously  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

34. Reliance is made on authorities which state that the Appellant would be
    required to produce his Facebook password to the authorities on return.
     That of course could not apply if the account had been deleted.   Even
    if the Appellant were to  be  questioned  the  position  in  which  the
    Appellant would find himself is set out at paragraph 30 of SSH and HR:

         "We can understand the sensitivity that the Iranian authorities may
         have towards perceived slights against their own State in the  form
         of untruthful allegations about  the  conduct  of  the  State,  but
         equally one can expect  a  degree  of  reality  on  their  part  in
         relation to people who in the interests of advancing their economic
         circumstances would make up a story in  order  to  secure  economic
         betterment in a wealthier country."

    That scenario would seem to fit the circumstances  of  this  particular
    case.

35. I do not consider when looked at this matter in the round that reliance
    on HM -  AA/09450/2014  assists  the  Appellant  bearing  in  mind  the
    negative findings of credibility found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    and maintained by myself in the  Upper  Tribunal.   Further  I  do  not
    consider that support can be found for the Appellant in  paragraph  146
    for all the above reasons i.e. that the Appellant has been found not to
    have had a genuine Christian  conversion,  that  he  has  advanced  his
    activities purely to support his case based on economic betterment  and
    that he has been found not to be a credible witness.

36. For all the above reasons I am satisfied that this is an Appellant  who
    would not be at risk  on  return  to  Iran,  that  he  would  not  face
    persecution on return and that it would not be a breach  of  his  human
    rights to return him.  For all the above reasons the Appellant's appeal
    is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date  19 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date  19th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

