
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09765/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 July 2019                      |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     rsh
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1991 is a male citizen of Iraq. The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2008. His claim for asylum  was
    refused and a subsequent appeal dismissed in  August  2010.  He  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 8 October  2010.  On  31  August  2011,  the
    appellant was granted three years  discretionary  leave  to  remain  on
    Article 8 grounds. On 28 July 2015,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of
    wounding/inflicting grievous bodily harm and was sentenced to  2  years
    imprisonment. The respondent issued  a  notice  of  intention  to  make
    deportation order on 26 September 2016. On 24 July 2018, the respondent
    refused  the  appellant's  protection  and  human  rights  claims.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 8 April 2019,  allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  3  and
    Article 8 ECHR grounds. The asylum appeal  was  dismissed  as  was  the
    appeal seeking humanitarian protection (on the basis that the appellant
    had committed a serious crime: paragraph 339D(iv)).  The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The  appellant  was  not  represented  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  I
    therefore invited  the  presenting  officer,  Mr  Mills,  to  make  his
    submissions first. I told the appellant that he  would  speak  last  in
    response to Mr Mills and that he should tell me anything else which  he
    considered relevant in the appeal.

 3. Mr Mills submitted that the judge should  not  have  followed  existing
    country guidance of AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  but  should  have
    analysed in greater detail the recent evidence adduced by the Secretary
    of State which purports to show that Kirkuk, the appellant's home  area
    of Iraq, is no longer in the possession of ISIS and that  it  would  be
    safe for him to return there in order to  obtain  a  replacement  CSID.
    Moreover, the appellant's mother continues to live in  Kirkuk  and  the
    judge had failed to give reasons why the appellant  could  not  contact
    her to ask for assistance or to reside with her whilst he  obtains  his
    new documents.

 4. The judge had addressed the submission made by the  presenting  officer
    that she should depart from the country  guidance  of  AA  (Iraq).  Her
    analysis and response to those submissions appears at [60-70]. At [71],
    judge observed that the appellant would  be  returned  to  Baghdad.  He
    would not be able to board a domestic  flight  to  the  IKR  without  a
    passport or CSID and it would not be safe for him to travel by land  to
    the IKR (or, by extension, Kirkuk) as male Kurd who cannot speak Arabic
    without possessing the appropriate documents.

 5. Although Mr Mills' submissions were advanced with his customary  skill,
    I do not find that the judge has fallen into legal error. Her  analysis
    is exhaustive and thorough and she is given  reasons  finding  that  AA
    (Iraq) had not been displaced by more recent evidence  put  forward  by
    the Secretary of State. I do not consider any part of her  analysis  to
    be wanting or that she has, as  asserted  in  the  grounds,  failed  to
    address criticisms of the existing country  guidance  advanced  by  the
    respondent.

 6. The grounds also attack the judge's conclusions on the Article  8  ECHR
    appeal. Here, Mr Mills told me that he was unable to  say  'that  there
    was nothing' in the family circumstances  as  found  by  the  judge  to
    justify a grant of leave on Article 8 ECHR grounds. I agree. The  judge
    has explained in some detail the vital role played by the appellant  in
    the lives of his young children (age 15 and 10 years respectively)  and
    the very considerable difficulties which  is  partner  would  encounter
    having to bring up children and  maintain  the  household  without  the
    assistance of the appellant. The judge has applied the appropriate test
    of undue harshness and I find that, on the  particular  facts,  it  was
    open to the judge to conclude  that  the  effects  of  the  appellant's
    deportation upon his partner and children (the oldest in particular  in
    need of his father's guidance at a time when he appears to have  become
    involved in criminality) would be unduly harsh.  Although  a  different
    outcome on the same facts may have been possible, in this instance I am
    not prepared to interfere with the judge's conclusion.

 7. For the reasons I have given above, the Secretary of State's appeal  is
    dismissed.




Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





