

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09539/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 May 2019                        |On 13 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Glass, Counsel instructed by Okafor & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Presenting Officer

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Jamaica.   His  date  of  birth  is  8
    November 1991.  He came to the UK on 13 April 2007 when he was aged 15.
     He was granted indefinite leave to remain on 18  November  2008.   The
    anonymity order continues to protect the identity  of  the  Appellant's
    brother who is a child.

2.   On 17 February 2016 he was  convicted  of  causing  death  by  careless
    driving when under the influence of drugs contrary to s.3A (1)  (a)  of
    the Road Traffic Act 1988.   On 31 March 2016 he was sentenced to three
    years' imprisonment and ordered to pay a victim surcharge of �120.  The
    judge, while sentencing the appellant, stated as follows:-

         "[AA], sit there for a moment please.  I'm going to make  a  number
         of observations which are designed to inform you  and  the  public,
         and any other interested party, as to how I am approaching sentence
         in this case.

         The courts frequently, too frequently, have to deal with cases such
         as this where a life has been lost as a result of bad driving,  and
         they are cases that cause great anguish because  so  often,  as  in
         this case, the person responsible for the killing, for  the  death,
         is a person with many positive qualities and I read much about  you
         which is to your credit.  But a life has been taken,  the  life  of
         another young man, doubtless of many positive  qualities  as  well;
         there can be no doubt about that if anyone reads the  statement  of
         his mother, a much loved and valued son now dead.

         This hearing, these hearings,  these  sentence  hearings,  tend  to
         focus very much on the qualities of the defendant and as  a  result
         there is a temptation to lose sight of the ultimate  responsibility
         of the sentence exercise.  What the judge has to do  in  sentencing
         in a case like this is to weigh the culpability of  the  defendant,
         to weigh the consequences of the  defendant's  actions;  that's  to
         assess, if you like, the gravity of the  crime;  and  to  set  that
         against the positive elements, the mitigation in the case, which is
         so often, as here a powerful element.

         But the court must not lose sight  of  its  responsibility  to  the
         wider public and here, here the life has been lost because you were
         driving when you had been breaking the law and using cannabis.  You
         were undoubtedly influenced by the  cannabis  you  had  taken.   It
         affects judgment; it affects one's ability to react  quickly  to  a
         situation.  It makes you think you're a better driver than you are.
          And couple that with your experience  as  driving  -  at  driving,
         couple that with the fact that the driving at the very limit of the
         permitted speed on that stretch of fast  road,  add  those  factors
         together and it's a potent mix which, as we know when you lost  it,
         killed somebody.

         And the court has to pass a sentence that ensures that  the  public
         knows that whatever the merit of a defendant, if you drive in those
         circumstances, affected by drugs just as if you'd been affected  by
         drink, it's an unforgiveable thing to do and the court has to  pass
         a sentence which will make  others  think  twice  before  they  get
         behind a wheel having had their  spliff  with  their  mates  before
         setting out on their journey ...

         You're a young man, you've got many years of life, productive life,
         ahead of you and there is no doubt you  will  be  able  to  make  a
         valuable contribution to society in the future, unlike your friend,
         whose chance of life has gone."

3.   Following the conviction,  the  Respondent  made  a  deportation  order
    against the Appellant pursuant to Section 5(1) of the  Immigration  Act
    1971 on 5 October 2016.  The Secretary of State must make a deportation
    order in respect of a foreign criminal under Section 32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  There has never been a challenge  to  the  Appellant
    being a foreign criminal and that his deportation is conducive  to  the
    public good for the purposes of Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act
    1971.

4.   Following the deportation order the Appellant made a claim for  asylum.
     His application was refused on 22 July 2017.   The  Appellant  appeals
    against the decision of the Secretary of State on 22 July 2017 on human
    rights grounds.  His appeal was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Talbot in a decision that was promulgated on 4 September 2018.

Error of law

5.   The decision of Judge Talbot was set  aside  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McWilliam and the Honourable Lord Matthews sitting as an Upper Tribunal
    Judge following a hearing on 20 November 2018.  The  panel  found  that
    Judge  Talbot  had  materially  erred  for  the  reasons  expressed  at
    paragraphs 16 and 17 of the decision which read as follows:

         "16. The judge properly directed himself on the law.  There  is  no
             challenge to his  self-direction.   The  judge  was  entitled,
             contrary to the assertions in the grounds, to attach weight to
             the Appellant presenting a low risk of  reoffending  and  that
             the trigger offence was a one off.  However, the case law  and
             the statutory regime is such that in assessing the  weight  to
             attach to be attached to  the  public  interest,  the  judge's
             decision cannot be properly understood in the absence of clear
             and reasoned findings on all limbs of paragraph  399A.   There
             is a structural error in the approach of the judge.   This  is
             an error of substance because we cannot rule out that had  the
             judge made clear findings on  matters  under  paragraph  399A,
             properly applying the law, he would not have reached the  same
             conclusion.  For  this  reason  alone,  the  judge  materially
             erred.  It is not necessary for us to engage with  all  issues
             raised in the grounds.  However, what the judge said  at  [26]
             about the public interest being "diminished" causes us concern
             because we believe this  approach  to  be  at  odds  with  the
             statutory regime which tells us that  Parliament  has  decided
             that  deportation  is  in  the  public  interest.   Under  the
             legislative framework we do not  believe  that  factors  other
             than the seriousness of the offence are  capable  of  changing
             the weight of the public inters in deportation.  The  approach
             of the judge should have been whether the Appellant's  Article
             8 rights are of such strength that  they  would  outweigh  the
             public interest, and this should  be  considered  through  the
             lens of the Rules and statutory  regime.   We  set  aside  the
             decision of the FTT to allow the appeal under article 8.

         17.  The matter will be listed in the UT for submissions only.  The
             FTT made credibility findings to which there is no  challenge.
             There is no reason in our view to interfere  with  these  when
             remaking (in the absence of further evidence admitted  by  the
             UT  from  either  side  which  would  establish  a  change  in
             circumstances).   The  Appellant  has  not  submitted  further
             evidence to date in compliance with the directions of  the  UT
             and there was no good reason, brought to our attention why  it
             would be necessary to hear evidence.   Ms  Ferguson  mentioned
             the Appellant's partner/girlfriend wishing to  give  evidence,
             but no statement from her had been served in  accordance  with
             directions."

Findings made by the FTT

6.   Judge Talbot heard evidence from the Appellant and his mother  and  she
    made findings as follows:

    (1)  There is no doubt that the Appellant  has  established  a  private
         life in the UK having arrived at the age of  15  and  continued  to
         reside here for over eleven years.

    (2)  There is no doubt that the Respondent's decision  will  constitute
         an interference with his private life.

    (3)  The public interest in the Appellant's deportation stems from  the
         offence committed on 6 April 2014.

    (4)  It is in the Appellant's favour that this was  a  one-off  offence
         and in all other respects he is of good character.

    (5)  The judge took into account the OASys Report of  1  December  2017
         which  assessed  the  Appellant  as  presenting  a  low   risk   of
         reoffending and  has  been  very  motivated  and  very  capable  of
         addressing his offending.  The judge took into account that he  had
         completed courses whilst in prison addressing drugs issues.   There
         was also a letter from the Appellant's probation officer confirming
         that he represents a low risk with a low likelihood of  reoffending
         and that he fully engages with his licence, attends appointments on
         time and is pleasant.

    (6)  The other factors in the appellant's favour relate to the strength
         and quality of his private life.  He has resided here lawfully  and
         has had settled  status  since  2008.   He  has  been  involved  in
         studying and working and has made many friendships. The judge  made
         reference to the letters submitted in support from  friends  and  a
         letter from the Appellant's  girlfriend.  The  judge  accepted  the
         Appellant's evidence of family relationships with  his  mother  and
         his younger brother and accepted the Appellant's mother's  evidence
         about the strength of those relationships.

    (7)  The judge considered a letter from  the  Appellant's  brother  O's
         class teacher and head teacher describing the  Appellant  as  being
         'deeply involved in his brother's  education'  and  expressing  the
         view that O would find it hard to cope with his deportation.

    (8)  The judge accepted that the Appellant has a close "elder  brother"
         relationship with O and that O will miss him.

    (9)  The Appellant assists his mother in a practical sense for  example
         by taking O to and from school and being at home to  look  after  O
         when she is out at work.

    (10) In relation to the Appellant having to live in Jamaica  the  judge
         said as follows:

         "25. The Appellant also asserts that he would not be able  to  cope
             with living in Jamaica.  He has not visited Jamaica since 2012
             and states that he has no family there who could  provide  him
             with support.  I note that he does have  a  half-sister  there
             and a maternal aunt and uncle.  However,  I  accept  that  the
             evidence of the Appellant's mother that  these  relatives  all
             have their own problems and  that  they  would  not  be  in  a
             position to  offer  him  anything  in  the  way  of  practical
             support.  I also note the Appellant's  evidence  that  he  has
             mental health problems and this is borne  out  by  the  letter
             dated 23.7.18 from a therapist to whom he had been referred by
             his GP, confirming that he attends CBT sessions  and  that  he
             suffers from 'moderate to severe low mood and anxiety."

    (11) The judge reached the following conclusions at paragraph 26:

         "26. The Appellant was of  good  character  until  the  unfortunate
             incident which resulted not only in the death  of  his  friend
             but also left him with physical  and  mental  injuries  and  a
             lengthy term  of  imprisonment  as  well  as  the  deportation
             decision which is the subject of this  appeal.   He  also  had
             settled status and no adverse immigration history.  The public
             interest in his deportation (as laid down by statute) can only
             be rebutted where there are 'very  compelling  circumstances'.
             I pay attention to the dicta of Lord Reed  (as  quoted  above)
             that for the Appellant to succeed, the circumstances need  not
             be 'exceptional' in the sense  of  being  'extraordinary'  but
             rather in the sense of being 'a  departure  from  the  general
             rule.'  It is abundantly clear that  there  is  in  general  a
             strong  public  interest  in  the  deportation   of   'foreign
             criminals' but Lord Reed also made  clear  that  the  judicial
             assessment should include 'factors bearing on  the  weight  of
             the public interest  in  the  deportation  of  the  particular
             offender' and ultimately  it  comes  down  to  a  question  of
             proportionality.   The  public  interest  in  the  Appellant's
             deportation in this particular case is undoubtedly  diminished
             by the fact that he is a  settled  immigrant  since  childhood
             with no adverse immigration history; that it was his first and
             only offence; and that he has been assessed as  having  a  low
             risk of  reoffending.   The  Appellant's  enforced  return  to
             Jamaica will undoubtedly cause great hardship both to him  and
             to his family members in the UK.  Weighing up  the  cumulative
             factors that I have referred to herein, I am (albeit with some
             hesitation) drawn to  the  conclusion  that  those  cumulative
             factors outweigh the public interest in  his  deportation  and
             that the Respondent's deportation decision  therefore  amounts
             to a violation of his Article 8 rights."

The hearing before the UT

7.   Before us the Appellant relied on the original Appellant's bundle  that
    was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  includes  the  Appellant's
    statement and the  witness  statements  from  his  mother  and  younger
    brother, O.  In addition, there are letters of support from friends and
    a  report  from  the  Appellant's  probation  officer  and  the   OASys
    assessment.

8.    There was a further bundle served  for  the  purpose  of  the  hearing
    before us and this includes a letter from  the  Appellant's  GP  of  20
    March 2019.  She confirmed that the Appellant is  a  patient  receiving
    treatment for depression and PTSD and that he receives  anti-depressant
    medication.  He appears to be stable on this and has been engaging with
    his GP and also with the chronic pain team.  He has previously  engaged
    with the CPT.  The GP stated that in respect of the possibility of  him
    being deported,

         "There is a possibility that this move may well affect  his  mental
         health adversely, as his mental  health  appears  to  be  currently
         stable.   However  I  am  unable  to  comment  about  the  services
         available to him over there and how he would be able to engage with
         them and this what effect deportation  would  have  on  his  mental
         health."

9.   There was a character reference from the  Winchester  Project  dated  8
    March 2019.  It is an organisation which has  experience  working  with
    families, children and young people.  The author  of  the  report,  Kim
    Mabbutt, states that the Appellant is a registered family member of the
    project and has been a positive and active member.  He has  volunteered
    his time to help and support of a variety of initiatives and  including
    summer barbeques, Christmas discos, fundraising days and a weekly Winch
    family meal set up to enable  local  children  and  families  to  build
    relationships.  It is stated that  he  is  a  reliable,  committed  and
    responsible person.  It is stated that the Appellant's younger  brother
    O attends the primary years provision at the Winch.  He has significant
    difficulties socially and emotionally and extremely low confidence  and
    self-esteem.  O is now part of the  play  promise  cohort  which  is  a
    bespoke service for  children  and  young  people  who  need  intensive
    support.  The Appellant plays  an  integral  and  much  needed  "father
    figure role" in his brother's life.  He is O's primary carer collecting
    him regularly from the provision.   The  Appellant  provides  a  secure
    trusting foundation to his life and is the only male role model.

10.   There  was  a  character  reference  from  the  Christian   Fellowship
    Ministries of 23 March 2019.  The author of this is Kemar Paul  Dickson
    who describes the Appellant as a  "wonderful  and  polite  man  and  an
    active member of our  church  since  April  2018."   He  describes  the
    Appellant helping a young man in need.  He states  that  the  Appellant
    has a strong bond with his family and friends within the community  and
    that he is "Vital  in  the  upbringing  of  his  younger  brother,  who
    considers him  a  strong  paternal  figure.   Losing  him  would  be  a
    detrimental effect on his little brother, which most certainly have  an
    ongoing effect to his future and his family."

11.  There was a baptism certificate relating to  the  Appellant  indicating
    that he was baptised on 19 November 2008.  There was a letter from  the
    Holy Trinity Church of England Primary School of 25 March 2019 from the
    head of pastoral care, Helen Toplis.  She  states  that  having  worked
    with O on a regular one-to-one basis she has observed  an  increase  in
    his emotional vulnerability which over the last couple  of  months  has
    peaked.  She has become aware of the significance of the  Appellant  on
    O's sense of stability, safety and guidance and how fearful and anxious
    O is at the prospect of his brother having to leave the UK.  She states
    that she has met with O and the Appellant and  is  impressed  with  the
    positive influences the Appellant has on O.  She opines  that  the  two
    clearly have "A very strong bond and mutual respect for each other  and
    I  am  concerned  that  without  his  brother's   consistent   support,
    influencing guidance, [O] will struggle significantly to the  detriment
    of his emotional wellbeing."

12.  There was a second letter from the same school which  is  undated  from
    Sotira Styllis a year 4 class teacher relating to O.  She  states  that
    having met O and the Appellant on a few occasions it is  clear  to  see
    that the Appellant has a positive influence.  O talks highly of him and
    O has spoken on "multiple occasions of  his  anxiety  relating  to  the
    prospect of his brother having to leave the country."  She is concerned
    that O will struggle significantly "to the detriment of  his  emotional
    wellbeing" should his brother be deported.

13.  There was a CAMHS referral form relating  to  O  and  the  bundle.  The
    referrer's main concern is documented as follows:

         "[O] has said he wants to end his  life/some  harmful  behaviour  -
         hitting his head.  Under the  heading  family's  main  concern  the
         following is stated 'very attached to  older  brother  and  [O]  is
         quite vulnerable.  He's been through a lot.'  Under the heading any
         other important  information  we  should  know?  the  following  is
         stated, [O] joined our school this year when mum moved in with  her
         sister.  They were  previously  in  Enfield.   [O]  brother  had  a
         serious accident when he was 4.  Subsequently his brother served  a
         prison sentence and is now being threatened with deportation.  This
         is very traumatic for [O]."

14.  In addition, Ms Glass also relied on  a  report  prepared  by  Luke  de
    Noronha.  At the  hearing  in  November  Miss  Ferguson  who  was  then
    representing the Appellant produced the report.  The Tribunal  was  not
    in a position to remake the decision because of the late service of the
    report which the Respondent needed time to consider.

15.    The report relied on  is  entitled  "Expert  report  -  deportees  in
    Jamaica".  It is a generic report. The author is in the third year of a
    Dip Phil in anthropology at the University of Oxford and  his  doctoral
    research focuses on deportation from the UK to Jamaica.  The report  is
    undated but he states within it that  he  has  recently  returned  from
    Jamaica in November 2016 having spent eight months there.  He met  over
    100 deported persons who had been returned by the  British  government.
    He worked with an NGO and a homeless shelter where a number of deported
    persons live.  He spoke with individuals working at government level on
    issues  surrounding  deportation  and  settlement.   He  describes  his
    research  as  "ethnographic"  and  states  that  his  engagement   with
    deportees was intense and highly immersive.

16.  The report addresses family support at section 1. It is concluded  that
    those who are most estranged  from  family  in  Jamaica  and  have  the
    thinnest forms of support tend to be those who left Jamaica as children
    and did not maintain contact with the  country  of  their  birth.    He
    opines that without family support and a support network, people    who
    have often forgotten how things operate both practically and culturally
    in Jamaica tend to face difficulties.  There is very  little  provision
    for wi-fi in Jamaica. It is expensive and unreliable.   Flight  tickets
    for family to visit deportees in Jamaica are expensive and out of reach
    for most.  At section 2,  the  author  addresses  crime,  violence  and
    extortion  and  in  his  opinion  "deported  persons   are   especially
    vulnerable to  crime  in  Jamaica  and  regularly  become  targets  for
    robberies and different forms of extortion."  In his view deportees are
    very visible, stigmatised and vulnerable to crime  and  that  crime  in
    Jamaica is "intensely  social".   Deportees  are  vulnerable  to  crime
    because they do not know people and people do not know them.  Added  to
    this is the intense hostility  and  stigma  attached  to  deportees  as
    "failed migrants".  Deportees who left Jamaica as children and who went
    to school in the UK are unable to hide from their neighbours  the  fact
    that they were deportees.  The author states that  he  has  heard  from
    numerous sources cases about deportees being  murdered.   He  addresses
    reintegration: language, health, housing and employment  at  section  3
    and indicates that whilst the Home Office states that  English  is  the
    official language in Jamaica  this  has  the  potential  to  be  deeply
    misleading.  He addresses health  with  the  comment  that  he  is  not
    qualified to speak confidently on mental health provision  in  Jamaica.
    However, it is his experience that poor people in Jamaica  struggle  to
    access free healthcare (even emergency care)  and  that  mental  health
    service provision is lacking  for  ordinary  Jamaicans.   He  addresses
    housing and states that a vast majority of deported people lived in low
    income neighbourhoods and almost all felt vulnerable to  extortion  and
    robbery.  It is likely that males with no family support  network  will
    most likely end up living in the homeless shelter which is not a secure
    place.

17.  The author of the report comments on the Home Office  booklet  entitled
    'coming home to Jamaica'  a  copy  of  which  Ms  Glass  produced.   He
    stresses that the NGO  provisions  referenced  in  that  report  cannot
    substantively help  people  find  employment  or  offer  any  financial
    support.  They are not yet effective in helping people find employment.
     The homeless shelter provides people with a place to sleep but nothing
    beyond that.  The booklet overstates the provisions  and  NGO  services
    available to deportees whilst  recognising  how  difficult  it  is  for
    deported persons to stay safe and reference was made to page 24 of  the
    coming home to  Jamaica  booklet  which  lists  dos  and  don'ts  which
    presents  a  different  picture.   In   terms   of   unemployment   the
    unemployment rate is high currently at around 14%  and  30%  for  young
    adults.

Submissions

18.   We  heard  detailed  submissions  from  both  representatives   having
    identified at the start  of  the  hearing  the  issues  namely  it  was
    incumbent on the Tribunal to make findings in respect of paragraph 399A
    of the Immigration Rules.

19.  The Appellant's case is that he satisfies  paragraph  339A(b)  and  (c)
    and that there are very compelling circumstances over and  above  those
    described in paragraphs  399  and  399A  with  reference  to  paragraph
    398(c).

20.  Ms Glass indicated that she relied on the findings of Judge Talbot  who
    closely analysed the facts.  In relation to 399A(a) she relied  on  the
    skeleton argument drafted by Miss Ferguson in which it is asserted that
    the Appellant has been lawfully resident for almost twelve years  which
    amounts to 44% of his life  and  therefore  the  failure  to  meet  the
    exception by a small margin is not exceptional in itself  but  combined
    with other factors may be.  Ms Glass submitted that the material  point
    was that he had spent his formative years here.   He  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK.  Whilst  this  was  a  point  that  Mr
    Whitwell in submissions conceded, it is in our view  necessary  to  set
    out Ms Glass' submissions on the point.  The  Appellant  has  completed
    his secondary education here having sat GCSEs in the UK.   He  attended
    sixth form college and started a  BA  Hons  degree  at  Buckinghamshire
    University.  He had worked and studied here prior to offending. He  has
    many friends here who have  submitted  evidence  in  support.   He  has
    immediate family and extended family members in the  UK,  his  mother's
    family have lived in the UK since 1950.  Ms Glass  referred  to  O  the
    Appellant's younger brother.  He has autism and Ms Glass submitted that
    the evidence establishes a high level of involvement in O's life.   She
    made reference to the terrible accident which led  to  the  Appellant's
    conviction.  She submitted that the Appellant is involved as part of  a
    treatment plan to support O and that he  plays  a  fatherly  role.   He
    works as a volunteer helping homeless  people  and  she  spoke  of  his
    connections with the church including his baptism.  She submitted  that
    the Appellant's bonds with  family  and  friends  are  spiritually  and
    emotionally important to him.  O is a child with great needs  which  is
    supported by the evidence in the original bundle before the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  He has high dependency  and  requires
    one-to-one attention.  He has a very strong bond  with  the  Appellant.
    He has complex emotional needs.  She  referred  us  to  Judge  Talbot's
    findings in relation to the strength of the Appellant's family ties  in
    the UK and private life generally.

21.  In respect of very significant obstacles to integration she  relied  on
    the report of Mr de Noronha, taking  us  to  the  salient  parts.   The
    Appellant has struggled with  mental  health  issues  and  he  receives
    support here from his GP, from the  church  and  family  support.   She
    submitted that he is mentally tortured by what happened and he also has
    physical injuries.   He does not have family who  can  support  him  in
    Jamaica.  If he returns there he will  be  isolated  from  his  family.
    There will be an impact on O.   The  Appellant's  mother  is  a  single
    mother.  It is according to Ms Glass 'delusional' to believe  that  the
    Appellant's family  will  be  able  to  provide  such  support  to  the
    Appellant in Jamaica.  She referred us to isolation, his vulnerability,
    and the stigmatisation  of  deportees  and  difficulties  arising  from
    language, crime and homelessness.  She submitted that the  coming  home
    to Jamaica report puts a gloss on the reality of what is  available  to
    deportees in relation to housing, and health services.   She  submitted
    that CBT and the support the Appellant receives for depression will not
    be available to him in Jamaica he will be  returning  as  a  vulnerable
    person where he will be homeless.  Ms Glass submitted that all  factors
    cumulatively should lead to the appeal being allowed.

22.  Mr Whitwell made submissions.  He relied on  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter.  He referred us to the oral evidence of the Appellant  and  his
    mother set out in Judge Talbot's decision and that  the  Appellant  has
    relatives in Jamaica and notwithstanding the judge's findings at  [25],
    his family would be able to offer emotional support if not practical or
    financial.  In respect of paragraph  399A(a)  the  Appellant  does  not
    remotely meet the requirements. He is a year and a half off from  being
    here for most of his life.   He  conceded  that  he  was  socially  and
    culturally integrated on the basis of the Appellant having been granted
    indefinite leave to remain having been  educated  here,  his  work  for
    charities and the relationship he has with  O.   However,  he  did  not
    accept that there would be very significant obstacles  to  integration.
    He will be able to have a private life in Jamaica notwithstanding  that
    he has post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and  depression.   It  is  not
    suggested that if he were to be granted leave here he would do anything
    other than work. It is not clear how his mental health  problems  would
    prevent him from having a private life in Jamaica.

23.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the expert report it is  generic.   It  does
    not provide  an  evaluative  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  personal
    circumstances.  The report is  historic.  It  is  undated.  The  author
    states that he recently returned to Jamaica in 2016.  The expertise  of
    the author is brought into question.  The purpose of the report  is  as
    part of the author's doctoral research and the author indicates that he
    has  a  specific  interest  in  homophobic  violence  which  is  of  no
    materiality to the Appellant.  In this respect  Mr  Whitwell  submitted
    that the fourth, fifth and sixth sections of the report which deal with
    appealing from Jamaica, LGBTI persons and women have  no  relevance  to
    the Appellant.  Mr Whitwell questions the impartiality of the  evidence
    and questions the  sources  quoted.   He  also  reminded  us  that  the
    Appellant's appeal is not under Article 3.  It is  not  suggested  that
    deportation would breach the UK's  obligations  under  Article  3.   He
    accepts that the report, whilst useful, a great deal of  weight  should
    not be attached to it.  Whether or not the return to Jamaica  would  be
    bleak is not the test to be applied.  There is in  his  view  emergency
    accommodation and a social security system and in addition provision of
    mental healthcare.  He asked us to consider very significant  obstacles
    in the context of the Appellant who is a 27- year old  man  of  working
    age with an employment history who is educated to GCSE  level  and  who
    started a college course.  As a matter of fact, the language in Jamaica
    is English, the Appellant lived in Jamaica until  the  age  of  15.  He
    referred us to the case law relating to  children  and  that  the  ages
    between 4 and 11 are  more  significant.   The  Appellant  successfully
    adapted to a move to Europe.   He has spent fifteen years of  his  life
    in Jamaica. Whilst there may not  be  practical  or  financial  support
    available for him, there would be a level  of  emotional  support  from
    relatives there.  He made reference to Hesham Ali and that only a  very
    strong case would amount to very compelling circumstances.  This is not
    such a rare case.

The Legal Framework

24.

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
                contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the
                Human Rights Convention, and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least 4 years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
                    offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
                    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                    the law, the Secretary of State in assessing that  claim
                    will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,
                    if it does not, the public interest in deportation  will
                    only be outweighed by other factors where there are very
                    compelling circumstances over and above those  described
                    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                applies if -

                (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                    most of his life; and

                (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                    and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                    integration into the country to which it is proposed  he
                    is deported."

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
                cases:

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                    in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest,  and  in  particular in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  because
                    persons who can speak English-

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest,  and  in  particular in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons-

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                    that is established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the
                    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight  should  be  given  to  a  private life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In  the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable to
                    deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
                    person's removal where-

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and  subsisting parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

                (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                    interest.

                (2)    The more serious the offence committed  by  a foreign
                    criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public   interest   in
                    deportation of the criminal.

                (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C")  who  has not
                    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years
                    or more, the public interest  requires  C's  deportation
                    unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

                (4)     Exception 1 applies where-

                    (a)     C  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the United
                        Kingdom for most of C's life,

                    (b)    C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in the
                        United Kingdom, and

                    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles  to C's
                        integration into the country to which C is proposed
                        to be deported.

                (5)     Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine and
                    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a
                    genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
                    qualifying child, and the effect of C's  deportation  on
                    the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has been
                    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four
                    years, the public interest requires  deportation  unless
                    there are very compelling circumstances, over and  above
                    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to
                    be taken into account  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                    considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal only
                    to the extent that the reason for the decision  was  the
                    offence or offences for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                    convicted."

25.  In the recent case of MS (s.117C (6): "very compelling  circumstances")
    Philippines [2019] UKUT 0122, the  Upper  Tribunal  considered  Section
    117C (6) following KO (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKSC 53.  When concluding that whether there are very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1
    and 2 in sub-Sections (4) and (5),  such  as  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal, a court or  Tribunal
    must take  into  account,  together  with  any  other  relevant  public
    interest considerations, the  seriousness  of  the  particular  offence
    which the foreign  criminal  was  convicted;  not  merely  whether  the
    foreign criminal was or was not sentenced to imprisonment of more  than
    four years.  The Upper Tribunal said as follows at paragraph 8:

         "8.  The second point to make is that, as  is  apparent  from  that
             last sentence, the judgment in  KO  (Nigeria)  does  not  make
             reference to the respondent's concession before the  Court  of
             Appeal in NA (Pakistan) & Ors v Secretary  of  State  for  the
             Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662  that  the  purpose  of
             section 117C(6) is to ensure that in every "foreign  criminal"
             case, Part 5A of the 2002 Act does not operate in such  a  way
             as to cause a  violation  of  Article  8.   For  this  reason,
             section 117C(6) must be read as applying, not  only  to  "four
             years or more" cases but also to those other foreign criminals
             who fall within section 117C.  As we have noted in  RA  (Iraq)
             (HU/00192/2018),  which  was  heard  immediately  before   the
             present appeal, nothing  in  KO  (Nigeria)  casts  doubt  upon
             paragraphs 25 to 27 of  the  judgment  of  Jackson  LJ  in  NA
             (Pakistan), where he held that the respondent's concession was
             correctly made and that the ambit of section 117C (6)  extends
             beyond the written words in the section."

26.  The UT decided that it would be incorrect to say that  KO  compels  the
    finding that s.117C  (2)  is  merely  declaratory  of  the  distinction
    between foreign criminals who have not been sentenced  to  imprisonment
    of 4 years or more, and those who have (see [10]). The UT said that the
    evaluation of very compelling circumstances "calls for  a  wide-ranging
    evaluative exercise".  The UT stated:

         "17.     Viewed in this light, it can  readily  be  seen  that  the
             ascertainment   of   what    constitute    "very    compelling
             circumstances",  such  as  to  defeat  the  public   interest,
             requires a case-specific analysis of the nature of the  public
             interest.  The  strength  of  the  public  interest,  in   any
             particular case, determines the weight that must then be found
             to lie on the foreign criminal's side of the balance in  order
             for the circumstances  to  be  properly  categorised  as  very
             compelling. It would,  frankly,  be  remarkable  if  a  person
             sentenced  to  four  years'  imprisonment  for  fraud  had  to
             demonstrate the same circumstances as a  person  sentenced  to
             life imprisonment for multiple murders.

         18.      To say this is not  to  seek  to  introduce  a  "balancing
             exercise" into Exceptions 1 and 2  and  the  test  of  "unduly
             harsh". The words "over and above", as interpreted by  Jackson
             LJ in NA (Pakistan), underscore the difference  in  the  tasks
             demanded by, on the one hand, section 117C(4) and (5) and,  on
             the other, section 117C(6)."

27.  In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  and  Ors
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662 in relation to Section 117C(6) the  court  said  as
    follows:

         "29. In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to  those  provisions.  The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". As we have indicated  above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

         30.  In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. One might describe that as  a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2",  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8.

         31.  An interpretation of  the  relevant  phrase  to  exclude  this
             possibility would lead to  violation  of  Article  8  in  some
             cases, which plainly was not Parliament's intention. In  terms
             of relevance and weight for a proportionality  analysis  under
             Article  8,  the  factors  singled  out  for  description   in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 will apply with  greater  or  lesser  force
             depending on the specific facts of a particular case. To  take
             a simple example in relation to  the  requirement  in  section
             117C(4)(a) for Exception 1, the offender in  question  may  be
             someone aged 37 who came to the UK aged 18 and hence satisfies
             that requirement; but his claim under Article 8 is  likely  to
             be very much weaker than the claim of an offender now aged  80
             who came to the UK aged 6 months, who by dint of  those  facts
             satisfies that requirement. The circumstances  in  the  latter
             case might well be highly relevant  to  whether  it  would  be
             disproportionate and a breach  of  Article  8  to  deport  the
             offender, having regard to the guidance given by the ECtHR  in
             Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47, and hence highly relevant  to
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

         32.  Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all  he  could
             advance in support of his Article 8 claim was  a  "near  miss"
             case in which he fell short of bringing himself within  either
             Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be  possible  to  say
             that  he  had  shown  that   there   were   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". He would need to have a far stronger case than that by
             reference to the interests protected by  Article  8  to  bring
             himself within  that  fall  back  protection.  But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision maker, be it the
             Secretary of State or a tribunal, must look at all the matters
             relied upon collectively, in order to determine  whether  they
             are  sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high  public
             interest in deportation.

         33.   Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient."

28.  The UT in MS engaged with the comments of Lord Reed  in  Hesham  Ali  v
    Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2016]   UKSC   about
    deterrence. It concluded that there  is  nothing  in  Hesham  Ali  that
    requires a court to eschew the principle of general deterrence,  as  an
    element of the public interest, in determining a deportation appeal  by
    reference to section 117C (6).  In  assessing  proportionality  the  UT
    considered the Appellant's rehabilitation concluding that  following  a
    serious offence, it will not ordinarily count as a  significant  factor
    weighing in favour of an Appellant  facing  deportation  as  a  foreign
    criminal.

Conclusions

29.  We have regard to the three facets of deportation and do not  attribute
    too much weight to the Appellant's risk of reoffending  and  propensity
    to reoffend, which is in our view low, if not minimal.   We  take  into
    account the conclusion of the Upper Tribunal in MS namely that there is
    nothing in Hesham Ali v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] UKSC 60  that  requires  a  court  or  Tribunal  to  assume  the
    principle of public deterrent, as an element of the public interest, in
    determining a deportation appeal by reference to Section 117C (6).  The
    starting point is that deportation is in the public interest.  We  take
    into account that the Appellant was convicted of a very serious offence
    and the appalling  consequences  that  followed  from  this.  The  more
    serious the offence, the greater the public interest (see s.117C (2) of
    the 2002 Act). The public interest is unarguably  high  in  this  case.
    The test of compelling circumstances is determined on that  basis.  The
    Appellant has committed a serious offence for which he was sentenced to
    three years imprisonment. We attach weight to the dire consequences  of
    the offence.  It is in the public interest  to  deport  the  Appellant.
    However, we conclude looking at factors  (that  go  beyond  commonplace
    incidents of family life) cumulatively and all matters in the round his
    deportation would breach his rights under Article 8.

30.  The Appellant cannot meet the requirements of  paragraph  399A  in  its
    totality.  He satisfies one limb of 399A. He is  able  to  show,  to  a
    large margin in our view, that he is socially and culturally integrated
    in the UK.  He came here when a child and  we  take  into  account  the
    principles in Maslov v Austria 1630/03 [2009] INLR 47.  Whilst  he  has
    been here for a significant part of his life he is unable to  meet  the
    requirement 399A (a).  We find that the Appellant has spent one  and  a
    half years short of half his life here in the UK. We do not  apply  any
    "near miss" principle to the benefit of  the  Appellant;  however,  the
    length of time he has been here is of significance. We give significant
    weight to the fact that the Appellant came here as a child and that  he
    is socially and culturally integrated in the UK to in our view  a  very
    significant degree

31.  In respect  of  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  we  have
    considered the evidence of Mr de Noronha and the Coming Home to Jamaica
    booklet  which  it  seeks  to  undermine.   We  accept  Mr   Whitwell's
    submission in relation to the  evidential  value  of  Mr  de  Noronha's
    report.   It  does   not   deal   with   the   Appellant's   individual
    circumstances.  It  does  not  establish  very  significant  obstacles.
    However, we accept that it establishes that the circumstances  for  the
    Appellant on return to Jamaica would be very difficult  for  him,  even
    bleak, and would result in  a  significant  and  distressing  level  of
    hardship. Although we do not accept  the  expert  evidence  establishes
    that the  Appellant  would  be  destitute  and  unable  to  access  any
    healthcare for ongoing mental  health  problems,  we  accept  that  the
    Appellant's mental health benefits from the support of his  family  and
    the support of his GP.  We accept that if returned to Jamaica  he  will
    not have anywhere near the same level of family  support  or  the  same
    level of professional care which is  available  to  him  here.   Whilst
    there is family in Jamaica, the support that they would be able to give
    to the Appellant, as found by Judge Talbot, would not be  practical  or
    financial support. It would in our view amount to very little.

32.  We find that the Appellant enjoys a close relationship with his  mother
    with whom he resides.  We accept  the  evidence  of  a  close  fatherly
    relationship between the Appellant and his younger brother,  O.   There
    is no reason for us to go  behind  the  findings  of  Judge  Talbot  in
    relation to the Appellant's family life.  Mr Whitwell did not  seek  to
    challenge the further evidence produced by the Appellant which was  not
    before Judge Talbot.  It was not argued by the Appellant that he has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with O.  His  relationship
    falls, in our view, short of this. However,  the  evidence  establishes
    that  the  Appellant  is  a  source  of  parental  support  to  O.  The
    relationship between O and the Appellant is significant and goes beyond
    that of brothers. Whilst para 398 is of no direct materiality  in  this
    case in so far as the Appellant does not claim to have a subsisting and
    parental role with O, we are in no doubt that the impact of deportation
    on O would be unduly harsh in the context of  398,  applying  KO.   The
    evidence that it would be in O's best interests for  the  Appellant  to
    remain here in the UK with him is overwhelming.  O is a British citizen
    child. We find that  he  is  a  vulnerable  child.  We  find  that  the
    Appellant  is  similarly  vulnerable.  The  medical  evidence  was  not
    challenged. We find that he has ongoing physical  and  emotional  scars
    from the part he played in the accident that caused the  death  of  his
    friend.  We take into account the Appellant's mother's reliance on  the
    Appellant to help her with O although this has to be seen in the  light
    of the Appellant's incarceration.

33.  The Appellant is someone who  does  not  have  a  criminal  profile  of
    significance. He has committed one serious offence that has resulted in
    very serious consequences.  It is  not  suggested  that  he  was  in  a
    criminal gang or that he chose a lifestyle the inevitable  consequences
    of which would lead to criminality. The extent of  his  criminality  is
    limited  to  this  offence  albeit  the  very  serious  nature  of  the
    consequences that ensued and the Appellant's high culpability.  He  was
    sentenced to three years. The maximum sentence is 14 years.   From  the
    sentence received and the sentencing  remarks,  it  can  be  reasonably
    inferred that the offence was at the less serious  end  of  the  scale,
    there were mitigating factors accepted by  the  judge  and  aggravating
    features that would have given rise to  a  greater  sentence  were  not
    present. These are all matters in the Appellant's favour.  There is, in
    our view, very little risk of him reoffending. This is only  one  facet
    of the public interest, but a matter to which  we  put  into  the  mix.
    Similarly, we attach some weight to his evidence of remorse and that he
    is trying to make amends through charitable work.

34.  Considering everything that weighs in favour of the Appellant  and  the
    circumstances of the offence for the reasons set out above we find that
    there are very compelling circumstances such as to  defeat  the  public
    interest notwithstanding the strong public interest in  deportation  of
    the Appellant.  Having had regard to the seriousness of the offence and
    the sentence imposed and the need to maintain public confidence in  the
    system of immigration control, the appeal is allowed under Article 8.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 4 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

