
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09125/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 28th February 2018                         |On 21st March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  mr H Y M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shashi Jaisri (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kainth, promulgated on 31st October 2017, following a hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 17th October 2017.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Somalia, and  was  born  on  [  ]
    1989.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  Secretary  of
    State dated 3rd September 2017 refusing his application for asylum  and
    for humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that  he  is  a  minority  clan
    member belonging to the Benadiri, which is also known as Reer Hamar  in
    Somalia.  He was born in Mogadishu.  He had experienced  problems  from
    the majority Hawiye clan.  He was physically assaulted.  He was  forced
    to pay them money and his shop was attacked and  burnt  down.   He  now
    believes that if he has to return to  Somalia  he  will  be  killed  by
    members of the Hawiye clan as he belongs to the minority Benadiri clan.
     His wife arrived in the UK  in  2014  and  claimed  asylum.   She  was
    granted refugee status on 14th January 2016.  On 22nd December 2014 and
    on 28th July 2017 his  children  were  born  in  the  UK.   His  eldest
    daughter has a number of health concerns and has  been  diagnosed  with
    cancer.  Both of her eyes  have  been  removed  and  she  continues  to
    receive hospital and medical treatment (see paragraphs 15 to 19 of  the
    determination).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to the country guidance case  of  MOJ  (Return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  and  properly  concluded  that
    there were no clan militias in Mogadishu any longer, no clan  violence,
    and no clan based discriminatory  treatment,  even  for  minority  clan
    members, as a result of this decision having come  into  effect.   (See
    paragraph 26).

 5. The judge additionally also held that the  Appellant's  claim  was  not
    credible in itself because,  had  he  formed  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution, he would not have returned back to Qatar from  the  United
    Kingdom, having left his wife and unborn child.  He had  first  entered
    the UK in 2015 with a visit visa.  His wife was granted asylum in  2016
    thereafter.  His explanation for not claiming asylum once he was in the
    UK was that he was working in Qatar.  The first child was born on  22nd
    December 2014.  In these circumstances, it was  quite  surprising  that
    the Appellant would not have claimed asylum  and  remained  in  the  UK
    (paragraph 32).  The Appellant then remained absent from the  UK  until
    arriving back on 1st November 2016, some two years  after  leaving  his
    wife in this country (paragraph 33).  Accordingly, the claim to  asylum
    was  rejected  after  extensive  analysis  of  the  evidence  and   the
    applicable case law undertaken by the judge in this determination  (see
    paragraphs 45 to 57).

 6. In  relation  to  the  Appellant's  Article  8  claims,  however,  this
    presented more difficulty because the Appellant  already  had  by  this
    stage now a wife in the UK who had full refugee status,  together  with
    two children, one of whom had very serious medical problems.  The judge
    gave consideration to this aspect of the claim as well, setting out the
    case law in detail (see paragraphs  59  to  61),  before  applying  its
    strictures to the facts before him (paragraphs 64 to 72).  Judge Kainth
    then proceeded to consider the expert evidence available in relation to
    the children.  For example, the social worker, Nana Quanfah-Heart,  had
    stated that both of the two young children need parenting by both their
    parents, especially given that one of them has special  needs.  Another
    report by Maxin Fraser stated that father and child "are  exceptionally
    close and have a very special bond" (see paragraphs  76  to  77).   The
    medical consultants' reports were then also referred to (see paragraphs
    77 to 78).  It was concluded that the Appellant could not succeed under
    Article 8 either.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  wrongly  failed  to
    consider all the medical evidence from the  clinical  psychologist  and
    the medical team; failed to make it  clear  whether  it  was  in  [I]'s
    interest in having the support of her  father  ([I]  being  the  eldest
    child who is diagnosed with cancer and has both of her eyes  surgically
    removed); and failed to consider expert evidence that  the  Appellant's
    presence was in [I]'s best interests in the UK.

 8. On 7th December 2017, permission to appeal was granted.  It  was  noted
    that the Appellant's two children and his wife  are  Somali  nationals.
    His wife  has  recognised  refugee  status  in  the  UK  already.   The
    Appellant already enjoyed with his eldest daughter, [I],  family  life,
    and she has suffered cancer in both  eyes,  and  both  eyes  have  been
    removed in 2016 and 2017.  The judge  did  not  refer  to  the  medical
    evidence.  The decision made was arguably against  the  weight  of  the
    evidence.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 28th February 2018, Mr Jaisri, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the fundamental point  in  this
    appeal was that the judge had already found that  family  life  existed
    between the Appellant and his children (see paragraph 62).

10. Second, after coming to the UK the Appellant became a father once again
    (paragraph 63).   He  has  regular  contact  with  his  children.   The
    Appellant was unable to live with his children in the UK  for  entirely
    practical reasons,  and  the  social  worker,  Nana  Quanfah-Heart  had
    alluded to this (see page (xiv) of the bundle).

11. Third, the judge, in the light of this background evidence,  had  erred
    in law by very early on concluding that the Appellant did not play  any
    proper role in his children's life (see paragraph 69) before then going
    on to consider the evidence, especially from the experts, which did say
    precisely the opposite.

12. Fourth, it was accordingly irrational for the judge to conclude that,

         "There is no particular feature that I have been able  to  identify
         to suggest that the  Appellant  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom
         enhances his children's best interests because case  law  dictates,
         best interests is not decisive when there are other  countervailing
         reasons ..." (paragraph 77).

13. Finally, however, if  one  looked  at  the  report  of  the  consultant
    paediatric oncologist, Dr Duncan (see page (xix)) he  was  quite  clear
    that the eldest child was going to require intensive  chemotherapy  and
    that this would require the presence of the Appellant, her  father,  in
    the UK.  In referring to  Dr  Duncan,  and  to  Dr  Robertson,  another
    clinical psychologist, all the judge was doing was  simply  paying  lip
    service to the fact that these  reports  existed,  without  making  any
    reference to the contents of these medical reports (at paragraphs 77 to
    78).

14. For his part, Mr Avery submitted that he  would  have  to  accept  that
    there was family life between the Appellant and his  children  and  his
    wife.  However, the judge did observe that the Appellant had previously
    "wilfully removed himself from the United  Kingdom  knowing  full  well
    that his wife was pregnant with their first child" (paragraph 66).   To
    this, Mr Jaisri interrupted to say that he had gone back  to  Qatar  to
    work and that this was not the same as "wilfully" leaving this  country
    and abandoning his family.  Mr Avery proceeded to state that the  judge
    was entitled to conclude that, since  the  children  were  living  with
    their mother, who had refugee status, their best interests  was  served
    by remaining with the mother in the UK.  There  was  no  need  for  the
    Appellant to be present in this country.  Finally, it is not  the  case
    that the social worker's reports had been  ignored  because  the  judge
    specifically refers to them, setting out the  input  of  their  reports
    (see paragraph 76 to 77).

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

16. First, this is a case where the judge had already accepted  that  there
    was a family life "between the Appellant and his children in the United
    Kingdom" (paragraph 62).  In the circumstances, it does not  matter  at
    all that contact was then lost between the parties  "between  2014  and
    June 2016" (paragraph 62) when the Appellant returned to Qatar to work.
     Nor does it matter that "he does not live with his wife  or  children"
    because it is expressly recognised by the judge that, "he  has  regular
    contact with them" (paragraph 63).   Indeed,  the  judge  had  evidence
    before him that the Appellant  "has  attended  more  than  one  of  his
    daughter's  hospital  appointments"  (paragraph  69),  although  it  is
    difficult then to understand why he also states that  this  "in  itself
    does not substantiate that he plays a vital role in her  upbringing  or
    welfare" (paragraph 69).

17. Second, this is a case where the Appellant's eldest child, [I], who  is
    just over 3 years of age, has been diagnosed with cancer, and  has  had
    both of her eyes surgically removed.  The report from Maxin Fraser  (at
    paragraph 77) who is a clinical oncologist nurse, is  absolutely  clear
    that, "[I] is going to be spending most of the next six months or so in
    hospital" and this being so, this "will require Hussein [the Appellant]
    to be with her at all time giving this support.  [I] and her father are
    exceptionally close and have a very special bond ...".  In fact,  Maxin
    Fraser even goes on to state that [I],  "is  notably  calmer  when  her
    father is with her as he constantly talks to her and explains  what  is
    happening around her ..." (paragraph 77).  In these circumstances it is
    very difficult to understand how the conclusion can be reached that the
    Appellant's removal "would not in  my  assessment  have  a  detrimental
    impact upon his children" (paragraph 70).  It cannot be said that  this
    is because he does not live with them.  The evidence before  the  judge
    was that "he attends upon the children on  a  daily  basis"  (paragraph
    70).  It was also the case that the judge had already found that  there
    was a subsisting family life between the Appellant  and  his  children.
    It is worth remembering that the Appellant had "attended more than  one
    of his daughter's hospital appointments" (paragraph 69).

18. Third, not only are the conclusions reached against  the  face  of  the
    evidence that is already recited by the  judge,  namely,  that  of  the
    clinical oncologist nurse,  Maxin  Fraser,  but  the  evidence  of  the
    medical doctors themselves, is not properly engaged with at all  during
    the course of the determination, and is only referred to  at  the  very
    end of the determination, as an adjunct to that determination.   It  is
    stated (at paragraphs 77 and 78) that there  were  letters  of  support
    from Dr Robertson, a clinical psychologist, and a further  letter  from
    Lesley Green, as well as  the  letter  from  Dr  Duncan,  a  consultant
    paediatric oncologist.  The evidence of Dr Duncan, in  particular,  was
    particularly powerful.  Insofar as there is a reference to the evidence
    of Nana Quanfah-Heart, a social worker,  who  has  stated  that,  "both
    parents are needed to look after two young children, one  with  special
    needs and the other a tiny baby who needs the  full  attention  of  his
    mother" (at paragraph 76), it is difficult to understand how it can  be
    concluded that, "the author makes no reference with respect to why  she
    believes this to be the case", when  there  is  considerable  evidence,
    from a variety of sources, and not least the medical condition  of  [I]
    who is facing the next six months in a hospital and has a  particularly
    close relationship with her father the Appellant.  It is also difficult
    to understand what is meant by  the  suggestion  that,  "nor  does  she
    examine any other options that may  potentially  be  available  to  the
    Appellant's wife and children  upon  his  return  to  Somalia/Tanzania"
    (paragraph 76).  If the expert  opinion  is  that  the  Appellant,  who
    enjoys a family life with his children and his refugee status wife,  is
    needed for the upbringing of two young children, one of  whom  has  had
    both her eyes removed and is facing further hospital treatment,  it  is
    difficult to see how an option of removal back to Somalia or  Tanzania,
    needs any further explanation from the medical experts, when  exercised
    by the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State.   The  decision  arrived  at,
    accordingly, is against the weight  of  the  evidence,  and  cannot  be
    supported.

Remaking the Decision

19. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.  I do so given that practice statement 7.2 makes it  clear  that
    the Upper Tribunal is likely on each occasion to proceed to remake  the
    decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-tier Tribunal, and
    given the overwhelming weight of the evidence in this case, I  come  to
    the conclusion that this appeal must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

21. An anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated 17 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss

