
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09512/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 27 June 2019                      |
|Prepared 4 June 2019                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    d h a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw, Counsel instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Iraq,  date  of  birth  15  October  1990,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision,  dated  20  July  2018,  to
    refuse a protection claim founded principally  on  the  claim  that  he
    formerly of the Islamic faith had converted to Christianity in Iraq and
    that as an apostate he would face serious consequences on  return  both
    arising under his relationship with his  father  and  family  but  also
    generally as a convert to Christianity.

2.   His claim was rejected and the appeal was made to  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge James, (the Judge) who,  on  27  September  2018,  dismissed  the
    appeal but made an anonymity order which is continued.

3.   Permission to appeal that decision was given on 1st November 2018.  The
    two principal grounds are first the judge's findings in relation to the
    Appellant's claim to have converted to Christianity; Secondly in  terms
    of the issue of ability to return to the IKR in Iraq as in the light of
    the country guidance case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -  internal  relocation)
    Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212.

4.    Having heard Mr Bradshaw's analysis of the  sufficiency  and  adequacy
    of the reasons, which Mrs Aboni properly accepts makes it difficult  to
    defend the judge's decision, coincided with my view that the  structure
    in which the decision has been written. There was a fair recitation  of
    the evidence but a marked lack of adequate or sufficient reasons to  be
    a material error of law.

5.    There  are  other  criticisms  that  are  made  not   least   to   the
    possibilities that the  judge  was  moving  away  from  the  recognised
    standard of  proof  expected  in  protection  cases  which  was  always
    acknowledged as a low one but appeared often to be applied at a  higher
    level.  In terms of the assessment  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  the
    judge has also had recourse  to  the  description  of  plausibility  in
    relation to the Appellant's evidence: Rather than the extent  to  which
    it is reliable or otherwise to be rejected for reasons given.  I  found
    therefore that  the  Original  Tribunal's  decision  contains  material
    errors of law in  the  proper  assessment  of  the  issues.  Mrs  Aboni
    correctly pointed out the  judge  had  really  failed  to  address  the
    consequences of the case of AAH in terms of the issues  of  return  and
    has given no good  reasons  for  rejecting  that  country  guidance  or
    indicating why in the case of the Appellant it would not be applicable.



6.   In the circumstances I  concluded  that  the  issue  will  have  to  be
    addressed again in the First-tier Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The matter will have  to  be
remade in the First-tier  Tribunal  not  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
James.

DIRECTIONS

List for hearing two and a half hours unless the Tribunal is notified  of  a
lesser time estimate or a need for a greater one.
  Any further evidence relied upon  by  the  Appellant  in  support  of  the
claims to be  served  not  later  than  ten  clear  working  days  upon  the
Secretary of State and the Tribunal.
  Any response from the Secretary of State to be served not later than  five
clear working days before the further hearing.
  Any  further  directions  if  required  to  be  given  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.
  No findings of fact to stand.


ANONYMITY DIRECTION

The anonymity order is continued.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 20 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

