
         [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09684/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2018                             |On 10 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                      BM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


An order has been made under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellant being identified. Failure  to  comply
with this order could lead to a contempt of court.


1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of  23  August  2016  refusing  her   application   for   international
    protection.

Background.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [  ]  1980.  She  first
    arrived in the UK on 8 February 2011 with leave to remain as a  student
    valid until 3 June 2012.   She was granted further leave to  remain  in
    the  same  capacity  until  30  September  2013.   However,  a  further
    application for a residence card as the spouse of an EEA  national  was
    refused on 3 July 2015.  On 10 December 2015, she  applied  for  asylum
    and her application was refused in the decision of 23 August 2016,  the
    subject of this appeal.

3.    Her application for asylum was based on  her  claim  that  she  was  a
    lesbian and was in a lesbian relationship with her partner,  a  citizen
    of India. Her partner has also applied for asylum but  her  application
    was refused and certified  in  a  decision  made  on  26  August  2016.
    However, the respondent did not accept that the appellant  was  lesbian
    and for that reason found that she would not be at risk of  persecution
    on return to Pakistan.   Her application was refused accordingly.

4.    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The judge  did  not
    find that the evidence of the appellant or her partner was credible  or
    that the evidence of a further witness was sufficiently cogent for  him
    to conclude that the appellant  and  her  partner  were  in  a  lesbian
    relationship. For these reasons, her appeal was dismissed.

The Error of Law.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.   At  the
    hearing before me it was agreed by Mr Chelvan and Ms Fijiwala that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.  Firstly, the judge erred in law by entering  into  a  fact-
    finding exercise to decide whether the respondent had meant to  concede
    that the appellant's partner was  lesbian  (para  27  of  the  decision
    letter relating to her claim  where  such  a  concession  is  recorded)
    without following the procedure approved by the Court of Appeal  in  NR
    (Jamaica) v Secretary of State [2009]  EWCA  Civ  856.   Secondly,  the
    judge erred in law by failing to analyse the evidence of the  appellant
    in the context of the DSSH model as set out in the respondent's  policy
    documents including API Sexual Orientation in Asylum Claims,  3  August
    2016.

6.    Both representatives agreed that the proper course was for the  appeal
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration by way of
    a full rehearing and the directions set out  in  [7]  below  were  also
    agreed save that Mr Chelvan submitted that the finding of fact made  by
    the judge at [72] of his decision that "the appellant and  her  partner
    may well share a room together" should be preserved whereas Ms Fijiwala
    argued that it would be artificial for this fact alone to be  preserved
    if the appeal was to be heard afresh.  I am satisfied  that  the  right
    course in the light of the errors of law made by the judge is for there
    to be a full rehearing with no preserved findings of fact. Ms  Fijiwala
    indicated that she intended to consider whether the concession relating
    to the appellant's partner should be withdrawn and also that she  would
    be reviewing the decision relating to the appellant as the evidence had
    not been assessed in the context of the DSSH model.

7.    Accordingly, I make the following directions:

      (a)     the  appeal  is  to  be  remitted   to   Taylor   House   for
          reconsideration by way of a  full  rehearing  before  a  different
          judge on the basis that  as  at  the  date  of  this  hearing  the
          concession that the appellant's partner is a lesbian still stands.


    (b)     if the respondent wishes to withdraw the  concession  that  the
          appellant's partner is a lesbian, she must provide reasons why the
          concession should be  withdrawn  based  on  the  evidence  in  her
          protection claim.  These reasons are to be filed with  the  First-
          tier Tribunal on or before 18 January 2018, a copy being served on
          the appellant.


    (c)     the decision on the review of  the  appellant's  claim  in  the
          light of the concession about the failure to use the DSSH model is
          to be filed with the First-tier Tribunal   on or  before  1  March
          2018, a copy being served on the appellant.


    (d)     the respondent is to file the relevant  documents  relating  to
          the appellant's asylum application on  or  before  1  March  2018,
          copies being served on the appellant.

Decision.

8.    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  reconsideration
    by way of a full rehearing by a different judge.

9.    In the light of  the  issues  raised  in  this  asylum  appeal,  I  am
    satisfied that this is a proper case for an order to be made under rule
    14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I  make
    an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely
    to lead to the appellant being identified.




Signed:           H J E latter               Dated:       8 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
