
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09955/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th November 2018                         |On 8th January 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                mohammed [k]
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Latimer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on 1st January 1988, is a  citizen  of  Iraq.   The
    Appellant  was  represented  by  Ms  Latimer.    The   Respondent   was
    represented by Mr Howells, a Senior Presenting Officer.





Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made an application for asylum on 3rd  May  2016  and
    that application had been refused by the Respondent on  21st  September
    2017.  The Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal had been
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Brien sitting at Newport on
    2nd January 2018.  The judge had dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  on
    all grounds.  Application for permission to appeal had  been  made  and
    granted on 23rd February 2018.  Directions  had  been  issued  for  the
    question of an error of law to be decided by the Upper Tribunal and the
    matter had come before me in accordance with those directions  on  22nd
    August 2018.  For reasons given within the  decision  I  found  that  a
    material error of law had been made by the judge and decided  that  the
    case needed to be reheard and a fresh decision made.   Directions  were
    issued amongst which it was directed that that fresh decision should be
    taken in the Upper Tribunal and that the findings of fact made  by  the
    judge in relation to the Appellant's personal circumstances and  reason
    for leaving Iraq in the first instance  were  preserved  and  that  the
    issue to be decided was the question of risk on return to Iraq.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 3.  The  Appellant  was  present.   There  was  no  interpreter  but   the
    Appellant's representative was quite content for the matter to  proceed
    in the absence of an interpreter as it was intended that the case would
    proceed by way of submissions only from both  the  Respondent  and  the
    Appellant's representative.

 4. In addition to the documents on the original file I was provided with:

       . Skeleton argument.

       . Appellant's bundle, pages 2 to 126.

       . Iraqi News extract.

       . AAH Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212.

 5. As a preliminary matter the issues  in  the  case  were  discussed  and
    agreed.  The Appellant's home area in Iraq is agreed to be Diyala.  The
    Respondent said that the Appellant could return to his home area,  that
    part of Iraq now being sufficiently safe.  The Respondent accepted that
    the Appellant could not relocate to Baghdad  because  of  his  personal
    situation but the Respondent further said it would be possible for  the
    Appellant to relocate to the IKR should it be found that his home  area
    was unsafe.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 6. Mr Howells submitted that the conflict between ISIS  and  Iraqi  forces
    had changed markedly in recent times with ISIS no longer having control
    in Iraq and it was appropriate therefore to  look  at  whether  Article
    15(c) was applicable in any area of Iraq.

 7. In respect of the Appellant's home area of Diyala it was accepted  that
    in AA [2015] Diyala had been found to be an Article 15(c) area but  was
    submitted that that had changed in a  durable  way  and  that  ISIS  no
    longer controlled the territory and there was no longer a  threat  that
    it could re-take that area.  I was referred to  the  CPIN  March  2017,
    paragraphs 2.3.6 and 2.3.9.  I was further referred  to  the  table  at
    paragraph 9.6.1 and the map at 8.4.1.  Additionally, I was referred  to
    the final page which was a  UNHCR  Report  January  2018  dealing  with
    Diyala.  In respect of security it was found  that  in  AA  [2015]  the
    issue of security was a matter to be looked at  but  it  was  submitted
    that Diyala no longer fitted into that category and  in  particular,  I
    was referred to a number of graphs within the CPIN Report and paragraph
    4.4 of a Swedish Report.  Mr Howells submitted that the Appellant had a
    maternal uncle in Diyala and could ask him to get  a  replacement  CSID
    from the local civil affairs office or that the Appellant could give  a
    power of attorney to someone else to do that.  It  was  noted  that  at
    paragraph 19 of the Appellant's witness statement of 27th October  2017
    the Appellant had provided documents and photographs  from  that  uncle
    proving that the uncle had that ability to assist him.   The  Appellant
    had also said that it was the uncle who  had  paid  an  agent  for  the
    Appellant to leave Iraq.  It  was  noted  the  Appellant  had  copy  ID
    documents showing that he had previously been issued with documents.

 8. In respect of Baghdad it was accepted that it would be unreasonable for
    him to relocate to Baghdad, in particular because it  was  accepted  he
    had no family connections in that area nor  did  he  speak  the  Arabic
    language and was Kurdish.

 9. In terms of the KRG I was reminded the Appellant was an ethnic Kurd and
    therefore he would be free to enter the KRG.  The case  of  AAH  [2018]
    found that if an Appellant had a CSID or passport then there  would  be
    no risk travelling from Baghdad to the KRG but if such a person did not
    have that document then they would face difficulty on the journey.   It
    was submitted the Appellant could get a CSID  from  the  Iraqi  Embassy
    that would allow him to then travel to the KRG.  I  was  reminded  that
    the Appellant's own evidence which was accepted is that he  had  fought
    with the Peshmerga between 2006 to 2015 having risen  to  the  rank  of
    warrant officer.

10. On behalf of the Appellant I was referred to the skeleton argument.  In
    the case of Diyala it was submitted that this  was  still  a  contested
    area that met the Article 15(c) provisions.  It was said that AA [2017]
    had been decided by the Court of Appeal in July 2017 and that the  CPIN
    referred to had in fact been issued prior to AA [2017].  I was referred
    to the Danish Immigration Service Report at page 105  and  126  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  In AAH at paragraph 14 the threat  from  ISIS  was
    recognised in the Diyala area and was said that it was likely it  would
    be there for some time.  It was submitted that that  was  the  position
    declared in June 2018.  It was said that there was no  cogent  evidence
    to depart from AA.

11. In respect of return to the KRG and the question of  a  CSID  document,
    AAH dealt with the question of return to the KRG and it was  said  that
    there was no evidence to show that anyone else had been able to  get  a
    CSID for some other person.  It  was  submitted  that  the  embassy  in
    London was unhelpful.  The Appellant had said  that  he  had  lost  his
    Iraqi passport but it was also said  that  the  documents  said  to  be
    necessary to produce to obtain a CSID did not include a passport.   AAH
    in 2018 had found that ISIS  had  destroyed  or  damaged  most  of  the
    registry offices in areas they controlled and therefore it is  unlikely
    the Appellant would be able to  obtain  a  replacement  CSID.   It  was
    submitted therefore that it was not possible for the Appellant  to  get
    such document either in the UK or Iraq and therefore he  would  not  be
    able to travel to the KRG.  Indeed, I was referred to the opinion of Dr
    Fatah in AAH where it was said the person would have difficulty leaving
    an airport without the CSID.  In all those circumstances  it  was  said
    that relocation to the KRG was not reasonable.

12. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and evidence submitted.  I now provide that decision with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

13. It is accepted fact that the Appellant is from Diyala.   In  AA  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 944 the Court of Appeal had considered the  original  decision
    in AA [2015] before the Upper Tribunal.  They were essentially  focused
    on the issue of a CSID but as noted at paragraph 41  they  appended  to
    their judgment a complete revised country  guidance  which  appears  as
    annexes to the judgment.  Accordingly, whilst the judgment may not have
    looked in detail at all the matters considered in the case in  2015  it
    nevertheless specifically sets out guidance and at paragraph 22  (Annex
    F) specifically stated "this decision  replaced  all  existing  country
    guidance on Iraq".

14. Annex A, paragraph 1 states:

         "There is at present a state of internal armed conflict in  certain
         parts of Iraq involving government  security  forces,  militias  of
         various kinds and the Islamist group known as ISIL.  The  intensity
         of this armed conflict in the so-called contested areas  comprising
         the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah,  and  Salah  Al
         Din, is such that, as  a  general  matter,  there  are  substantial
         grounds for believing that any civilian returned there,  solely  on
         account of his or her presence faces a real risk of being subjected
         to indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious  harm  within  the
         scope of Article 15(c)".

    That decision was made in July 2017.

15. In general  terms,  a  judge  is  required  to  take  country  guidance
    determinations into account and  to  follow  them  unless  very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence are adduced justifying  their  not
    doing so (SC [2012 EWCA Civ 940).

16. It is accepted that circumstances in Iraq may well be fluid  and  there
    may have been changes in a relatively short time.  It is also  accepted
    that the threat posed by ISIS a few years ago is significantly  reduced
    and different to the situation now.  I have  carefully  considered  all
    the data I have been referred to within the bundles.   It  is  a  mixed
    picture.  Whilst I accept that  various  graphs  show  a  reduction  in
    security problems in Diyala it is begins from a poor base being one  of
    the six most affected areas.  In terms of areas where  households  have
    not been able to access their local public distribution  system  Diyala
    registered third worst in Iraq according to Reach.

17. In summary, I accept there have been changes and improvements but it is
    by no means a clear or unambiguous significant  shift  for  the  better
    that is presented.  I do not find that there is that  level  of  cogent
    evidence that allows me to depart from a country guidance case  decided
    by the Court of Appeal as recently as July 2017.   If  the  reality  is
    that the last time a case looked in depth at the  situation  throughout
    Iraq was in late 2014/early 2015 then  the  answer  is  to  produce  an
    updated country guidance case.  I do not find on the material before me
    however a sufficiency of cogent evidence that would justify a departure
    from the Court of Appeal guidance in AA [2017]  insofar  as  Diyala  is
    concerned.  I find therefore a return of the Appellant to his home area
    would lead to a situation where he would be  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection.

18. I have therefore looked at the question of  internal  relocation.   The
    Respondent accepts that the Appellant's personal circumstances are such
    that they  agree  a  relocation  to  Baghdad  would  be  unduly  harsh.
    Accordingly, the only option for internal relocation would  be  to  the
    IKR.

19. AA [2017] Annex E noted at paragraph 17 that the Respondent  will  only
    return P to the IKR if P originates from the IKR and his  identity  has
    been pre-cleared with the IKR authorities and they  do  not  require  a
    passport or laissez passer.  At paragraph 19 it is said that a Kurd who
    does not originate from the IKR can obtain entry clearance for ten days
    as a visitor and thereafter renew that entry.

20. Since AA [2017] Annex E, there has been the country  guidance  case  of
    AAH [2018] UKUT 00212.  That notes  that  there  are  no  international
    flights to the IKR and all returns are via Baghdad.  If  the  Appellant
    as a Kurd had a CSID or passport then there would be little  difficulty
    in him making the journey from Baghdad to the IKR.  However, without  a
    valid CSID or passport then he would face considerable difficulties  in
    making the journey from Baghdad to the IKR.  It is said that it is  not
    reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and the IKR  by  land
    absent the ability of P to identify his identity at checkpoints.

21. I find that the time the Appellant has spent in the IKR as a Peshmerga,
    gaining the rank of warrant officer, would have given him a  noticeable
    footprint in that area.   I  find  that  he  would  have  contacts  and
    potentially friends that would provide him with the type of  assistance
    that is described in AAH  as  being  available  to  those  with  family
    assistance.  I find the Appellant's footprint in the IKR such that  the
    term "family assistance" used in AAH whilst no doubt referring to blood
    relatives would in the circumstances of  the  Appellant's  case  be  as
    readily applicable in his case to contacts and friends that he  has  in
    that area.

22. The question  mark  therefore  is  the  ability/reasonableness  of  the
    Appellant travelling from Baghdad to the IKR.  I do not  find  evidence
    to suggest he has a current or  expired  passport.   In  terms  of  his
    ability to acquire a CSID within a reasonable timeframe in Baghdad I am
    guided by the criteria referred to in Annex E  of  AA  [2017]  and  the
    replacement guidance within AAH [2018] UKUT 00212.  I  have  looked  at
    the factors to see whether the Appellant could obtain a new CSID within
    a reasonable timeframe.  I have noted the  factors  listed  within  AAH
    [2018].  I find the following relevant to the Appellant:

      a) The Appellant does not have documents.

      b) The local civil registry office in Diyala was potentially  formerly
         held by ISIL, may well be destroyed, was in a  contested  area  and
         remains in an area I find that on current country guidance  remains
         an Article 15(c) area.

      c) The relative referred to within the facts, namely  the  Appellant's
         maternal uncle, is on the mother's side of the family in  a  system
         which is patrineal.   That  uncle  does  not  live  in  Diyala  and
         information about him and his current  circumstances  is  extremely
         limited.  There are no other family members identified.

      d) The Appellant is Kurdish, does not speak Arabic and  has  no  known
         family friends or support in Baghdad.

23. The ability of the Appellant to  obtain  a  CSID  within  a  reasonable
    timeframe in Baghdad is therefore  unlikely.   The  Respondent  accepts
    that internal relocation to Baghdad  (presumably  except  for  a  short
    transit period prior to relocation to the IKR), is not acceptable,  but
    the evidence points precisely to the fact that the Appellant's  ability
    to relocate outside Baghdad in a reasonable  timescale  or  at  all  in
    safety is doubtful because of his lack  of  a  CSID  and  inability  to
    obtain one within such a reasonable timescale if at all.

24. Accordingly, whatever the reality  may  be  on  the  ground  currently,
    following as I do the relevant country guidance case  law  for  reasons
    provided, I find the Appellant cannot be returned  to  his  home  area.
    The Respondent accepts he cannot be relocated to Baghdad.  I find  that
    he could, given his background, relocate to the  IKR  but  for  reasons
    given I do  not  find  that  he  has  or  could  obtain  the  necessary
    identification that would allow him to travel from Baghdad to  the  IKR
    given that currently removal is only to Baghdad and not direct  to  the
    IKR.

25. I find therefore that returning the Appellant to his home area would be
    a breach of Article 15(c) and  there  is  no  current  viable  internal
    relocation option in his case.

Notice of Decision

26. I find in this case  that  the  Appellant  qualifies  for  humanitarian
    protection.

    Anonymity not retained.




Signed                              Date: 18 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable




Signed                              Date: 18 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

