
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09952/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 8 April 2019                      |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 RAMTIN [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals with permission a decision of Resident  Judge
         Zucker promulgated on 16 October 2018 in which the Judge  dismissed
         the appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.




Background


      2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 5 November 1991.

      3. The basis of the protection claim is an assertion  that  whilst  in
         Iran the appellant converted  from  Islam  to  Zoroastrianism.  The
         appellant flew from Tehran to Paris before, with the assistance  of
         an agent, entering the  United  Kingdom  by  lorry.  The  appellant
         claims  his  conversion  to  Zoroastrianism  became  known  to  the
         authorities in Iran and that if he was to be returned  he  will  be
         killed. The appellant  claimed  he  started  practising  his  faith
         between 2009 and 2017 but accepted  the  new  faith,  according  to
         another response, on 17 March 2017.

      4.  The  Judge  at  [4]  sets  out  the   issues   agreed   with   the
         representatives as being at large in relation to the  appeal  which
         are:

               I. Has the Appellant converted to Zoroastrianism?

              II. Is he already of interest to the authorities in Iran?

             III. If not, how would he conduct himself in Iran?

              IV. Why would he conduct himself in that manner?

      5. There is no error in the Judge focusing on determine the merits  of
         the case by reference to the agreed issues which properly represent
         the questions to be considered in a case of this  nature  following
         HJ (Iran).

      6. The Judge had the benefit of not  only  the  written  evidence  but
         seeing and hearing the appellant give his oral  evidence.  Findings
         of fact are set out from [22-30] in the following terms:

             "22.     I note  the  various  documents  in  the  Appellant's
                  bundle  including  his  membership  card  from  the  World
                  Zoroastrian Organisation.  I note too, the contents of the
                  letter of 21 June 2018 written  by  Revd.  Vafadari  which
                  makes reference to the Appellant attending for  devotional
                  prayers, though I note also that there is no letterhead to
                  that letter, but I attached little weight to any criticism
                  of the evidence on this basis.

             23.  I found the Appellant's evidence lacking.  The  Appellant
                  gave answers to  questions  put  an  interview  concerning
                  Zoroastrians. The point was well made  by  Ms  Smith  that
                  where criticism  was  made  in  the  refusal  letter  that
                  answers are vague, the Refusal Letter did not address what
                  the answers should have been.

             24.  However if I proceed on the basis that the Appellant  was
                  entirely  correct  in  all  his   assertions   about   the
                  Zoroastrian faith, that tells me that he knows  about  the
                  Zoroastrian faith. It is of course some evidence  that  he
                  is an adherence to it but the  fact  that  somebody  knows
                  about another faith does not of itself establish that they
                  are a member of it. I repeat that I fully aware that it is
                  the lower  standard  of  proof  that  is  to  be  applied.
                  However, that corroboration is not required does not  mean
                  that sufficient evidence is not required.

             25.  Although in my view the Appellant could  so  easily  have
                  obtained evidence of his  commitment  even  in  the  short
                  period whilst he was in the  United  Kingdom,  either  the
                  Revd or the other person by way of witness statement,  the
                  absence of the same, in my judgement, was  not  adequately
                  explained by the illness.

             26.  The Appellant has had representatives  throughout  and  a
                  witness statement might  easily  have  been  obtained  and
                  certainly something rather more than the letter of 21 June
                  2018, all the more so when I am told it is  only  about  a
                  month ago (August) that this person became  ill,  and  yet
                  the hearing before me is September. I note also there  was
                  no application  to  adjourn.  The  case  of  TK  (Burundi)
                  supplies some guidance as to the view  that  the  Tribunal
                  should take when there is evidence  that  one  might  have
                  more easily obtained but is not forthcoming.

             27.  I also bear in mind in this case that the  Appellant  did
                  not know of the communities in Birmingham and  Manchester;
                  in particular all the more so when Manchester is not  that
                  far from Huddersfield nor that  there  were  at  the  very
                  least Zoroastrians in Huddersfield even if  no  temple  or
                  organised community events.

             28.  Ms Smith submitted to me that that this was a matter that
                  I ought not to take into  account  because  there  was  no
                  evidence that the Appellant ought to have  been  aware  of
                  them. However, the Appellant had given  evidence  that  he
                  had looked on the Internet and not found anything, I  find
                  it frankly totally beyond belief that  the  Appellant  who
                  was concerned enough apparently to want to move closer  to
                  London, and was in communication with the religious leader
                  in  London,  and  indeed  the  Association  from  whom  he
                  obtained his membership card, was not aware,  or  advised,
                  or interested enough, to establish that he could  join  in
                  community with those nearer to where he lived or indeed be
                  aware that they existed.

             29.  That  lack  of  commitment  is  in  my  judgement  wholly
                  inconsistent with a person who contends that were they  to
                  be returned to Iran they would be  unable  to  hide  their
                  faith; indeed, I am  not  satisfied,  even  to  the  lower
                  standard, that the Appellant is committed in  any  way  to
                  the Zoroastrian faith. It seems to me that  the  Appellant
                  is motivated by a desire to be in the United  Kingdom  for
                  whatever reason.

             30.  The Appellant did not persuade me to the  lower  standard
                  that he was a  reliable  witness.  He  has  not  therefore
                  established his case to the lower standard  and  in  those
                  circumstances his appeal fails."

      7. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  asserting  the  Judge's
         analysis is fatally undermined by a failure to  provide  sufficient
         or sustainable reasons for the adverse  credibility  findings.  The
         grounds assert the Judge erred  by  placing  undue  weight  on  the
         absence of corroboration when  it  is  claimed  the  appellant  did
         provide a reasonable explanation for the  absence  of  an  intended
         witness who was elderly and ill, and in  failing  to  consider  the
         appellant's credibility on the basis of  the  reasonably  available
         evidence. The grounds assert that as the appellant displayed a good
         knowledge of his faith and had a membership card for his  faith  he
         had discharged the burden upon  him  and  that  it  was  reasonably
         likely that the appellant is a member of the Zoroastrian faith. The
         grounds also assert the Judge erred in basing  adverse  credibility
         finding on the appellant's failure to find other Zoroastrians  with
         whom to worship near his home in Huddersfield as he was only  aware
         of the main temple in Harrow. The grounds assert a further Internet
         search undertaken by the appellant's solicitors after  the  hearing
         reveals the website for the North  West  Zoroastrian  community  is
         inactive with no  useful  information  and  there  was  nothing  to
         suggest  any  current  activity  by  any   Zoroastrian   group   in
         Birmingham;  making  the  Judge's  assessment  of   this   evidence
         materially flawed.

      8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Upper Tribunal  Judge
         Martin sitting as a judge of the First-Tier Tribunal on 15 November
         2018 and renewed to the Upper Tribunal  directly  where  permission
         was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 19 December  2018  on
         the basis it is said  to  be  arguable  that  the  Judge's  adverse
         credibility findings were insufficient and that he had erred in his
         analysis of the appellant's evidence.

Error of law


      9. On behalf of the appellant Mr Greer sought to rely upon the pleaded
         grounds but also asserted the Judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
         evidence regarding the appellant's claim regarding what happened to
         him in Iran where he states that as a result of persecution he  had
         left Iran, which it  was  claimed  is  relevant  to  assessing  the
         appellant's credibility. It was argued that there was  evidence  of
         elevated attendance and knowledge  of  other  issues  such  as  the
         scriptures. The grounds argue the Judge gave weight  to  immaterial
         factors such as the non-attendance of a witness. In relation to the
         Internet research point, the grounds  argue  the  Judge's  findings
         regarding the website are wrong as it should be  asked  whether  it
         was rational to conclude as the Judge did and that  the  Judge  had
         imposed his own  views  and  found  an  error  regarding  the  same
         infecting the conclusion that the burden  of  proof  had  not  been
         discharged, which was not warranted.

     10. Mrs Pettersen argued that Mr  Greer  had  gone  beyond  the  points
         pleaded in the grounds in relation to  which  permission  had  been
         granted. Although this is  not  a  Christian  conversion  case  the
         principles are similar and were applied by the Judge. It is  argued
         the Judge considered all relevant aspects before concluding that he
         was not satisfied the appellant is a genuine convert.

     11. There are aspects of the submissions made on the appellant's behalf
         by Mr Greer which strayed beyond the grounds on which permission to
         appeal was sought and granted. It is also the  case  the  assertion
         made regarding the status of Internet  sites  referred  to  by  the
         Judge arises as a result of post hearing research undertaken by the
         appellant  solicitors.  The  comments  made  in  such   submissions
         regarding the weight to be given to the internet evidence were  not
         made in such terms  to  the  Judge  even  though  there  was  ample
         opportunity at the hearing for the  appellant's  representative  to
         have done so.

     12. This is not a case of the Judge undertaking post  hearing  research
         on the Internet of which the parties had no  knowledge  or  notice.
         The Judge clearly notes in the decision at [11] that  it  was  with
         the permission of the representatives that he looked  the  evidence
         up online in court and that although  he  did  not  find  a  temple
         outside London, per se, he found evidence of communities meeting in
         Manchester and Birmingham. The grounds do not challenge  that  this
         is what the Judge found but try to argue that the weight the  Judge
         gave to this element is somehow irrational. The key point noted  by
         the Judge is that recorded  at  [12]  that  the  appellant  in  his
         evidence stated  he  was  not  aware  of  the  existence  of  these
         communities which are much nearer to Huddersfield  than  Harrow  in
         London. The Judge's findings at [27] and  [28]  regarding  lack  of
         knowledge is further evidence of the lack  of  credibility  in  the
         appellant's account and has  not  been  shown  to  be  infected  by
         arguable legal error.

     13. It is not made out the Judge failed to consider  all  the  evidence
         with the required degree of anxious  scrutiny.  The  issue  of  the
         appellant's conversion was clearly the first of the  questions  the
         Judge directed his mind to  which  required  consideration  of  the
         appellant's claim that he had converted in Iran. The Judge had  the
         benefit of the interview together with witness statements and, more
         importantly, the ability to see and hear  the  appellant  give  his
         oral evidence and to factor the same into the  assessment  process.
         The assertion in the grounds the Judge placed undue weight  on  the
         absence of corroboration has no arguable  merit  and  misrepresents
         the findings made. It is important to read the decision as a  whole
         to see how the separate pieces of the jigsaw are  interlinked.  The
         Judge clearly considered the written evidence of the Revd. Vafadari
         [22]. The Judge does not reduce the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
         evidence as a result of lack of corroboration but assesses  whether
         the evidence  the  Judge  received  and  was  able  to  assess  was
         sufficient. This is clear from [23] in which the  Judge  found  the
         appellant's own evidence to be lacking. The Judge at [24]  confirms
         that even if he proceeded on the basis the appellant was correct in
         all his assertions regarding the Zoroastrian faith that only proved
         that he had knowledge of it not that he was a  genuine  convert  or
         follower of the faith. That has not been shown to  be  an  arguably
         irrational finding.

     14. The Judge  identifies  the  fact  that  the  appellant  could  have
         obtained further evidence but that he had failed to do so. This is,
         again,  not  an  adverse  finding  being  made  on  the  basis   of
         corroboration per se, but  a  finding  in  light  of  the  guidance
         provided in TK (Burundi) as referred to by the Judge at [26].

     15. The task of the Judge was to assess the evidence provided,  in  the
         round, to ascertain whether the lower  standard  applicable  to  an
         appeal of this nature had been met and the appellant discharged the
         burden of proof upon him to establish that what he was  saying  was
         reasonably  likely  to  be  true.  The  Judge's  finding  that  the
         appellant is not in any way committed to the Zoroastrian faith  and
         that the appellant is motivated by a desire to  be  in  the  United
         Kingdom, and had not established his case to the lower standard, is
         clearly a finding that the appellant had not proved what he  claims
         to have occurred had occurred, that he is not  a  genuine  convert,
         and that he had not made out he will face a real risk as  a  result
         on return to Iran.

     16. Although it is claimed the alleged failings in  the  judge  Judge's
         analysis are not mere  disagreement  with  his  conclusions  it  is
         arguable that that is exactly what they are. It has not  been  made
         out the Judges findings are outside the range of  those  reasonably
         available to the Judge, irrational, or that he applied too  high  a
         standard of proof. It is not made out the findings are  not  within
         the range  of  those  reasonably  available  to  the  Judge  having
         exercised his judgement in relation to the  weight  that  could  be
         given to the evidence.

     17. The appellant failed to  establish  any  real  risk  on  return  in
         relation to either his claim conversion or for any other reason.



Decision

     18. There is no material error of law  in  the  Judge's  decision.  The
         determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

     19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.

         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9 April 2019

