
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09767/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th August 2017                          |On 26 September 2017          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     M P
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Cisnesos (Counsel)
     Instructed by Migrant Legal Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 1.  The  Appellant,  an  Iranian  national  born  in  1993,  appeals  with
    permission a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Fowell),
    dismissing his appeal on international protection grounds  relating  to
    risk on return through a pre-flight threatened honour  killing  by  his
    father, and arising from his sur place conversion to Christianity.

 2. Judge Fowell, taking account of medical  evidence  that  the  Appellant
    suffers PTSD found his account of criminals kidnapping him, raping  him
    and sending a film on CD of the rape to his father to extort 50 million
    Toman in ransom money, credible.  The judge did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant's father decided  that  he  would  then  kill  the  Appellant
    himself to preserve the family's honour,  and  concluded  that  he  had
    fabricated a gloss on the account of kidnap  and  rape  to  create  his
    claim. In terms of the claimed conversion  to  Christianity  the  judge
    found that the evidence of a genuine conversion was limited, and it was
    undermined by the timing of the claimed conversion, coming as  it  did,
    rapidly following the refusal of  the  asylum  claim.  Looking  at  the
    evidence in the round, and taking account of the  poor  credibility  in
    terms of the threat from the father in Iran, he found it expedient.

The grounds to the UT

 3. The grounds do not take significant issue  with  the  discrete  adverse
    credibility findings concerning the claimed conversion to Christianity,
    nor the judge's consideration of  the  oral  and  written  evidence  in
    relation to that matter, but rather assert that if the judge had  taken
    a different view of the historical account and found  the  threat  from
    the father had been made out, then the credibility  of  the  conversion
    would have not been impugned, and the appellant would have succeeded.

 4. The grounds assert that the assessment of  the  historical  account  is
    flawed for two reasons;

      a) The judge has used his own cultural conditioning to decide what was
         likely or not in terms of the father's reactions.

      b) The judge has failed to take account of the medical  evidence  that
         there were several triggers for PTSD  in  the  Appellant's  history
         including that he  had  received  threats  from  his  father,  when
         assessing the credibility of the claimed threats.

 5. The grounds were maintained by Mr Cisnesos, who  had  also  represented
    the Appellant before Judge Fowell.

 6. Mr Mills for the respondent agreed that if  the  judge  had  found  the
    account of threats from the father credible then the  appellant  should
    have succeeded, however, he maintained that the judge was  entitled  to
    find the account was not credible.

Discussion

 7. Having read the decision and heard the arguments I find that  there  is
    no error of law for the reasons I now set out.

 8. The Grounds of Appeal argue that the judge failed to  give  the  proper
    consideration to the medical evidence when considering the  credibility
    of the father's reaction.

 9. Mr Cisnesos submitted that when assessing the likely  reaction  of  the
    father to the potential risk to the family's reputation  in  the  event
    that other CDs had been retained and were  subsequently  released,  the
    judge should have taken into account the doctor's report to  the  point
    that the reaction described, namely that  his  father  would  think  it
    right to kill him in order to show his disapproval of his son being the
    victim of a rape, would be a potential trigger for  the  post-traumatic
    stress disorder suffered by the Appellant.  The  judge  has  in  effect
    cherry-picked the report. Having said at [37] that he found it detailed
    and persuasive he should have found it detailed and persuasive not only
    as to the fact as to the likely cause of the PTSD being kidnapping, but
    also of the threats from the father.

10. I find the ground is not made out. Judge Fowell dealt with the  medical
    evidence in some detail [17] and [18] and had clearly read all 47 pages
    of it. These grounds assert an inconsistency in the  Judge's  treatment
    of the evidence arguing that having found the medical report  detailed,
    extensive and persuasive, in establishing the fact of the kidnapping he
    was bound to find the same about the opinion that the claimed  fear  of
    his father resulted in PTSD. That is incorrect.   Dr  Buttan's  report,
    and the judge's consideration, is much more nuanced than the submission
    allows.

11. Dr Buttan's report identifies under the heading: "Causes of any  mental
    health problems", at page 23 that:

      a)  "PTSD is caused by experiencing a very  traumatic  event.  MP  has
         very clear objective symptoms of severe PTSD.  From  the  interview
         and collateral evidence (written statement) I could  only  identify
         him being kidnapped and raped at the  age  of  22  years  and  then
         facing fear of honour killing by his  father  along  with  risk  of
         religious persecution due to his subsequent conversion as potential
         causes of PTSD"

      b) Later in the same paragraph, when going on to look at his diagnosis
         of depression Dr Buttan mentions the threats again. He first refers
         to the multifactorial nature of the origins  of  a  depression  and
         then lists what he has identified as risk factors  contributing  to
         the Appellant having become depressed including his fear of  honour
         killing:

          i) Being brought up in a very  strict  and  punitive  environment
             from childhood including differential treatment to  his  other
             siblings by his father.

         ii) The kidnap and rape at the age of 22 years.

        iii) Fear of honour killing by his father  and  possible  religious
             persecution due to his conversion to Christianity.

         iv) Now facing uncertain immigration status and not being able  to
             access appropriate help and work towards his own recovery  and
             achieve his goals.

12. It was entirely open to the judge to reach a reasoned view that in fact
    the claim to be at threat of an honour killing was not made out.

13. I deal now with whether the judge has fallen into the error of applying
    his own cultural and moral norms, and rejected the appellant's  account
    as implausible when measured against those norms.

14. The criticism arises from page 10 of the  12-page  decision  where  the
    judge states at paragraph [43]:

         "that the version presented at the hearing, that  his  father  took
         the view that if there were other CDs in circulation  he  could  at
         least say that he had done the honourable thing and killed his  son
         was illogical and extremely difficult to take seriously  not  least
         because if one had been told that the rape had arisen as  a  result
         of a failure to pay its hard to imagine any other  plausible  human
         reaction than remorse and outrage, not against his son but  against
         his  captors.   Making  every  possible  allowance  for   different
         cultural norms and attitudes, I am unable to accept that  a  father
         would blame his son in these circumstances, or would feel  that  he
         had brought shame on the family, whatever shame his  son  may  have
         felt.  Even if that could be imagined, the rest of the family - his
         mother, brother and uncle -  were  all  supportive.   It  does  not
         follow that each of them would throw their hands up and accept that
         there was nothing to be done with such a father."

15. It is commonly understood that a decision must be read  in  the  round.
    When reading this decision as a  whole,  including  the  9  pages  that
    appear before the impugned paragraph, and  in  particular  the  earlier
    reference to the medical evidence,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  is
    focused, from [35] onwards, on explaining to the Appellant that  whilst
    he accepted that he suffered from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  in
    light of the evidence  from  the  doctor,  counsellor  and  pastor,  he
    nonetheless did not accept the assertion of risk from the father.

16. The judge starts off by pointing out that the fact of being a  son  who
    has been kidnapped and raped does not lead, logically,  to  a  risk  of
    death or serious harm from the paying father because of having suffered
    shameful ill treatment.

17. He quite properly interrogates the position, he  specifically  reflects
    that there is no evidence to show that a different culturally normative
    position exists in Iran showing any likelihood that a victim  would  be
    held responsible. He points out that there is no evidence that rape  is
    not a crime in Iran, or that in these circumstances  the  police  would
    ignore or tacitly condone the threatened murder of a rape victim rather
    than prosecute the alleged  perpetrator.  The  judge  also  noted  that
    whilst the country information presented to him about male rape  showed
    that it was practised by the security forces on political prisoners  of
    both sexes as a technique of  torture  and  intimidation,  it  did  not
    indicate that male rape was not a crime  in  Iran.  Further  the  judge
    noted there was nothing in the  country  information  to  suggest  that
    being a victim of male rape in Iran would cause  such  stigma  that  it
    would give rise to honour violence of any sort.  The judge  noted  that
    in many cases involving honour violence it was  said  that  the  police
    would not take effective action because they shared these prejudices or
    were prepared to turn a blind eye, but in cases such  as  the  present,
    where even on the Appellant's case his father's reaction is  illogical,
    that should not be the case.  The judge was properly  cautious  finding
    an insufficient  evidential  base  to  form  a  definite  view  on  the
    availability of protection, but also, as was open to him, finding  that
    the fact that there had been no recourse to the authorities,  and  that
    it was not even considered, dented his confidence  in  the  Appellant's
    account that his father was a threat to him.

18. The judge notes  that  on  the  appellant's  own  evidence  it  is  not
    suggested that it is societally acceptable or the norm, but came  about
    because of the individual characteristic of his father, who he says  is
    not logical. The judge notes the appellant said that other  members  of
    his close family hid him and arranged his flight.

19. It follows that the judge's conclusion, that  much  as  here,  in  Iran
    there was no public perception of "honour" being saved or upheld  by  a
    father killing his son in  these  circumstances,  was  founded  in  the
    evidence, and not simply a reflection of his own personal  or  cultural
    norms. In  that  context,  the  judge  correctly  identifies  that  the
    appellant has not brought forward any country information  which  lends
    credibility to the claim of honour  killing  in  the  circumstances  he
    describes.

20. The judge does not say that without  such  supporting  information  the
    appellant cannot establish his case. He assesses the credibility of the
    Appellant's assertion.

21. The judge notes the difficulties for the Appellant of  the  explanation
    for why the father wanted to kill him emerging in cross-examination, at
    paragraph [20]:

         "After his release he did not receive any medical  treatment.   His
         father paid the 50 million Toman ransom and destroyed the  CD,  but
         his father was a man with a good reputation, and wanted to kill him
         just in case there was another CD, just to show that he was against
         this."

22. At paragraph [21] the judge records that, asked why  his  father  would
    want to harm him when he had paid for his release, the Appellant said:

         "His father was not a normal person, not a logical man.  The  first
         person he called when he was released was his paternal  uncle.   He
         did not call his father because he was angry with him.  His  father
         could have paid the money before they  did  anything  to  him.   He
         phoned his father and was angry with him, swore at him,  and  asked
         why he had not helped him."

23. The judge notes the further difficulties with the  incoherence  of  the
    Appellants evidence in cross-examination being  inconsistent  with  his
    previous statements that he had no contact with his father.  The  judge
    states:

         " I cannot make sense of this series of events, and this difficulty
         is compounded by his later answer that he had no contact  with  his
         father following his release. "

24. The judge had concerns about the evidence of how the Appellant came  to
    know about the threat.  The Appellant said the threat was passed on  to
    him by his uncle, whom it had earlier been said had heard it  from  the
    Appellant's brother. There was no evidence that the  family  had  taken
    any steps to challenge the father.  The judge  notes  the  contrast  of
    this position with the evidence of the Appellant that he last spoke  to
    his father on the phone and had "shouted and  sworn  at  him"  for  not
    getting him out earlier, and yet, on being told  second-hand  that  his
    father had decided to kill him, decides to leave Iran and come  to  the
    UK.

25. At 40 the judge noted the evidence of the unfolding of the  Appellant's
    account, and the shift from the expression of internalised feelings  of
    shame from the sexual violence; with the counsellor recording:

         "He felt that he had brought shame  on  his  family  and  that  his
         father would seek to have him put away or even killed if  returned.
         His father was only interested in protecting his own reputation and
         not caring for his son.  MP told me that he was angry at  what  had
         happened, that he had no friends in Swansea and he  sometimes  felt
         that he would be better off dead."

26. The judge notes that the emphasis is on the trauma and the  Appellant's
    own sense of shame, not on any external threat from his father.

27. The judge finds at 41

         "this unhappy picture of his mental processes seems to me far  more
         plausible than the one presented at the hearing.  On this  view  it
         is the Appellant who feels that he has brought shame on the family,
         and he is angry at his father for not being  concerned  about  him.
         The shame of what happened has divided them.  The  suggestion  that
         his father would kill him is thrown out as a possibility, perhaps a
         melodramatic one, rather than the main reason for him  leaving  the
         country.  Later in the letter, describing the  rape,  she  recorded
         his concern:

             "The video was then sent to his father and a  ransom  demanded
             or the video would be distributed on  the  internet  and  MP's
             family dishonoured and shamed across the world."

28. The judge finds that the alternative picture, presented at the hearing,
    of a vengeful and implacable father, does not need to be explored  very
    far  before  the   difficulties   mount   and   the   picture   becomes
    unsustainable.

29. If the judge had simply relied on an expression of  his  personal  view
    and replaced the  assessment  of  evidence  with  his  view,  then  the
    criticism would be well made, but that is simply not the case here.

30. The judge has been careful and considered.  He has fully taken  account
    of  the  medical  evidence.  He  has  taken  account  of  the   country
    information. He has provided detailed reasoning which shows that he has
    not relied on a lack of plausibility predicated  on  his  own  personal
    cultural norms, although he has rightly recognised them.

31. In short, the judge found the claimed risk from the father inconsistent
    with the father's action in  paying  a  ransom  for  his  release,  the
    attitude of the other family members who assisted  the  Appellant,  and
    noted that there was nothing in the country information to suggest that
    "honour killings" in such  circumstances  were  societally  acceptable.
    The judge has examined the evidence of the unfolding of the claim.  The
    judge concluded that the claim was expedient, fabricated, in  order  to
    obtain an immigration benefit.

32. The judge notes that having embellished the  account  of  his  criminal
    abduction to include a subsequent threat from his father  in  order  to
    bolster his claim, he must approach the  Appellant's  sur  place  claim
    with caution.  The judge correctly identifies that  the  dishonesty  in
    those aspects is not determinative of the sur place claim,  and  it  is
    not argued that this is a case  where  the  judge  has  segued  from  a
    finding of a lack of credibility in the historical account to a lack of
    credibility in the sur place conversion. There is  no  submission  that
    the judge in dismissing the appeal otherwise fell into error.

33. Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not reveal  any  error  of  law
and it stands.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
