
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09501/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Working remotely by Skype            |On 03 June 2021                      |
|On 20 May 2021                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Mugal of AMB Advocates Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or
court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant.  This direction applies to both the
appellant and to the respondent and a failure to comply with this direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 23 June 1995.  He
arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 October 2018 and claimed asylum on the
basis of his political activities in Iran.

On 17 September 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims
for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the European Convention on
Human Rights.

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination sent
on 5 December 2019, Judge Cockburn dismissed the appellant's appeal on all
grounds.  In particular, in relation to his international protection claim,
the judge did not accept the credibility of the appellant's account and
that he would be at risk on return to Iran as a result of his political
activities.

The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal challenging
the judge's adverse conclusion, in particular her adverse credibility
assessment.  On 11 February 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shimmin)
granted the appellant permission to appeal.

Following directions sent by the Upper Tribunal on 30 April 2020, both the
appellant and Secretary of State filed short skeleton arguments.

The appeal was listed at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on 20 May 2021
for a remote hearing by Skype.  The appellant was represented by Ms Mugal
and the respondent by Mr Bates, both of whom joined the hearing remotely.

The Appellant's Claim

The appellant's claim is that he was politically active in Iran.  He claims
that he attended, and helped organise, a seminar at Hormozgan University in
December 2016 as a member of a university group called Anjaman-e-Islamiai.
At that seminar, a prominent Iranian philosopher and theologian, Mr
Mohammed Motjahed Shabestari spoke on subjects concerning Islam and human
rights and criticised aspects of the Iranian government.  Following the
seminar, the appellant claims that he was contacted by officials from
Etallat and told to come to their offices.  He initially declined but
subsequently he attended.  He was asked to sign a document promising to
cease all political activity but he refused to do so.  He claims that he
was then released as a result of intervention by the University Chancellor
or because students at the university were threatening to riot in protest
at his detention.

The appellant next claims that in November 2017 he attended a demonstration
at Hormozgan University against the Iranian regime.  The authorities
intervened and one of his friends was arrested but he ran away and, as far
as he knows, he was not identified by the authorities.

Finally the appellant claims that in August 2018 he attended a
demonstration against the regime which the authorities attempted to break
up and during that he was grabbed by someone whom he believes to be an
Etallat official when he dropped his wallet which the official took.  The
appellant ran away and went back to his parents' house where he lived.
Around ten days later, his father (who was a retired policeman) told him
that he was known by the authorities and he was in trouble.  The appellant
then left and, he claims, the Etallat visited his family home after he had
left and seized his laptop.  His father was questioned by the Etallat and a
cousin was initially arrested and detained, but subsequently released,
because it was accepted that he was not the appellant despite having a
similar physical appearance to him.

The Grounds of Appeal

In the grounds of appeal, subsequent written submissions and oral
submissions made by Ms Mugal at the hearing, the appellant essentially
relies upon four grounds.

First, it is submitted that the judge at paras 23 - 24 of her determination
wrongly took into account and criticised the appellant for not providing
supporting evidence from his family.  In particular, it is said that had
the appellant provided such evidence then the judge would simply have seen
it as "self-serving" and not attached any weight to it (Ground 1).

Secondly, at para 25 the judge failed properly to consider the documents
submitted in support of the appellant's claim, in particular in relation to
his account of the seminar in December 2016.  In the grounds, it is
submitted that at page 3 of the appellant's bundle is a document relating
to the actual audio recording of the lecture which he attended at the
university.  The judge failed to take this document into account.  Further,
at pages 4 - 5 of the appellant's bundle, there are supporting documents
concerning the lecturer Mr Shabestari illustrating that he is known for
giving anti-government lectures (Ground 2).

Thirdly, at para 27 the judge simply accepted the respondent's reasons for
disbelieving the appellant and failed to give any reasons of her own
(Ground 3).

Fourthly, at paras 28 - 29, the judge failed to give adequate reasons why
she doubted the appellant's account on the basis that it was vague (Ground
4).

Discussion

Ground 1

This ground relates to paras 23 - 24 of the judge's determination in which
she took into account the absence of supporting evidence from family
members.  At paras 23 - 24, the judge said this:

"23. The first issue that causes some difficulty for the appellant is
corroboration.  I have considered the fact that it can be difficult if not
impossible for some asylum claimants fleeing their country of origin to
obtain evidence to support the subjective aspects of their claim, either
before or after they leave.  Therefore, I do not place undue weight upon
this factor per se.  However, in the appellant's case his evidence is that
he is still in touch with his family in Iran and there are therefore
potential witnesses to his claim.

24.  In his asylum interview on 12 July 2019 the appellant said he last
spoke to his family in Iran (parents, one sister and brother) [ ] the week
before the interview [AIR 4].  No explanation has been given as to why
members of the appellant's family have not provided statements to back up
his account, particularly as it is claimed that the appellant's father and
cousin were both questioned and briefly detained by Etallat.  Furthermore,
the appellant has two aunts and two uncles and cousins living in the UK, he
lives with his maternal uncle, yet, none of the appellant's family members
have been called to give evidence.  While I acknowledge that it is likely
none of these UK-based relatives would have been first-hand witnesses to
the incidents in Iran, it is odd that none of them were able to give
evidence on their knowledge of any of the events and how and why they found
out the appellant was coming to the UK.  As the appellant is living with
his family in the UK it is not plausible, absent a clear explanation, that
this UK-based family were not in touch with their family in Iran.  This
unexplained omission is simply one factor I have taken into account in
considering the appellant's credibility in the round."

In response to Ms Mugal's submissions, Mr Bates submitted that the judge
had accepted that the absence of this supporting evidence was something to
which she gave "limited weight".  In any event, Mr Bates submitted that the
judge was doing no more than following the approach of the Court of Appeal
in TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40.  The judge found that the
appellant was in touch, through his family in the UK, with his family in
Iran and his father and cousin in Iran were, on his account, directly
contacted and detained by the Etallat.

It is not said by the appellant that the judge erroneously required
corroboration of his claim.  Plainly, although the judge used that word in
para 23 of her determination, that was not the substance of the points she
was making in paras 23 - 24.

In TK (Burundi) the Court of Appeal recognised that, in assessing the
credibility of an asylum claimant, absence of independent supporting
evidence from individuals whom it was reasonable to expect to provide
supporting evidence, was a relevant factor in assessing credibility.
Thomas LJ (as he then was) (with whom Moore-Bick and Waller LJJ agreed)
said this at [20] - [21]:

         "20. The importance of the evidence that emerged in this  Court  is
         to demonstrate how important it  is  in  cases  of  this  kind  for
         independent supporting evidence  to  be  provided  where  it  would
         ordinarily  be  available;  that  where  there   is   no   credible
         explanation for the failure to produce that supporting evidence  it
         can be a very strong pointer that the account being  given  is  not
         credible. It is clear in the circumstances of this  case  that  the
         Judge was in  fact  right  to  disbelieve  the  appellant.  If  the
         appellant had asked the mother of his second child, Ms  Ndagire  to
         give evidence, the truth about her immigration  status  would  have
         emerged and his claim to base an entitlement to family life on  his
         relationship with her and the child by her would have failed.  That
         that was the inevitable consequence was made clear by the fact that
         his counsel accepted before us that he could no  longer  rely  upon
         the relationship with Ms Ndagire and  her  daughter  and  the  sole
         ground on which an Article  8  claim  could  be  advanced  was  the
         relationship to his daughter by his first partner.

         21. The circumstances of this case in my view demonstrate that
         independent supporting evidence which is available from persons
         subject to this jurisdiction be provided wherever possible and the
         need for an Immigration Judge to adopt a cautious approach to the
         evidence of an appellant where independent supporting evidence, as
         it was in this case, is readily available within this jurisdiction,
         but not provided. It follows that where a Judge in assessing
         credibility relies on the fact that there is no independent
         supporting evidence where there should be supporting evidence and
         there is no credible account for its absence commits no error of
         law when he relies on that fact for rejecting the account of an
         appellant."

The judge found that he appellant had family in the UK and they were in
contact with his family in Iran, where his father and cousin still lived.
There was no plausible explanation why no evidence from family members was
produced.  In my judgment, the judge was entitled to take into account the
absence of supporting evidence from family members, particularly those who
could give direct evidence of the events which the appellant claimed had
occurred in Iran, in assessing whether the appellant had established his
claim to the required standard, albeit the lower standard, applicable in
international protection claims.

I do not accept Ms Mughal's submission that the judge would have rejected
the evidence as self-serving.  It would have been wrong for the judge
simply to discard such evidence, as Ms Mugal submitted she would have done,
as being self-serving.  As the Upper Tribunal made plain in R (SS) v SSHD
("self-serving" statements) [2017] UKUT 164 (IAC) as set out in para (2) of
the judicial headnote:

"Whilst a statement from a family member is capable of lending weight to a
claim, the issue will be whether, looked at in the round, it does so in the
particular case in question.  Such a statement may, for instance, be
incapable of saving a claim which, in all other respects, lacks
credibility."

As the Upper Tribunal pointed out, the expression "self-serving" adds
"little or nothing".  Indeed, it is relatively unusual for a litigant to
rely on evidence which is not supportive of their claim and, in that sense,
is self-serving.

Applying the approach in TK (Burundi), the judge was entitled to take into
account the absence of this supporting evidence which she would not,
properly directing herself, have simply discarded as being self-serving had
it been submitted.  For these reasons, I reject Ground 1.

Ground 2

Ground 2 criticises the judge's consideration in para 25 of her
determination of the supporting evidence in the appellant's bundle.  There,
the judge said this:

"The appellant has tried to corroborate the happening of the seminar in
December 2016 through internet documents at pages 3 to 5 of his bundle.
However, the first document concerns an event on 'Monday, February 27',
year unknown, and the documents on pages 4 and 5 concern articles written
on 6 October and November 2019 respectively.  There are no documents before
the Tribunal which evidence the December 2016 seminar.  No explanation has
been provided as to why such evidence has not been provided, either through
similar internet printouts, literature from the University, or witness
evidence from anyone involved.  Why did the appellant not contact the chief
organiser of the seminar (AS) or the chancellor of the University who it is
claimed intervened to secure the appellant's release from Etallat, or the
speaker Motjahed Shabestari himself?"

In the grounds, it is contended that the document at page 3 of the
appellant's bundle relates to the seminar which the appellant claimed he
helped organise in December 2016 and had attached to it an audio file of
that lecture.  During the course of the hearing, I raised with Ms Mugal the
fact that this document refers to a lecture, albeit given by the claimed
speaker, on "Monday, February 27" as indeed the judge noted in para 25 of
her determination.  Ms Mugal accepted that this document did not, as the
grounds contend, relate to the lecture which the appellant claimed he had
organised in December 2016.  Instead, she submitted, along with the
documents at pages 4 to 5, that the judge had failed to take these
documents into account as being supportive at least of the speaker's
involvement in anti-government lectures.  In fact, there are no documents
directly supporting the appellant's claim that he was involved in the
organisation of a seminar in December 2016.  The document at page 3 relates
to a different event on "Monday, February 27" although the precise year is
not disclosed in the document.

The difficulty with Ms Mugal's submission that the judge failed to take
into account that document and the documents at pages 4 and 5 of the
bundle, which do refer to the claimed speaker and his involvement in talks
and lectures which were anti-government, is that the judge does refer to
them explicitly in para 15 of her determination where she refers to "online
articles concerning Mojtahed Shabestari speaking at Hormozgan".  Further,
in para 25 of her determination she also specifically refers to the
documents at pages 4 and 5.  It is simply not arguable that the judge
failed to take these documents into account.  None of these documents
directly related to the event which the appellant relied upon in December
2016 as being the beginning of his problems with the Iranian authorities.
The judge correctly noted in para 25 that there were "no documents" which
evidence the December 2016 seminar.

Further, despite having been able to obtain internet documents relating to
a lecture given by the claimed speaker and other documents about the
claimed speaker, the judge noted in para 25 that there was no supporting
evidence that had been provided for the December 2016 seminar either from
internet printouts or from the main organiser of the seminar, the
Chancellor of the university or the speaker himself.  Ms Mugal did not
specifically seek to challenge that aspect of the judge's reasoning in para
25 which, in truth, again reflects a legitimate assessment of the evidence
in the round following TK (Burundi).  For these reasons, I reject Ground 2.



Ground 3

This ground relates to para 27 of the determination and states in bald
terms that the judge simply adopted the position of the respondent without
giving any reasons for not accepting that the appellant had established his
involvement in the December 2016 seminar.  Initially, in her oral
submissions Ms Mugal made no reference to ground 3 but, when I raised that
with her, she maintained that she continued to rely upon it.

Para 27 of the judge's determination is in the following terms:

"Following on from this, I accept the respondent's position, as reinforced
in submissions by Mr Graham that the appellant has not provided an adequate
explanation as to why he was targeted over the December 2016 seminar and
the speaker Mr Shabestari and the Chancellor of the University were not.
Although I have considered the appellant's evidence that the Chancellor was
texted by the authorities asking him to stop putting on seminars.  Whilst
the objective materials show the Iranian authorities do target political
dissidents with varying profiles, including relatively low-level profiles,
it does not ring true that an administrative organiser such as the
appellant would be detained and threatened whereas the speaker protagonist
or the Chancellor would largely be left alone, particularly where the
University endorsed the seminar.  There is no evidence to demonstrate that
the Iranian authorities deliberately target lower level dissidents instead
of those with real political influence in relation to the same matter.  The
position is illogical and more importantly, it is unsubstantiated by the
appellant's evidence.  I cannot find that this aspect of the claim is
reasonably likely, and this is exacerbated by the lack of any cogent
witness or other evidence to show that the seminar and subsequent events
took place.  Whilst it is possible that Mr Shabestari spoke at a seminar in
December 2016, and that the appellant might have had a hand in its
administrative organisation, for the reasons I set out above I cannot find
that the appellant came to the adverse interest of the authorities.  I note
that the December 2016 seminar is not the reason the appellant left Iran,
but it does go to the Iranian authorities' perception of his political
views and profile."

As I pointed out to Ms Mugal during her submissions, Ground 3 contends that
the judge failed to give any independent reasons for her adverse finding in
relation to the appellant's claimed involvement in the December 2016
seminar.  It is not a ground that contends that reasons were given but that
those reasons were perverse or irrational.  On any reading of para 27, the
judge plainly gave a number of reasons for her adverse finding including
that it was illogical or implausible that the appellant would be targeted
whilst the other organisers and university chancellor were not in any
substantial way.  Further, there was an absence of supporting evidence as
to the seminar ever having taken place although the judge did accept that
it was possible that it had but did not accept that the appellant had been
involved or targeted as he has claimed.

As I have said, the judge's reasons for reaching that latter finding are
not challenged in Ground 3 but rather it is contended that the judge gave
no reasons, other than to endorse those of the respondent, for reaching
that finding.  In fact, the judge gave a clear reason in para 27 which, as
Mr Bates submitted, is neither perverse nor irrational that led her to
conclude that she did not accept that the appellant had been targeted as a
result of any seminar that might have taken place given that others had
been "largely ... left alone".  For these reasons, I reject Ground 3.

Ground 4

Ground 4 contends that in para 28 of the judge's determination she failed
to give adequate reasons why she did not accept the appellant's claimed
political involvement in Iran and consequent risk on return.  There the
judge said this:

"28. The appellant claims that he attended demonstrations in November 2017
at the University and August 2018 in his hometown of Shiraz.  I am prepared
to accept that this might be the case because students in Iran do engage in
demonstrations, however, I do not accept that events unfolded as described
by the appellant in August 2018 which led him to leave Iran.  Having had
the benefit of listening to the appellant's oral evidence I have found it
to be vague, lacking in detail and sometimes unclear.  Throughout his
written evidence and the oral evidence, the appellant was unable to
demonstrate an adequate degree of political conviction and he was
unconvincing as to why he would engage in any other claimed political
activities.  I have considered that it is possible to believe some aspects
of an appellant's account while discounting others, but I find that
overall, I cannot accept the material aspects of the appellant's core
account, even to the lower standard.  In summary, I reach this finding on
the basis of several factors including vagueness and a lack of detail and
clarity in the appellant's evidence, and illogicality and an absence of
substantiation and reasonable corroboration on the particular facts of the
case.  Following on from this I have considered that the appellant has also
failed to provide any evidence of his claimed social media activity
concerning Iranian politics."

Reading para 28 fairly as a whole, it is clear that the judge was drawing
together reasons that she had previously given for not accepting the
appellant's account including the "illogicality" of the appellant alone
being targeted following the December 2016 seminar which she had previously
referred to in para 27.  She also referred to the absence of supporting
evidence which she referred to and relied on in paras 23 - 24 (in respect
of the appellant's family) and at para 25 (in respect of internet evidence
or other evidence from those involved in the claimed events in December
2016).

As Mr Bates submitted, the judge heard the appellant give oral evidence and
was unpersuaded that he had shown a "degree of political conviction" which
was convincing such as to support his claimed engagement in political
activity.  At para 3 of his determination, the judge referred to the
appellant's evidence as being that he is a follower of "Third Line
Reformist Movement" which is a "school of thought as opposed to a political
party".  Whilst the judge does not spell out in detail why the appellant's
evidence in relation to events was "vague", reading the judge's reasons
overall I am satisfied that they were adequate and sufficient to allow the
appellant to understand why the judge did not accept his claim and those
reasons are properly and legally sustainable.  The judge's determination
must be read as a whole and not simply focussed on para 28.

It is also worth noting, and this is not challenged in the grounds, that
the judge took into account that the appellant's political activity was
said to have continued on the internet in the UK through social media
activity over a period of six to seven years (see para 9(viii) of the
determination).  Yet, no evidence supporting that was produced by the
appellant.  The appellant made no reference to this activity in his written
statement dated 5 November 2019.  However, he did in his asylum interview
which was dealt with by the respondent in para 35 of the decision letter
where it was not accepted that the appellant would have no access to any of
his social media activity because it was deleted after 24 hours as he
claimed.  The judge was entitled, in my judgment, to have regard to the
absence of any supporting evidence of the appellant's claimed political
activity on social media over a six to seven year period as one of a number
of reasons why she was not satisfied that the appellant's claim had been
established.  For these reasons, I reject Ground 4.

Standing back and reading the judge's determination as a whole in a fair
and reasonable way, I am satisfied that the judge properly took into
account the relevant evidence and gave cogent and adequate reasons for
rejecting the appellant's account that he would be at risk on return to
Iran as a result of his claimed political activities between 2016 and 2018.

Consequently, the judge did not err in law in dismissing the appellant's
appeal on asylum grounds or otherwise.

Decision

For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.  That
decision, therefore, stands.

Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 24 May 2021

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Cockburn made no fee award.  Given that I have upheld her decision to
dismiss the appeal, and there is no challenge in any event to the fee
award, her decision to make no fee award also stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 24 May 2021
