
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09524/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd April 2019                             |On 1st May 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                   MR Z G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam instructed by Inayat Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan, appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated  17th  July
    2018 to refuse his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana  dismissed  the  appeal  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 28th December 2018.   The  Appellant  appealed  to  this
    Tribunal with permission.  On 5th March 2019 I set aside  the  decision
    of Judge Chana in relation to Article 8 only.  I  accepted  that  Judge
    Chana made an error of law in her approach to Article 8 for the reasons
    set out in my decision on  error  of  law  which  is  appended  hereto.
    Judge's Chana's decision in the asylum appeal still stands.

 2. The resumed hearing  took  place  on  3rd  April  2019.  The  appellant
    submitted a supplementary bundle including a further witness  statement
    from his girlfriend dated 27th March 2019 and  Foreign  &  Commonwealth
    Office Travel Advice for Afghanistan.  At  the  hearing  I  heard  oral
    evidence from the Appellant and from his girlfriend through Pashtu  and
    Urdu interpreters separately.  At the outset of the  hearing  Mr  Tufan
    said that the Secretary of State was not disputing that  the  Appellant
    has a girlfriend.  Mr  Aslam  clarified  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    girlfriend do not live together on a full-time basis  therefore  it  is
    accepted that they do not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.

 3. The Appellant gave oral evidence  at  the  hearing.  He  confirmed  his
    witness statement of 28th  August  2018.   He  described  his  physical
    issues saying that he has chest pain and a pain in his kidney  and  his
    stomach.  He said that he takes pain relief medication.  He  also  said
    that he cannot sleep at night everything his father  did  to  him,  the
    beatings etc, comes back in front of his  eyes.   In  cross-examination
    the Appellant said that there is no definite diagnosis  at  the  moment
    because they are trying to find out what is wrong with  him.   He  said
    that he went for an appointment last week and when he had a camera test
    down his throat.  He said he does not  know  at  the  minute  what  his
    condition is.  He had also been  recently  referred  for  treatment  in
    respect of dental problems and  Mr  Aslam  clarified  that  there  were
    medical entries in his GP notes in relation to  a  renal  stone  and  a
    prescription for folic acid.

 4. In her oral evidence the Appellant's  girlfriend  confirmed  her  three
    witness statements of 28th August 2018, 11th  December  2018  and  27th
    March 2019.  She said that she has leave to remain for a period of  two
    and a half years as a dependant of her mother.  Her leave to remain  is
    due to be renewed in June this year.  She said that she lives with  her
    mother but that she and the Appellant rent a room  where  they  usually
    spend two nights and three days a week together.  She tells her  mother
    that she is going to stay with  a  friend.   She  cannot  stay  in  the
    Appellant's room because there are Muslims in  the  building  and  they
    would not approve of the relationship.  She has  not  told  her  mother
    that she stays with the Appellant.   In  cross-examination  Ms  Hussain
    also said that she and the Appellant communicate in Urdu.

 5. In his submissions Mr Tufan submitted that there were two limbs to  the
    Article 8 appeal, the medical issues and the relationship. In terms  of
    the medical issue he submitted  that  there  were  no  reports  and  no
    diagnosis from any medical professional.  He submitted that  there  are
    ongoing investigations but these are nowhere near  the  high  threshold
    required to meet Article 3. He pointed there was no  diagnosis  of  any
    medical mental  health  issues.   He  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his girlfriend is precarious, she is not  settled  in
    the UK. He accepted that there is some sort of relationship but  it  is
    no more than that of boyfriend and girlfriend and does not come  within
    the Rules.  If she obtained settlement in the future she could  sponsor
    an application  from  the  Appellant.   He  referred  to  Section  117B
    factors.  He said there was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  speaks
    English.  He is not financially independent and his leave to remain has
    always been precarious.

 6. Mr Islam submitted that the starting point was the evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He accepted there are  no  medical  reports
    but submitted that the  medical  evidence  there  does  show  that  the
    Appellant in subject to ongoing investigations.  He accepted that there
    is no confirmed diagnosis in relation to  physical  or  mental  issues.
    However he referred to the Respondent's bundle at C11  to  12  and  the
    Appellant's bundle at pages 36 to 48.  He submitted that this  evidence
    shows  that  the  Appellant  has  been  subjected  to  tests  and   has
    multifaceted health issues although he accepted it is  not  clear  what
    these might be.  He accepted that the evidence does not meet  the  high
    threshold in Article 3.

 7. However he submitted that it is relevant to Article  8.   He  submitted
    that the Appellant had demonstrated that  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to  his  reintegration  in  Afghanistan  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 276ADE.  He relied on the skeleton argument before the First-
    tier Tribunal, in particular paragraph 26 which relies on the  decision
    in AS. The relevant factors in this case, in his  submission  are  that
    the Appellant is not in good health; he has no network in Kabul; he has
    been out of the country since he was 13; he maintains that he  came  to
    harm from his father; he has no education; and he has  no  capacity  to
    survive in Kabul so could not relocate there.  He referred to paragraph
    27 of the skeleton argument and pointed that the  health  care  is  not
    well provided for in Kabul.  The Appellant would  not  have  access  to
    accommodation.  He submitted that an added  risk  factor  is  that  the
    Appellant has been in the UK since childhood, he has been here for over
    nine years, since the age of 14. He would be perceived as  westernised.
    In his submission all of  these  factors  amount  to  very  significant
    obstacles under 276ADE.  He submitted that all  of  these  factors  are
    relevant to the  assessment  of  Article  8.   He  submitted  that  the
    relationship is serious, the couple have been together for almost seven
    years, since the  Appellant  was  17  and  they  intend  to  marry.  He
    submitted that the Appellant  receives  significant  support  from  his
    girlfriend and that would be lost if he was  returned  to  Afghanistan.
    He accepted that this was not an EX.1 case and  he  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's girlfriend is likely to be on a ten year route so she has a
    long way to go until she is settled in the UK.  However he  would  lose
    that support and he is now a central part of her  life.   He  submitted
    that there are very  significant  obstacles  as  well  as  the  country
    circumstances in Afghanistan and his relationship with  a  partner  and
    returning him would be disproportionate.

My Findings

Article 3

 8. The appeal under Article 3 was not pursued before me and I find that it
    has not been established that returning the  Appellant  to  Afghanistan
    would breach the UK's obligations under Article 3.

Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules

 9. Mr Aslam  submitted  that  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) which provides:

         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         ...

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

10. The Appellant's account of his background in Afghanistan  was  rejected
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana. She rejected the Appellant's  claim
    that he had been assaulted by his father with a knife or threatened  by
    him [20-23]. The judge rejected the Appellant's claim that he  has  not
    been in contact with his family in Afghanistan [28-29]. The judge found
    that the Appellant has an uncle and siblings  in  Kabul  and  that  his
    father is not a Taliban Commander as claimed [31].  In light  of  these
    preserved findings I am satisfied that the Appellant will  have  family
    support in Kabul.

11. The Appellant  claims  to  have  physical  and  mental  health  issues.
    However, despite the opportunity afforded by  the  adjournment  of  the
    hearing to remake the decision under Article 8 the  Appellant  has  not
    produced any medical reports to establish any physical or mental health
    conditions. I accept that he has been undergoing tests for some time in
    relation to physical health issues but there  is  no  evidence  of  any
    diagnosed condition or  of  any  treatment  or  potential  problems  in
    relation to any physical issues on return to Afghanistan. There  is  no
    medical evidence of any mental health issues.  The  Appellant  and  his
    girlfriend say that he suffers from nightmares but, as his  account  of
    issues with his father was not accepted, his explanation  that  he  has
    sleep issues due to memories of beatings inflicted by his father  lacks
    credibility. There is no medical  evidence  to  support  any  claim  of
    depression or other mental health issues  which  would  impact  on  his
    ability to reintegrate in Afghanistan.

12.  The  Appellant  gave  evidence  through  a  Pashtu  interpreter.   His
    girlfriend said that they communicate in Urdu. Accordingly he will have
    no language issues upon return to Afghanistan.

13. Mr Tufan accepted that the Appellant is  in  a  relationship  with  his
    girlfriend. However they do not live together. Her mother does not know
    about the relationship and his girlfriend has temporary leave to remain
    in the UK. If they wish to continue the relationship it would  be  open
    to her to return to Afghanistan with  the  Appellant,  accordingly  the
    relationship is  not  a  barrier  to  the  Appellant's  integration  in
    Afghanistan.

14. Mr Aslam submitted that the Appellant is westernised and that this is a
    factor which would amount to a barrier to  integration.  However  apart
    from the fact that he has been in the UK since he was 14  there  is  no
    evidence that he is westernised. He still speaks Pashtu,  there  is  no
    evidence as to his activities or behaviour in the UK  or  as  to  those
    with whom he associates in the UK.  Mr  Aslam  did  not  point  to  any
    background evidence to suggest that time spent  in  the  UK  in  itself
    creates a perception of westernisation or that  this  in  itself  would
    lead to a risk in Afghanistan or any barrier to reintegration there.

15. Considering all of the evidence I  find  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    established  that  there  are  very  significant   obstacles   to   his
    integration in Afghanistan.

Article 8

16. Mr Aslam accepted that the Appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM on the basis of his relationship.

17. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 in  accordance
    with the guidance in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. Whilst he
    has established a relationship with his girlfriend this does  not  meet
    the definition of a partner in the Immigration  Rules  and  amounts  to
    only a limited family life. I accept, based on the length  of  time  he
    has spent in the UK and on his relationship with his  girlfriend,  that
    the Appellant has established a private life in the UK. I  accept  that
    his removal would interfere with his  family  life  if  his  girlfriend
    decides not to go to Afghanistan with the Appellant. I accept that  his
    removal would interfere with his private life in the UK. In light of my
    findings above as to paragraph 276ADE and the  concession  made  by  Mr
    Aslam in relation to family life, such interference  is  in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules.

18. In considering proportionality I take into account  that,  although  he
    complains of physical and mental health  problems,  the  Appellant  has
    produced  limited  evidence  to  support  those  claims  and  has   not
    established that he has  any  significant  physical  or  mental  health
    problems. There is limited evidence of  treatment  in  the  UK  and  no
    evidence that there would  be  any  lack  of  equivalent  treatment  in
    Afghanistan.

19. I take account of  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    girlfriend. The Appellant's girlfriend has limited leave to  remain  in
    the UK with her  current  leave  due  to  expire  in  June.  She  could
    accompany the Appellant to Afghanistan. Alternatively she could sponsor
    an  application  for  entry  clearance  at  an  appropriate  time.  The
    Appellant's girlfriend's mother is unaware of the nature or  extent  of
    the relationship. Although the relationship is a factor to  be  weighed
    in the Appellant's favour and against the public  interest,  it  is  of
    limited weight because the Appellant's girlfriend is not a  'qualifying
    partner' within the  Immigration  Rules  and  neither  had  established
    immigration status when the relationship was formed or developing.

20. In weighing the public interest I also take account of  the  fact  that
    the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

21. Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides that the maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
    the public interest and sets out a number of factors to be  weighed  in
    the public interest. There is no evidence that the Appellant can  speak
    English (117B (2)). He is not financially independent (117B  (3)).  Any
    private life he has in the  UK  was  established  whilst  he  was  here
    precariously and is therefore of little weight (117B (5)).

22. Weighing all of these factors I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant's application for leave to remain on human  rights
    grounds is proportionate to the  respondent's  legitimate  aim  of  the
    maintenance of an effective system of immigration control.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law  in
its consideration of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

I set that part of the decision aside and remake it.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date: 25th April 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable therefore there is no fee award.

Signed
                                Date: 25th April 2019
A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




APPENDIX
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09524/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2019                         |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                   Mr Z G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah, instructed by Inayat Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan, appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated  17th  July
    2018 to refuse his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana  dismissed  the  appeal  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 28th December  2018.   The  Appellant  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Buchanan
    on 22nd January 2019.

 2. The Appellant puts  forward  three  Grounds  of  Appeal  contending  as
    follows:

     . The judge erred in failing  to  properly  consider  the  Appellant's
       private and family life under Article 8 in failing  to  engage  with
       the medical evidence about the Appellant's health issues;

     . the decision is unfair in that the judge failed to consider  whether
       there would be significant obstacles to the Appellant  returning  to
       his home country  and  failing  to  consider  that  there  would  be
       interference with his family  life  if  he  is  separated  from  his
       partner;

     . the judge has failed to properly  engage  with  the  fact  that  the
       Appellant has had mental health issues as set out in  his  partner's
       witness statement.

 3. At the hearing before me Ms Appiah acknowledged  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal and, she contended that  the  grounds  challenge  not  only  the
    findings on human rights but also the judge's findings  on  the  asylum
    appeal.  She contended in particular that the third ground incorporates
    a reference to the decision as a whole and therefore was sufficient  to
    incorporate a challenge to the asylum decision.

 4.  I  have  considered  the  grounds  as  a  whole,  they  emphasise  the
    Appellant's mental health in the context of his  human  rights  appeal.
    The judge granting permission to appeal clearly interpreted the grounds
    as referring to the human  rights  issue,  I  note  in  particular  the
    conclusion at paragraph 4 of  the  permission  to  appeal  that  it  is
    arguable  that  the  omission  to  address  medical  evidence  in   the
    assessment relating to satisfaction of the Immigration Rules and/or the
    claim outside the  Immigration  Rules  is  a  material  error  of  law.
    Looking at the grounds read with permission  to  appeal  and  with  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal it is clear in  my  view  that  the
    reasonable interpretation of the grounds is that they refer only to the
    judge's decision in relation to Article 8.

 5. I further take account of the  fact  that,  although  the  grounds  are
    handwritten and brief, they were clearly prepared  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf by his solicitor.  In my view any leeway which may  be  afforded
    to an Appellant in person in terms of articulating the grounds  is  not
    extended to the representatives.  Accordingly, I treat the grounds  and
    the permission to appeal as relating only to the Article 8  assessment.
    There is accordingly no challenge to the judge's  decision  as  to  the
    asylum appeal and that decision will stand.

 6. In terms of the challenge to Article 8, at the  hearing  before  me  Mr
    Walker accepted  that  the  judge  stated  at  paragraph  35  that  the
    Appellant is now an adult and an  Afghanistan  national  "and  in  good
    health".  He accepted that this conclusion fails to take  into  account
    the medical issues  identified  by  the  Appellant's  partner  and  the
    medical evidence in the Appellant's bundle  at  pages  36  to  48.   He
    accepted that the issue of the  medical  evidence  in  the  context  of
    Article 8 was raised in the skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at paragraph 43(h).  Mr Walker accepted that it  appears  that
    the judge failed to consider the medical  evidence  which  was  clearly
    raised in the skeleton argument and the Appellant's bundle and  in  the
    Appellant's supplementary bundle.

 7. I agree that the judge failed to consider the medical evidence and  the
    evidence from the Appellant's partner as to  his  mental  health.   The
    Appellant's partner made a supplementary statement dated 11th  December
    2018 which makes significant  reference  to  issues  which  she  claims
    indicate that the Appellant has  been  suffering  from  depression  and
    suffers flashbacks and nightmares.  It appears from  the  consideration
    at paragraphs 41 to 46 of the decision that the judge  failed  to  take
    this evidence into account.  Of course, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    could have decided to attach little weight to any of this evidence but,
    in failing to address it, it is not possible to conclude that  she  had
    it in mind in reaching her decision.  I  accept  that  the  failure  to
    consider this evidence is a material error  given  that  this  evidence
    could  have  an  effect  on  the  proportionality  assessment  and   on
    consideration of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 8. In these circumstances I find that the judge made a material  error  of
    law in her approach to Article  8.   I  set  aside  that  part  of  her
    decision.  The decision in relation to asylum will stand.

 9. I adjourn the hearing for a resumed hearing  to  consider  any  further
    oral or documentary evidence in relation to remaking  the  decision  on
    Article 8 grounds.

Directions

1.   The resumed hearing will take place on 3rd April 2019 at Field House.

2.   The following interpreters will be required - Urdu and Pashtu.

3.   The parties are to serve on the Tribunal and on each other any  further
    documents or witness statements to be relied upon no  later  than  five
    days before the date of the resumed hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
