
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09255/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st June 2019                    |On 12th July 2019                    |


                                   Before

                           DISTRICT JUDGE MCGINTY
                  SITTING AS A DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE


                                   Between

                                  mr A. h.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N.M.K Lawrence promulgated on 26th April 2019  following
    a hearing at Hatton Cross on 11th April 2019 in which he dismissed  the
    Appellant's protection and human rights claims.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Egypt who  was  born  on  1st  September
    1995.  He had claimed asylum on three grounds.  Firstly,  it  was  said
    that he would be killed as a result of a blood feud if returned back to
    Egypt.  Secondly, he stated that he did not wish to do military service
    and would be at risk of persecution  as  a  result  of  being  a  draft
    evader, and thirdly that he was homosexual/gay and that he would be  at
    risk of persecution as a result.

 3. given the nature of the asylum claim in this case it is important  that
    there is an anonymity direction. No record, note or transcript of these
    proceedings is to identify the Appellant or any member  of  his  family
    either directly or indirectly.  This  direction  applies  to  both  the
    Appellant and the Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction can
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the Appellant's account  on  all
    the grounds and also dismissed the Appellant's human rights claim under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Article 8  of  the  Human
    Rights Act.  The Appellant now seeks to appeal against that decision in
    Grounds of Appeal dated 10th May 2019.  Permission to  appeal  in  this
    case has been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant-Hutchison  on
    30th May 2019 who did not limit the grounds which may be  arguable  and
    found that the grounds did reveal an arguable error of law.

 5. I am most grateful for the help and assistance of both Ms Fitzsimons of
    Counsel who represents the Appellant today and Mr Bramble, Senior  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, who appears on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

 6. At the appeal hearing before me today Mr Bramble  concedes  that  there
    was an error made by Judge Lawrence, as set out  in  Ground  3  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal in respect of the way that the judge dealt  with  the
    claim that the Appellant is gay.  At paragraph 50 of the decision Judge
    Lawrence stated:

         "Ms Capel drew the Appellant's attention to the details of  witness
         statement dated 13th March 2019.  She  pointed  out  the  Appellant
         claims to have had casual sex with many men but that no-one was  at
         the hearing to support this part of his claim.  The Appellant  said
         'he was busy'.  Ms Capel ended her examination-in-chief.  Mrs  Khan
         picked up the point and asked the Appellant whom does  he  mean  by
         'he'.  The Appellant said he was  referring  to  'Louis'.   He  was
         asked for his surname.  He said he does not know his  surname.   It
         is conceivable that a person with whom the Appellant had casual sex
         may not be inclined to come to  the  hearing.   However,  'Ali'  is
         someone the Appellant claims he is in a relationship  with.   'Ali'
         has  not  provided  any  evidence  in  support  of  their   claimed
         relationship."

 7. At paragraph 51 the judge went on to note that Mrs Khan had  asked  the
    Appellant about 'Ali' and that the Appellant said he did not  know  his
    surname.  The judge found that he did not believe the Appellant was  in
    a relationship with a man, lived  in  his  house,  moved  a  number  of
    addresses with him, and yet does not know his surname.  The judge  then
    went on at subsequent paragraphs to find that it was not credible  that
    the solicitors may have asked Ali's surname but did not  mention  Ali's
    name to the Appellant and referenced the fact that Ali had not attended
    the hearing and that the Appellant had  said  his  solicitors  did  not
    require him to attend.  The judge found that the Appellant was  blaming
    Ali for not giving his full name and the solicitors for  not  requiring
    Ali to attend, and that the solicitors had contacted Ali  and  got  his
    surname but they had not then told the Appellant  his  own  boyfriend's
    name.  The judge has therefore clearly approached  that  issue  on  the
    basis that Ali was the Appellant's boyfriend.  It was  conceded  by  Mr
    Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State that  the  judge  erred  in
    that regard.

 8. The actual evidence given by the Appellant in his statement  dated  3rd
    April 2019 was that  he  had  had  a  number  of  casual  relationships
    including one with a Spanish man called Louis who  he  had  had  sexual
    relations with  after  meeting  a  few  times  on  two  occasions.   At
    paragraph 9 of his statement he said that he did not  want  his  friend
    Ali to find out about his sexuality as he does not know about this  and
    he will not approve as he is a religious man.  "This is why whenever  I
    meet another man I would just call one of the numbers that I  have  for
    the purposes of casual sex".  The Appellant's evidence was that as  far
    as Ali was concerned, stated at paragraph 7 of his statement,  Ali  had
    just provided him with accommodation and had been a good person to  him
    since.  It was not being said that the  Appellant  was  actually  in  a
    sexual relationship with Ali and in fact the Appellant's case was  that
    Ali did  not  know  of  the  Appellant's  sexuality  and  was  not  his
    boyfriend.

 9. The judge therefore has clearly mistaken the evidence  on  that  regard
    and become confused regarding the Appellant's evidence in that  regard,
    when proceeding on the basis that the Appellant was in  a  relationship
    with Ali and had been for a period of two  years.   That  was  not  the
    Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal.

10. When assessing credibility  regarding  the  Appellant's  sexuality  the
    evidence needs to be assessed in the round and holistically, as it does
    with the entirety of the evidence in the case, before the  judge  makes
    findings.  The judge when considering credibility on the issues of  the
    Appellant's sexuality  was  clearly  mistaken  on  the  nature  of  the
    relationship he has with Ali, yet explains that he  could  accept  that
    casual relationships may not be asked to come to the Tribunal but  then
    does not accept that Ali is not there, and that was  a  fundamental  or
    significant reason as  to  why  the  Appellant's  credibility  was  not
    accepted on that issue.

11. Quite clearly I cannot say the  judge  would  have  reached  that  same
    finding on the sexuality issue irrespective had  that  error  not  been
    made.  That is therefore a material error of law.

12. In respect of Grounds 1 and Grounds 2 of the Grounds  of  Appeal  those
    both relate to the way in which the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dealt
    with the evidence of the consultant psychiatrist Dr Katona.  In  Ground
    1 it is argued that there has been  a  misdirection  by  the  judge  in
    respect of the treatment of the report of Dr Katona and in Ground 2  it
    is argued that there has been a failure to give adequate  reasons  when
    rejecting that evidence.

13. There are in my judgment errors in the way that the judge has  actually
    dealt with the evidence of Dr Katona.  As Mr Bramble correctly says the
    evidence of Dr Katona related to the issue as to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder as a  result  of
    having witnessed the death of a young boy called Osama which is said to
    have led to the blood feud.  Although Judge Lawrence, when dealing with
    the blood feud issue, has mentioned for  example  at  paragraph  15  Dr
    Katona mentioned the custom of blood feuds and  Dr  Katona  saying  the
    Appellant remembered seeing the body of a child  covered  in  blood  at
    paragraph 17  and  the  prevalence  of  honour  killings  in  Egypt  at
    paragraph 21 and again saying he saw the body at  paragraph  19  to  Dr
    Katona.  When  actually  making  findings  in  respect  of  that  issue
    regarding the blood feud the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has not set out
    or dealt with the actual substance of the report of Dr Katona as far as
    actually the clinical diagnosis that the Appellant was  suffering  from
    post-traumatic stress disorder as set out in section 6 of  the  report,
    the mental state and presentation of the Appellant at section 5 of  the
    expert report, or the clinical plausibility section  at  section  7  of
    that expert report.

14. In that regard I note for example at  section  7.3  of  the  report  Dr
    Katona considered the question of whether or not  the  Appellant  might
    have been feigning or exaggerating his mental symptoms and  the  doctor
    noted  that  his  opinion  was  based  upon  his   objective   clinical
    observations of the Appellant's  speech  and  behaviour  and  not  made
    simply on the symptoms described to him.  The Doctor  opined  that  his
    presentation was clinically plausible and he was neither  feigning  nor
    exaggerating his symptoms and that had he been feigning or exaggerating
    the doctor would expect him to claim more  severe  depressive  symptoms
    and/or active suicidal intent.

15. The doctor had also considered other possible reasons for the  PTSD  as
    to whether or not it was as a result of having his experiences in Egypt
    upon seeing Osama being shot and killed and  as  to  whether  that  was
    aggravated by more recent trauma of being forced to  have  sex  against
    his will, as opposed to other factors such as his separation  from  his
    family and his country, being street homeless  in  the  United  Kingdom
    whilst a minor and his continuing immigration status uncertainty.

16. But when actually making findings on the blood feud issue the judge has
    not really dealt with those parts of the report of Dr  Katona  at  all.
    He has mentioned about, as I said, the issue  of  the  customary  blood
    feuds and what the Appellant said to Dr Katona regarding seeing a child
    being covered in blood but has not when considering  that  issue  taken
    account of the evidence of Dr Katona regarding what he  says  regarding
    the PTSD and potential reasons for it and whether or not  that  may  or
    may not add credibility to the Appellant's account of  actually  having
    witnessed those events but that evidence has not been taken account  of
    in that regard.

17. But when the judge did give reasons for rejecting Dr Katona's evidence,
    at paragraphs 56 and 57 of the statement, that was after  the  findings
    in respect of the blood feud the draft evasion and the sexuality  issue
    had already been made.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered  the
    case of R (On the application of AM) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 521 and what was stated there in respect  of
    scars and psychological injury.  But went on at the bottom of paragraph
    57 to find that in this case the psychological  injuries  are  entirely
    based upon the oral accounts given by the Appellant and that:

         "There are no physical injuries which an expert, such as Dr Katona,
         could draw upon and juxtaposition them with the Protocol  and  come
         to an expert opinion.  The reports  are  not  independent  in  that
         sense  but  entirely  dependent  upon  the  account  given  by  the
         Appellant and the Appellant alone."

18. Well it has been argued by  the  Appellant  that  that  approach  is  a
    misdirection and a failure to  give  adequate  reasons.   As  I  stated
    previously Dr Katona set out that he was  not  simply  relying  in  his
    report upon the oral evidence of the Appellant but had also  considered
    his own assessment of the Appellant in terms of  his  presentation  and
    undertaken psychometric testing of him and the expert had  gone  on  to
    consider whether or not the Appellant was feigning or exaggerating  and
    makes specific reference to the fact that he  was  not  relying  simply
    upon what he had been told as stated at paragraph 7.3  of  his  report.
    So for the judge simply to state that Dr Katona simply relied upon what
    the Appellant himself had said and the  Appellant  alone,  misconstrues
    the expert evidence in that regard and fails to deal properly with that
    expert evidence and also fails to  give  adequate  reasons  as  to  the
    rejection of what the expert says in that report as to why he concluded
    that the Appellant was suffering from PTSD.

19. It also seems in that regard that what the judge has done here is  made
    specific findings in respect of credibility and  then  dealt  with  the
    expert report as an addon which did not undermine the conclusions  that
    he otherwise had previously come to.  In that regard  that  is  exactly
    what the Court of Appeal in the case of Mibanga v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367  indicated  should  not  be
    done by First-tier Tribunal Judges and that the evidence needed  to  be
    considered holistically in the round. Judge Lawrence in this  case  has
    not indicated  anywhere  within  his  judgment  that  he  has  actually
    considered all the evidence in the round before making any findings  of
    fact and appears to have made the specific  findings  of  fact  on  the
    issues, before then going on to discount the report of Dr  Katona.   It
    may be that there were  adequate  reasons  potentially  discounting  Dr
    Katona's evidence but the judge has not explored or stated  fully  what
    those reasons are.  That also in my  judgment  amounts  to  a  material
    error.

20. The other matter raised within the Grounds of Appeal in Ground 5 is  an
    argument that when considering  the  risk  of  imprisonment  for  draft
    evasion the judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  evidence  in  the
    Respondent's own CPIN on Egypt Military Service from March  2017  which
    is said to have been cited in the skeleton argument  at  paragraph  15.
    Although within the Grounds of Appeal that  CPIN  is  then  extensively
    quoted, within the skeleton argument a brief reference was made to  it,
    there was no quotation from it, it was simply referenced as  one  piece
    of evidence in respect of that issue. More substantively there was  the
    Appellant's own expert report that had been commissioned in that regard
    from Dr Fatah.

21. The Appellant had actually gone to the trouble of  not  simply  relying
    upon the CPIN but actually getting their own expert  evidence,  from  a
    country expert Dr Fatah, dealing with the risk to  the  Appellant  upon
    return for draft evasion.  But what the judge  noted  from  Dr  Fatah's
    report was that although  formally  under  the  National  Service  Act,
    skipping military service may be subjected to imprisonment  for  up  to
    two years or a penalty of between 500-1,000 Egyptian pounds' fine,  and
    in practice it is said it could be  between  2,000  and  5,000  pounds,
    prosecutions do not start until a person turned 47  years  of  age.  Dr
    Fatah had said that in practice there was likely to be a fine and  that
    although it is plausible he would face a fine or imprisonment  but  may
    in practice a prison sentence was rarely enforced  and  most  violators
    pay a fine.

22. The judge also noted that Dr Fatah, when dealing with the conditions of
    service, said they may be demeaning and hard and pay  may  be  low  but
    were not such in themselves sufficient to amount to a contravention  of
    the Human Rights Convention.

23. In the circumstances where the Appellant has  actually  got  their  own
    expert country evidence on the point dealing with  the  risk  faced  by
    this Appellant if he was to draft evade,  and  their  expert  concludes
    that in reality violators would be fined  rather  than  imprison,  that
    evidence did not disclose treatment amounting  to  a  breach  of  human
    rights.  There is no error on the part of the judge in seeking to  rely
    upon that evidence.  The evidence from the CPIN  did  not  differ  from
    that apart from saying that obviously giving examples when people  have
    been imprisoned but when the Appellant has actually got an expert,  and
    the judge relied upon that own evidence to say that he is not at  risk.
    It cannot be an error for the judge  to  rely  upon  that  evidence  in
    preference to the more general evidence in the CPIN and on that  basis,
    having considered that point, Ms Fitzsimons on behalf of the  Appellant
    did not seek to proceed with that argument before me.

24. The only other Grounds of Appeal relate to the way in which  the  judge
    dealt with the Appellant's brother at Grounds 6 and 7 and  the  judge's
    failure to adopt a holistic approach to the evidence and misapplication
    in the case of R (On the application of SS) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2017] UKUT 00164 where the judge states  that  the
    Appellant's brother's statement bore the hallmarks of being 'written to
    order'.

25. As far as his brother's evidence is concerned it is argued in Ground  6
    basically that the way the judge dealt with that is again  contrary  to
    the Court of Appeal case of Mibanga v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department and in that regard it also seems that  the  judge  has  made
    findings about each of the grounds of the asylum claim before  then  as
    an afterthought between paragraphs 58 and 59 dealing with the  evidence
    of the brother.  At paragraph 59 the judge states specifically:

         "I find this statement materially mirrors the Appellant's  account,
         insofar  as  the  blood  feud  is  concerned.   I  have  found  the
         Appellant's account is not a credible one and set  out  my  reasons
         for that finding.  In the context I find that this witness does not
         add anything new which leads me to depart from the findings already
         made."

26. As Ms Fitzsimons submits that is not considering all of the evidence in
    thr round before making findings.  There is therefore a material  error
    also in that regard.

27. However, as  has  been  agreed  with  both  legal  representatives  the
    material errors in this case relates to the way  in  which  the  issues
    regarding the blood feud and the  Appellant's  claimed  sexuality  were
    dealt with and not in respect of the  issue  regarding  the  risk  upon
    return for draft evasion.  Indeed  Ms  Fitzsimons  did  not  ultimately
    pursue the argument raised in Ground 5 in respect of the draft  evasion
    findings.  Those findings are wholly separate to the issues relating to
    the other two grounds of the asylum appeal, namely the blood  feud  and
    the sexuality issue.  That in itself is  a  standalone  issue  and  the
    findings on the draft evasion issue are to remain.

28. However in light of the material errors in respect  of  the  other  two
    Grounds of Appeal it seems to me that it is  appropriate  the  case  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before any First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  in
    order that credibility can be assessed again and all the evidence taken
    into account in respect of the other two grounds of the  asylum  claim,
    namely the blood feud and the sexuality issue.   That  will  involve  a
    complete reassessment of credibility on those issues  and  reassessment
    of the evidence including the expert evidence.  It is therefore  not  a
    matter, given the substantial amount of  fact-finding,  that  the  case
    should be reserved and retained within the Upper  Tribunal  and  it  is
    appropriate in that case for the case to be remitted.

29. So I do preserve the findings in respect of  the  issue  regarding  the
    draft evasion but the findings in respect of the other two elements  of
    the appeal, the blood feud and the sexuality, are set aside.

Notice of Decision

30. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence is set aside  in
    respect of the findings on the issues of blood feud and the Appellant's
    sexuality and the case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a rehearing on those issues before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence.  The findings  in  respect  of
    the discrete issue regarding draft evasion are to remain and  therefore
    that is not a Ground of Appeal to be pursued at the renewed  First-tier
    appeal hearing.

31. In light of the nature of the allegations in this case  in  the  asylum
    claim it is appropriate for there  to  be  anonymity  order  as  stated
    above.  I  therefore  do  order  that  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to
    anonymity in these proceedings and no report,  transcript  or  note  of
    this decision is to identify the Appellant or any member of his family,
    either directly or indirectly.  This  direction  applies  to  both  the
    Appellant and the Respondent and to third parties.  Failure  to  comply
    with this order may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   DJ McGinty                 Date 3rd July 2019

District Judge McGinty sitting as a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
