
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09594/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 4 April 2018                       |On 02 May 2018                         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                         Mrs Fausat Omonigho Ibrahim
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Ogumbusola, Counsel, instructed by Chancery CS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a Nigerian national who was born  on  6  August  1967.
    She claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 December 2009 to
    visit her sister and her brother-in-law, one Mr  Udu.   While  she  was
    living with her sister, on her account, she was raped and assaulted  by
    her brother-in-law.  She says that the police advised her to leave  her
    sister's home and she therefore went to live  with  her  boyfriend,  Mr
    Sogo.  She  says  her  brother-in-law  went  to  Mr  Sogo's  house  and
    assaulted him and that he was arrested and imprisoned as  a  result  of
    that.  She then says that after her brother-in-law  had  been  released
    from prison in 2011 he threatened her on the street and took  a  bottle
    and stabbed himself.  Although he tried to blame her  he  was  arrested
    and detained before being deported to Nigeria.

 2. The appellant claimed that her brother-in-law held her responsible  for
    his deportation and had threatened to track her down should she  return
    to Nigeria.  She says that she cannot do so as her brother-in-law would
    find her and that the police could not protect her because her brother-
    in-law had connections with the militia.

 3. Her claim was refused by the  respondent  and  the  appellant  appealed
    against this decision.  Her appeal was heard  at  Hatton  Cross  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Manyarara  on  27  October  2017  but  in  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 17 November  2017  her  appeal  was
    dismissed.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds, including  Article
    8.

 4. The appellant has appealed against that decision, the grounds of appeal
    being relatively brief (one and a half  pages).   The  grounds  do  not
    challenge the decision to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds,  but
    claim that the judge made "a perverse  finding  on  matters  that  were
    material to the outcome of the determination" (at paragraph 2) and that
    in this regard she failed to  take  account  of  a  letter  of  support
    provided by her from REFUGE as well as a police report.  At paragraph 4
    it is said that  "the  Immigration  Judge  applied  a  higher  standard
    contrary to the lower standards" and that "it was this higher  standard
    that influenced his finding that  the  appellant  was  not  a  credible
    witness without providing adequate reasons for such findings".   It  is
    also said (at paragraph 5) that the judge erred in law "in finding that
    the appellant was not a member of a  social  group  and  the  appellant
    could obtain the protection of the Nigerian authorities".  It  is  said
    that "no adequate reasons were provided  in  support  of  such  finding
    despite the objective evidence before the Immigration Judge".

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on
    28 February 2018, who stated as follows, when setting out  his  reasons
    for granting permission:

         "...

         3.   The grounds argue that the judge erred  by  finding  that  the
             appellant had failed to provide  evidence  about  the  threats
             made by her brother-in-law; that the judge  applied  a  higher
             standard  of  proof;  and  that  the  appellant   could   seek
             protection in Nigeria was not supported by objective evidence.

         4.   At paragraph 52 of the decision,  the  judge  notes  that  the
             appellant claimed that she had informed the police  about  the
             threat posed by her brother-in-law  and  that  there  were  no
             letters addressing such a threat.  However, it does seem, that
             the appellant had submitted a letter from REFUGE and a  letter
             from the police.  It appears  the  judge  did  not  take  that
             evidence into account.  Whether or not that has any bearing on
             the ultimate decision is something  the  Upper  Tribunal  will
             have to decide.  At this stage, it is open  to  argument  that
             the judge did err.  In respect of the  other  grounds  seeking
             permission, there is no substance".

 6. For reasons which are not explained within the decision,  Judge  Chohan
    made an  anonymity  direction.   However,  representing  the  appellant
    today, Mr Ogumbusola is not instructed to apply for the continuance  of
    the anonymity direction and it is stated in terms that not only does he
    not have instructions to make such an application but there is no basis
    upon  which  such  an   application   could   legitimately   be   made.
    Accordingly, I discharge the anonymity direction previously made.

 7. I heard submissions made on behalf of both parties and  will  refer  to
    such of these submissions as are necessary for  the  purposes  of  this
    decision.  Although I will not set out everything which was said during
    the course of the proceedings I have had regard to all the  submissions
    which were made, as well as to all  the  papers  contained  within  the
    file.

 8. Having heard submissions, I entirely agree with Judge Chohan that there
    is no substance in the argument raised on behalf of the appellant  that
    the judge applied  the  wrong  standard  of  proof.   At  paragraph  23
    onwards, the judge set out the standard of proof  with  regard  to  the
    relevant case law.  At paragraph 23, following the relevant  cases  (to
    which reference was made) the judge stated as follows:

         "The burden upon the appellant to establish a well-founded fear  is
         to the standard of  a  'reasonable  degree  of  likelihood',  or  a
         'serious possibility'.  The same standard applies to past,  present
         and  future  events;  in  addition  to  subjective  and  background
         information, as well as the Geneva and  European  Conventions,  and
         internal flight".

 9. Then at paragraph 24, the judge continued as follows:

         "24. Where  the  alleged  persecution  is  committed  by  non-state
             agents, the appellant can be deemed to have in  fact  suffered
             persecution only if the state has failed  to  make  protection
             available to her: Horvath v  SSHD  [2000]  UKHL  Imm  AR  552;
             [2001] 1 AC 489".

10. At paragraph 27, the judge considered the standard of proof with regard
    to a claim for humanitarian protection, as follows:

         "27. Paragraph 339C of  the  Immigration  Rules  provides  that  an
             applicant who does not qualify as a refugee  will  be  granted
             humanitarian protection if the provisions  of  that  paragraph
             apply.  The burden rests on the appellant to show  that  there
             are substantial grounds for believing that, if  returned,  she
             would face a real risk of suffering serious harm and that  she
             is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to  avail  herself
             of the protection of the country of return.  Serious  harm  in
             this context  is  defined  as  unlawful  killing,  torture  or
             inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment,  or  a  serious
             and individual threat  to  a  civilian's  life  by  reason  of
             indiscriminate violence  in  situations  of  international  or
             internal armed conflict".

11. The judge then set out the law with regard to sufficiency of protection
    and internal relocation and also  (at  paragraph  32)  with  regard  to
    whether or not this appellant should be  regarded  as  a  member  of  a
    particular social group.

12. The judge's statements regarding the standard of proof  set  out  above
    are reinforced by what was said at paragraph 67 when she  set  out  her
    "conclusions on asylum".  Within that paragraph the judge  states  that
    "I therefore find that the appellant has failed to  establish  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution under the Refugee Convention.  Her  account
    is not credible in its entirety, even to the lower  standard  of  proof
    [my italics]".

13. The judge then, at paragraph 68, when setting out her  "conclusions  on
    humanitarian protection", states that "the appellant has not discharged
    the burden of proof to  show  that  she  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    suffering  'serious  harm'  by  reference  to  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules (as amended).

14. It is accordingly clear that throughout her determination the judge had
    in mind the correct standard of proof and the contention made on behalf
    of the appellant that she did not is not tenable.

15. The substance of the appeal is essentially that  the  judge's  findings
    were not in accordance with the evidence  insofar  as  she  disregarded
    material evidence which had been adduced  on  the  appellant's  behalf.
    Certainly that seems to be  the  basis  upon  which  Judge  Chohan  had
    granted permission to appeal.  The evidence which Judge Chohan  had  in
    mind, following the argument set out within paragraph 2 of the grounds,
    were essentially a letter from the police and  a  letter  from  REFUGE.
    However, when one analyses the decision  properly,  this  criticism  is
    also unfounded.  The judge deals very closely indeed with  the  letters
    to the police at paragraphs 51 and 52.  At paragraph 51, as conceded in
    argument by Mr Ogumbusola  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  before  this
    Tribunal, the judge did mention the  police  letter  in  terms.   While
    conceding this point, however, Mr Ogumbusola does maintain the argument
    that she did not refer to the letter from REFUGE.

16. With regard to the police letter, as Mr  Kotas  rightly  submitted,  at
    paragraphs 51, 52 and 53, it was  clear  that  while  recognising  that
    there had been a letter from the police what the judge had in mind  was
    the failure to produce  any  evidence  suggesting  that  she  had  made
    complaints to the police with regard to  what  she  was  now  alleging.
    What the judge had found remarkable is that despite complaining to  the
    police about the boyfriend, Yinka, she had not approached the police in
    a  similar  form  with  regard  to  her  brother-in-law,  despite   her
    apparently having been threatened by him.  At paragraph  54  the  judge
    specifically had in mind "the absence of any evidence relating  to  the
    proceedings against the appellant's brother-in-law",  which  "does  not
    explain the appellant's  inability  to  produce  any  evidence  of  the
    complaints she made to the police in the same manner in which  she  has
    been able to produce the letters relating to the incident involving her
    boyfriend in December 2016" (it being the  appellant's  case  that  she
    subsequently left her boyfriend because  of  his  subsequent  behaviour
    towards her).  It certainly appears to be the case  that  although  the
    appellant's  brother-in-law  was  convicted  of  the  attack   on   her
    boyfriend, Sogo, no complaint appears to have been made to  the  police
    (or there is no evidence of such complaint) regarding the rape or rapes
    which she says she suffered at the hands of her brother-in-law.  In  my
    judgment, this is a finding which was open to the judge on the evidence
    before her.

17. With regard to the letter from REFUGE, it is clear,  contrary  to  what
    appears to be stated by Judge Chohan in his  reasons  at  paragraph  4,
    that the judge did have that letter in mind, because at paragraph 16(d)
    of her judgment, the judge referred in terms to reference made  by  the
    appellant to that letter in evidence, when she had explained why  there
    was a "mistake" as to how many children she had within that letter.  It
    is also the case that the letter from REFUGE was merely a  self-serving
    statement to a health professional and the letter is on the basis  that
    her claim is an honest one, which for the very many reasons  which  are
    set out within the decision, the judge did not accept.

18. In my judgment within her very careful and well-reasoned decision,  the
    judge has analysed the evidence with considerable care.   Her  findings
    that  there  is  internal  inconsistency  regarding   the   appellant's
    sometimes contradictory claims, is well-reasoned within  the  decision.
    For example, the judge found, as she was entitled, that the appellant's
    case that it was her  sister  who  had  given  her  brother-in-law  her
    contact details to enable him to continue telephoning  her  even  after
    being deported was entirely inconsistent  with  her  alternative  claim
    that it was her sister who had warned her not  to  return  to  Nigeria.
    The judge was also entitled to take  account  of  the  fact  that  even
    though  it  was  the  appellant's  case  that  her  sister-in-law   was
    effectively on her side, there was not even a  witness  statement  from
    her.  Although an appellant is not required  to  provide  corroborative
    evidence and  there  are  many  cases  where  such  evidence  would  be
    difficult to obtain, in cases such as this, where assertions  are  made
    by an appellant, unsupported by any corroborative evidence even  though
    such evidence could or would be readily obtainable, that  is  a  factor
    which can be considered as relevant in the round  with  all  the  other
    evidence.

19. There are other  reasons  why  this  appeal,  in  my  judgment,  cannot
    succeed.  At paragraph 63, the judge found that even if (which  in  her
    view there were not) there were a real risk of serious  harm  from  the
    appellant's brother-in-law, "the authorities in  Nigeria  are  able  to
    provide protection".  Having analysed the evidence in this case (and in
    particular in light of her finding at paragraph 61 that  the  appellant
    had been wholly unable to support her claim that her brother-in-law had
    militia connections) there was simply no basis upon which  an  argument
    that there was an absence of sufficiency of protection available to the
    appellant within Nigeria could succeed.  The judge then at paragraph 64
    went on to consider the issue  of  internal  relocation,  finding  that
    "even if I accepted that the appellant faced problems in her home area,
    I find that she can live in another part of the country without risks".
     It is notable in this regard, as the judge  found,  that  by  her  own
    evidence, the appellant had stated that her  father  and  children  had
    been able to move to another state  where  they  had  not  faced  risk.
    Although the judge notes that the appellant had suggested that "this is
    because her brother-in-law is only interested in her"  she  nonetheless
    found, as she was entitled to  on  the  evidence,  that  "this  is  not
    determinative of the issue of sufficiency of protection".

20. It is notable that on behalf of the appellant before this Tribunal,  Mr
    Ogumbusola did not attempt to  enlarge  on  the  arguments  made  (very
    briefly) within the grounds regarding the judge's  findings  both  with
    regard to sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

21. Accordingly, it follows that in my judgment there is no material  error
    of law within the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge
    considered the evidence with care, reached findings of fact open to her
    on that evidence and applied the law  properly  to  those  findings  of
    fact.

22. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Manyarara is dismissed, on all grounds, there being  no  material  error  of
law in Judge Manyarara's decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 30 April 2018


