
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/09807/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke on Trent                   |Decision Promulgated             |
|On 1 August 2017                          |On 2 August 2017                 |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                                     SM
                         [Anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr R Sharif, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, SM, date of birth 21.3.96, is a citizen of Iran.

 2. I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  any
    anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue. The  First-
    tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity
    order.

 3. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ghani promulgated 27.1.17, dismissing his appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated  6.9.16,  to  refuse  his
    protection claim.  The Judge heard the appeal on 18.11.16.

 4. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    18.5.17.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 1.8.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. For the reasons summarised below, I found an error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  such  as  to  require  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.

 7. In granting permission to  appeal,  Judge  Kelly  found  there  was  no
    arguable error of law on grounds 3, 4  and  5.  However,  he  found  it
    arguable  that  notwithstanding  the  judge's  self-direction  on   the
    standard of proof at [4] of the decision, the judge applied a too  high
    standard of proof by making adverse findings at [22] which were said to
    be established "in all probabilities."

 8. Judge Kelly also considered it arguable that having accepted  that  the
    appellant was 'associated' with the KDPI, the Tribunal failed to assess
    the risk on return of becoming known  to  the  Iranian  authorities  by
    reason of that fact alone.

 9. In respect of this second ground of appeal I find no material error  of
    law. The judge disbelieved the appellant's claim  to  have  distributed
    KDPI leaflets in his Kurdish village, with the result that  the  Border
    Force came looking for him at home. The judge noted that the  appellant
    was not a member of any political party when  he  lived  in  Iran,  but
    claimed to have helped the KDPI in this manner  some  5  months  before
    leaving Iran. He knew little of  the  KDPI,  but  was  aware  that  its
    activities, fighting for the rights of Kurdish  people  in  Iran,  were
    proscribed and that there were  dangerous  consequences  of  supporting
    such organisations.

10. The judge gave cogent reasons at [17] for placing little reliance on  a
    letter purporting that the appellant was a KDPI supporter. However, the
    judge found his account of distributing leaflets not credible.  He said
    that only his two friends knew that he had  distributed  leaflets,  but
    inconsistently  also  claimed  that  the  whole  village  knew  he  was
    supporting the party. Later, he said he could have been seen  at  least
    once,  but  the  judge  concluded  that  was  a  late   invention,   an
    afterthought.

11. It is clear that the judge entirely rejected the appellant's  claim  to
    have been involved with the KDPI. In that light, I do not  accept  that
    at [22] the judge found that the appellant had  an  'association'  with
    the KDPI. I am satisfied that what the judge intended to convey was the
    appellant's awareness of the KDPI and the  dangers  of  supporting  it,
    having referred to spies and double-agents working in his  village.  At
    [22], at the end of the decision,  after  having  already  reached  the
    relevant findings that the appellant did not  distribute  leaflets  and
    was not wanted for that or any other reason by the Iranian authorities,
    the judge was no more than passing comment, that he thought it probable
    that the appellant was using that knowledge or familiarity to embellish
    an otherwise weak asylum claim. The comment was  not  relevant  to  the
    core findings and thus if there were an error, it was not  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal.

12. However, there is greater difficulty in interpreting the judge's use of
    the phrase, "in all probabilities," in [22]. One of  the  two  uses  of
    this phrase follows immediately after, "I  find  that  the  appellant's
    account does not have the ring of truth about it." Even though the "all
    probabilities phrase is used to qualify  the  comment  that  the  judge
    believes the appellant is an  economic  migrant  and  not  in  need  of
    international protection, the extent to which this  standard  of  proof
    has been applied to other issues remains unclear. As Mr Sharif  pointed
    out, other than than the standard self-direction at [4], the judge made
    no reference elsewhere in the decision  to  having  made  the  findings
    essential to the decision to the lower standard of proof. One could not
    be sure, Mr Sharif submitted, that the judge had inadvertently  applied
    the balance of probabilities  when  reaching  adverse  credibility  and
    factual findings,  rather  than  the  lower  standard  of  proof  of  a
    reasonable  likelihood.  Unfortunately,  whilst  the  judge  may   have
    intended to use this phrase only in relation to these two non-essential
    comments on the appellant's case, I cannot be satisfied that the  judge
    has correctly applied the lower standard of proof to the core  findings
    relevant to the outcome of the  appeal.  In  the  circumstances,  I  am
    persuaded that the decision cannot stand and  must  be  set  aside  for
    error of law. For the Secretary of State Mr Harrison conceded that  the
    use of the phrase amounts to an error of law and  did  not  resist  the
    appeal.

Remittal

13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal vitiate all other findings of fact and  the  conclusions  from
    those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues in the appeal.

14. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Consequential Directions

16.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Birmingham;

17. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

18. The ELH is 3 hours;

19. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Ghani;

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



