
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09071/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 April 2019                     |On 1 May 2019                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr O Atuegbe, Solicitor, R & A Solicitors.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision  of  First-
       tier  Tribunal  Judge  Khawar  who  despite  in  the  body   of   the
       determination  setting  out  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  evidence
       provided in the section headed "Assessment of Credibility Findings of
       Fact" leading to it being concluded that  MS  had  not  made  out  an
       entitlement to a grant of international protection or an  entitlement
       for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules or pursuant to  ECHR,
       proceeded in the section headed "Notice of  Decision"  to  allow  the
       appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds.

    2. Permission to appeal has been granted by another judge of the  First-
       Tier Tribunal on the basis the notice of decision is  not  consistent
       with the body of the decision and, as properly  pointed  out  in  the
       respondent's application, the Judge appears to have made a slip error
       in the Notice.

  Error of law

    3. There is no cross-appeal by Mr Sharif  against  any  of  the  factual
       findings made by the Judge which shall stand  unchallenged.  Although
       Mr Atuegbe asserted there are errors of fact in the decision, in EJ &
       MC [2013] UKUT 143 the head note at (3) reads "A party that seeks  to
       persuade the Upper Tribunal to replace a decision of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal with a decision that would make a material difference to one
       of the parties needs permission to appeal. The Upper Tribunal  cannot
       entertain an application purporting to be  made  under  rule  24  for
       permission to appeal until the First-tier Tribunal has been asked  in
       writing for permission  to  appeal  and  has  either  refused  it  or
       declined to admit the application." No such application has been made
       to the First-tier Tribunal.

    4. The Judge in the findings made gives ample reasoning for why  it  was
       concluded that MS's appeal must fail.

    5. I find the Judge has erred in law  in  allowing  the  appeal  on  all
       grounds which are findings contrary to the main body of the  decision
       under challenge. It is also legally wrong to allow an appeal on  both
       asylum and humanitarian protection grounds as the latter can only  be
       considered if an individual is not entitled to  be  recognised  as  a
       refugee.

    6. This is a case in which as a result of a slip or lack of due care  in
       the checking of the decision the Judge purports to  have  allowed  an
       appeal which should have been refused.  I  therefore  set  aside  the
       decision on  the  basis  of  the  unchallenged  facts  as  found  and
       substitute a decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

    7. Despite  the  Judge  indicating  in  the  header  that  no  anonymity
       direction had been made it also is clearly stated at [47] that such a
       direction has been made which is confirmed further at [52].

  Decision

    8. The Judge materially erred in law. I set aside the  decision  of  the
       original Judge. I remake the decision  as  follows.  This  appeal  is
       dismissed on all grounds.

  Anonymity.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29 April 2019
