
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09766/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On    21st January 2019              |On 4th February 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     HZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse from HS Immigration Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1987. He arrived  in  the
       UK in February 2018 and claimed asylum on the same  day,  his  claim
       being based on  his  conversion  from  Islam  to  Christianity.  His
       application for asylum was refused on 30th  July  2018.  His  appeal
       against the decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  AK
       Hussain in a determination promulgated on the 20th September 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Pedro on 15th October 2018 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had erred  in  law  in  failing  to  take  into
       account material evidence; in  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
       credibility; by a misdirection of the principles in HJ (Iran) [2010]
       UKSC 31; and by misdirecting himself about internal relocation.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal are, in summary as follows:

    5. Firstly, the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepts that the appellant is
       a Christian convert at paragraph 18 of his decision, but  finds,  at
       paragraph 20 of the decision, he would not be in danger as there  is
       no evidence the appellant has come to the adverse  interest  of  the
       Iranian authorities or that the he  or  the  Christadelphian  church
       actively engages in evangelising as part of his or  their  identity.
       It is argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
       account material evidence before  it  that  the  appellant  and  his
       church do in fact engage in evangelising behaviours in the UK.

    6. Secondly, it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in
       law in finding  that  the  Sepah,  which  is  part  of  the  Iranian
       Revolutionary Guard, would not have carried  out  the  raid  on  the
       house church as described by the appellant, based on the  manner  in
       which  this  is  done  which  is  assessed  as   being   implausibly
       incompetent, as this is a finding not supported by any evidence.

    7. Thirdly, it is argued that there was a failure to follow the Supreme
       Court decision in HJ (Iran) as it is  contended  that  the  evidence
       shows that the appellant would not practice his religion openly  and
       actively evangelising in Iran because he is afraid  of  persecution,
       and thus he qualifies as a refugee.

    8. Fourthly, it is argued that it was an  error  of  law  to  find  the
       appellant could relocate and find safety by internal relocation when
       in fact his evangelism would mean that he would continue  to  be  at
       risk, see AS (Iran) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1539.

    9. Fifthly, it is argued that there was a  failure  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to determine the human rights appeal.

   10. The respondent states in a Rule 24 letter that he  does  not  oppose
       the application for permission  to  appeal  and  invites  the  Upper
       Tribunal to remake the appeal based on the findings  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal at a continuance hearing. At the hearing before me  Mr
       Kotas clarified that the Rule  24  meant  that  the  respondent  had
       conceded that the grounds of appeal were correct and the decision of
       the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law. It was therefore  accepted
       by the respondent that the appellant was an evangelical Christian.

   11. It was therefore agreed by both parties that there was an  error  of
       law, and both parties were also in agreement that there was no  need
       for a further hearing or additional  submissions.  I  should  simply
       remake the appeal on the basis of the respondent's current position.

Conclusions - Error of Law and Remaking

   12. By consent it is agreed that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law as
       set out in the grounds of appeal.

   13. I find therefore that the evidence shows  that  the  Christadelphian
       church does evangelise and that it is shown to the required standard
       of proof that the appellant would do so  on  return  to  Iran  as  a
       member of this church, bar being afraid of persecutory action by the
       Iranian authorities. I find that he therefore has  a  well-  founded
       fear of persecution on return to Iran on grounds of his religion, in
       line with the country guidance set out in SZ and JM (Christians - FS
       confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082; the findings of the Court  of
       Appeal in AS (Iran) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1539;  and  the  European
       Court of Human Rights decision in A v Switzerland. This  finding  is
       also in line with the Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  Iran:
       Christians and Christian Converts Version 4.0 March 2018  at  2.2.11
       which concludes that a convert to Christianity would be at real risk
       of serious harm if  they  engage  in  evangelical  or  proselytising
       activities.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  on  asylum  and
      human rights grounds.

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  his
    protection claim.


Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:    21st  January
2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

