
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09541/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 March 2019                     |On 15 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood, IAS (Sheffield)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 20 January 1983 and is a citizen of  Morocco.
    The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom  in  January
    2018. By a decision dated 1 August 2018, the Secretary of State refused
    the appellant's application for international protection. The Secretary
    of State accepted that the appellant is a Moroccan of Amazigh ethnicity
    but did not accept that he had been arrested by the Moroccan  army  and
    detained and tortured for six  months  before  being  released  without
    charge but on a weekly reporting condition. The appellant claimed  that
    he had entered the desert with relatives for a picnic and had  ventured
    into an area which the army claimed was prohibited to civilians.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a  decision
    promulgated on 14 December 2018 dismissed the appeal. The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The judge accepted the accuracy of most of the appellant's account.  He
    found that the appellant had been arrested by  the  Moroccan  army  and
    mistreated. He accepted that the appellant  had  entered  a  prohibited
    area in this highly sensitive region of the Western  Sahara,  due  been
    the subject of a dispute between Morocco and the Polisario Front  since
    the 1970s. However, the judge rejected the appellant's claim  that  the
    authorities had kept his home in Bouznika under  surveillance  or  that
    the authorities had gone to his family home recently to look  for  him.
    Further, the judge did not accept that there was an arrest warrant  out
    for the appellant. At [36], the judge concluded, 'I  am  not  satisfied
    that [the appellant] will be at risk of  serious  harm  in  the  future
    because I do not accept that the authorities are looking for him or are
    even still interested in him.'

 4. The appellant relies on Demirkaya [1999] EWCA Civ 1654 at [20]:

         "20. Tribunal's failure to have regard to previous persecution

         Mr Nicol submits that the treatment which the appellant received in
         the months before he escaped from Turkey was life  threatening  and
         of a particularly horrifying kind. This is  very  relevant  to  the
         question  whether  the  appellant  has  a  well-founded   fear   of
         persecution on his return, yet the Tribunal do not advert  to  this
         aspect of the case at  all.  In  MacDonald's  Immigration  Law  and
         Practice, 4th edition, at paragraph 12.18, the editors state:

             "Past persecution substantially supports the  well-foundedness
             of the  fear  in  the  absence  of  a  significant  change  of
             circumstances."

         In his book 'The Law of Refugee Status', at p88, Professor Hathaway
         states:

             "Where evidence of past maltreatment exists,  however,  it  is
             unquestionably an excellent indicator of  the  fate  that  may
             await an applicant upon return to her home. Unless  there  has
             been a major change of circumstances within that country  that
             makes prospective persecution unlikely, past experience  under
             a particular regime should be considered probative  of  future
             risk...

             In  sum,  evidence  of  individualised  past  persecution   is
             generally a sufficient,  though  not  a  mandatory,  means  of
             establishing prospective risk."

         Although the House of Lords in Adan's case held that historic  fear
         was not sufficient and an  applicant  for  asylum  had  to  show  a
         current well-founded fear, Lord Lloyd  of  Berwick  said  at  p308C
         said:

             "This is not to say that historic fear may not be relevant. It
             may well provide evidence to establish present fear.""

    The appellant submits that, having found that the  appellant  had  been
    detained and mistreated for six months and then released on  a  signing
    condition which he had breached  by  leaving  the  country,  the  judge
    should have found that, in the absence of any major/significant  change
    of circumstances in Morocco, the  appellant  would  be  ill-treated  on
    return. Mr Bates, who appeared for the  Secretary  of  State,  observed
    that there were no Home Office policy notes or, indeed, Upper  Tribunal
    country guidance for Morocco. Both representatives told me that  it  is
    very rare that the Secretary of State, the First-tier Tribunal or Upper
    Tribunal have to deal with appeals for citizens of that country.

 5. The appellant does not challenge the findings  of  the  judge  save  by
    reference to Demirkaya. However, the passage from that judgement  which
    I have quoted above sits uneasily with the facts in this case. It makes
    no sense for the  grounds  at  [7]  relying  on  the  Court  of  Appeal
    authority to  submit  that  the  judge  had  'failed  to  identify  any
    major/significant change of circumstances in Morocco  that  would  lead
    the authorities to ignore the appellant.' That is the language used  in
    Demirkaya where there was a great deal of  evidence  dealing  with  the
    treatment of perceived separatists returning to Turkey.  It  cannot  be
    said, however, that there has been a major change of  circumstances  in
    Morocco as there is no evidence to show what the circumstances were  in
    the first instance. The appellant is not relying on evidence but merely
    on the assertion that, like regimes in other  countries,  the  Moroccan
    authorities would seek to harm individuals whom  they  have  previously
    detained, required to fulfil signing condition and who  have  fled  the
    country. The fact is that there is  no  evidence  to  support  such  an
    opinion or, indeed, to contradict or support the  judge's  own  finding
    that, having punished the appellant for  venturing  into  a  prohibited
    area, the Moroccan authorities have lost interest in him. Ultimately, I
    am reminded that the burden of  proof  in  the  appeal  rested  on  the
    appellant. Although the judge accepted much of the appellant's account,
    he was entitled on such evidence as he had to reject the claim that the
    appellant's family home has been under surveillance or that there is  a
    warrant out for his arrest; in his grounds  of  appeal,  the  appellant
    does not challenge those findings. The appellant has not discharged the
    burden of proving that, simply because he  had  been  detained  in  the
    past, it is reasonably likely that he will be ill-treated on return  to
    Morocco. To establish that claim the appellant had to produce evidence;
    it was not enough of him to rely  on  the  familiar  dictum  that  past
    persecution rendered future persecution reasonably likely to occur.  In
    the circumstances, I find no reason to interfere  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 12 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

