
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/09331/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2018                           |On 6 February 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                             LIBAN KHADER YOUSEF
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Bahja, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge M J Gillespie promulgated on 3 November 2017  dismissing  his
         deportation appeal on human rights grounds.




      2. The appellant is a Somali national born on 2 June 1991. He  entered
         the UK as a child with his maternal aunt (described as his adoptive
         mother) who had entry clearance to join  her  Somali  husband.  The
         marriage  failed  but  she   and   the   appellant   were   granted
         discretionary leave  and  in  2001  obtained  indefinite  leave  to
         remain.



      3. The appellant has a history of criminal  convictions.  In  November
         2011 the respondent considered deportation and served the appellant
         with  notice  of  liability  to  deportation.  He  responded   with
         submissions and the respondent chose not to pursue  deportation  at
         that stage. Regrettably that did not deter the appellant  from  his
         criminality and on 3 February 2017, after further convictions,  the
         respondent made a deportation order.  The  applicant  then  claimed
         asylum and a section 72 certificate was subsequently issued. On  25
         September 2017 the respondent rejected further representations made
         on behalf of the appellant.




      4. The appeal came before  judge  Gillespie  at  Hatton  Cross  on  25
         October 2017. The appellant was represented then as he is now by Mr
         Bahja.




      5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane granted permission to appeal on  29
         November 2017.  The matter then came before me.




      6. The Hearing




      7. The appellant was not present at the hearing. I  heard  submissions
         from the parties.




      8. Mr Bahja clarified that no issue was  taken  over  the  section  72
         certificate and that  the  sole  issue  was  whether  the  decision
         breached the appellant's human rights. He relied  on  his  skeleton
         argument and argued that the appellant had been in the  UK  for  25
         years, that he had been a child  when  he  left  Somalia  and  that
         although the history of his convictions was not disputed, they  had
         mostly been committed whilst he was a young man and had been  dealt
         with by the  youth  courts.  He  argued  that  the  judge  had  not
         considered this fact.




      9. Reliance was also placed upon country guidance.  It  was  submitted
         that the appellant had no family connections  in  Mogadishu.  There
         was no serious discrepancy in the conflicting evidence over whether
         his father was dead or probably dead as this  evidence  pointed  in
         the same direction. Were the appellant to be deported, he would end
         up in a camp for displaced persons; conditions therein would breach
         article 3. That factor when combined with the lack of  family  ties
         and his lengthy residence in the UK should have led the judge to  a
         different decision. the judge had failed to deal with the appeal in
         a manner which reflected the evidence.




     10. Mr Bahja submitted that there had  to  be  a  broad  assessment  of
         whether there would be insurmountable obstacles  to  reintegration.
         He submitted that the appellant had been here a long time and spoke
         English  and  there  would  be   significant   obstacles   to   his
         reintegration. Removal would also breach article 8.

     11. In response, Mr Kotas submitted  that  the  judge  had  indeed  had
         regard to the appellant's youth as he had referred  to  it  several
         times.  He was also plainly aware of his lengthy  residence.  There
         was no merit therefore to the complaint  that  these  matters  were
         overlooked. Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  in  additional  to  showing
         insurmountable obstacles to re-integration, the appellant also  had
         to show that he was socially and culturally integrated into British
         society and the only  evidence  of  his  activities  here  was  his
         criminality. He had  no  home,  no  employment  and  there  was  no
         evidence  of  any  qualifications  obtained.  The  submissions   on
         mitigating factors were undermined  by  the  appellant's  continued
         criminal behaviour until his most recent  incarceration.  Moreover,
         despite his claimed contrition, he had continued to behave badly in
         detention and received numerous adjudications.




     12. The judge had carefully considered the country conditions and noted
         that there was no longer any inter-clan violence. Country  guidance
         had been considered. It was not accepted that he spoke  no  Somali.
         The judge had considered all  the  factors  identified  in  country
         guidance and was entitled to conclude that article 3 would  not  be
         breached  and  that  public   interest   factors   outweighed   the
         appellant's article 8 claim.




     13. Mr Bahja accepted that the judge had considered the length  of  the
         appellant's residence but had failed to give it due weight. He  had
         also failed to consider reasons why the appellant may not have  had
         employment and he failed to  have  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
         appellant's knowledge of English demonstrated integration.




     14. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give with reasons.




     15. Conclusions




     16. I have carefully considered the evidence including the  submissions
         that have been made and have had regard to the case law to which  I
         was referred.




     17. Essentially the appellant's case is that he should not be  deported
         because of his long residence and youth.  It is certainly true that
         there are no other positive features to the case.




     18. The appellant has a sorry history of criminal  behaviour  which  is
         summarized by the judge in his determination  and  demonstrates  an
         escalation of the seriousness of his offending.  Contrary  to  what
         was argued by Mr Bahja, the judge was well aware of the appellant's
         youth on arrival,  his  age  when  he  carried  out  his  offending
         behaviour and his length of residence. These matters are set out at
         paragraphs 1, 2, 14, 23 and 44. Also contrary to what  was  argued,
         the judge did indeed note that his residency since  infancy  was  a
         highly significant factor (at 23).

     19. The determination is a careful, thorough and orderly examination of
         the case. The judge has correctly applied the law and assessed  the
         facts. He found that  the  appellant  had  committed  very  serious
         crimes by dealing and supplying Class A drugs and that he continued
         to be a danger to the public. No challenge has been made  to  those
         findings and Mr Bahja confirmed there was no issue taken  with  the
         judge's conclusion that the certificate had not been rebutted.




     20. Much emphasis was placed by Mr Bahja on the appellant's youth  when
         he committed most of his offences. I fail to see how that  advances
         his claim since it was his most recent foray  into  Class  A  drugs
         when he was in his mid-twenties and the  two  years  in  prison  he
         received which led to the deportation order. The judge noted that a
         previous threat of deportation in  2011  plainly  had  no  positive
         effect on him and that his submission  that  he  had  reformed  was
         without substance because his  offending  persisted  and  escalated
         thereafter. The judge noted that even whilst in prison for his last
         offences,  he  continued  to  receive  adjudications  for  offences
         including  violence,  threatening  behaviour,  the  possession   of
         dangerous  weapons  and  trafficking  in  drugs.  All  attempts  at
         rehabilitation have failed and the appellant's adoptive mother  has
         conceded that she has no influence over him and has no idea of  his
         circumstances because he does not live with her.




     21. The judge took careful note of the submissions on integration  both
         in the UK and on return. He acknowledged that the appellant's  long
         residence was a significant factor. He was,  however,  entitled  to
         find that the appellant had failed to  prove  social  and  cultural
         integration into life in the UK. He found that his only witness had
         no information about his circumstances, that there was no  evidence
         as to his activities  in  this  country  other  than  his  criminal
         offending, no evidence of a home or employment and  no  information
         or evidence as to his life here. The judge  was  entitled  to  find
         that it had not been shown  that  the  appellant  could  not  speak
         Somali. Plainly his adoptive mother does and they  communicate  and
         the appellant's own representations refer to English as  his  first
         but not his only language. The judge was also entitled to note  the
         contradictory evidence about the appellant's father.  His  findings
         on the appellant's claim of homosexuality are unchallenged  as  are
         the findings  on  the  appellant's  tattoo  and  his  claimed  clan
         membership.




     22. Mr Bahja also argued that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
         deteriorating conditions in Mogadishu since the promulgation of MOJ
         (Return to Mogadishu) CG [2014] UKUT 442 and indeed permission  was
         granted on that basis. That is, however, misrepresentative  of  the
         determination as at paragraph 39 the judge  specifically  addressed
         the deteriorating conditions.




     23. It is argued that if returned, the appellant would end up in a camp
         for displaced persons but it would appear that no such argument was
         made before the  judge  at  the  hearing.  It  is,  in  any  event,
         speculative as the appellant has been unable to establish with  any
         reliability the circumstances he would be likely to face on return.
         The judge did not accept that he had shown he would have no family.




     24. I find in conclusion that the judge  properly  considered  all  the
         relevant factors, undertook a thorough assessment and  meticulously
         applied the law. Whilst the appellant may disagree with the  result
         and whilst another judge may have reached a different  outcome,  it
         cannot be said that this judge's determination discloses any errors
         of law which render it unsustainable.




     25. Decision




     26. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make any errors  of  law  and
         his decision to dismiss the appeal stands.




     27. Anonymity

     28. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and  I  see
         no reason to make one.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 2 February 2018


