

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09540/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2018                           |On 2 February 2018            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 A M MAHMOOD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                DETERMINATION

Introduction.

 1. This determination is to be read along with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 24 August 2016, refusing asylum.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the FtT, filed on 7  September
         2016.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge David C Clapham SSC,  promulgated  on  21
         April 2017, dismissing the appeal.

     iv) The UT's decision on error of law (as conceded by  the  respondent)
         dated 19 and issued on 23 October 2017,  including  directions  for
         further hearing in the UT to the extent indicated at paragraphs 7 -
         13.

      v) The UT's further ruling and directions issued on 8 December 2017.

     vi) The appellant's revised skeleton argument, itemising passages  from
         country guidance, background evidence, and the expert  report.   He
         contends that these show that he cannot  lawfully  be  expected  to
         return to his home area of Tuz Khurmato, Salah-al-Din province,  or
         to relocate to the IKR.  (At the hearing,  Mr  Winter  supplemented
         the argument to the effect that the appellant  could  also  not  be
         expected to relocate to Baghdad or anywhere else in Iraq.)

Appellant's evidence, and submissions thereon.

 2. The appellant adopted his statements up to and  including  21  November
    2017 as his evidence-in-chief.

 3. At a screening interview on 24 February 2016 the  appellant  said  that
    his parents and sister  were  in  Iraq,  his  family  paid  US$8000  to
    smugglers for his travel,  and  his  mobile  phone  was  taken  by  the
    smugglers (pp. A3, A9, respondent's FtT bundle).

 4. At  substantive  interview  the  appellant  said  his  family  in  Iraq
    comprised his mother and sister.  Asked if he had spoken to them  since
    being in the UK, he replied, "Only with my mum" (Q/A 10 - 12, p.C7).

 5. In the appellant's latest statement, he says he never had  a  passport.
    He had a CSID and a  nationality  certificate  but  left  them  behind.
    They are irretrievable due to disruption of his  home  area.   He  last
    spoke to his mother when he was in Calais.   He has no numbers for  his
    mother or for his sister in Kirkuk.   He  went  to  the  Red  Cross  in
    November 2016, but they said they were unable to help.  He went back to
    the Red Cross recently and they  took  details  to  try  to  trace  his
    family.

 6. Cross-examination focused  on  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's
    family in Iraq, and on his ability and efforts made  to  contact  them.
    He said that he last spoke to his mother when he was in  Turkey  or  in
    France, he could not remember which. He said at interview that  he  had
    spoken to her, but never that he had done so from the UK.   His  family
    had a mini-market business and some property.  He heard  while  on  his
    way to Turkey that his family sold a property to raise the  $8000.   He
    had  been  to  the  Red  Cross  many  times.   The  Presenting  Officer
    questioned him repeatedly about what information he had given about his
    family, to enable tracing to take place, but he said he was  unable  to
    recall any details.  He was not in touch with any of his  relatives  on
    his mother's side in the IKR, for reasons which he was not  willing  to
    discuss.

 7. In re-examination, the appellant said the most important people to  him
    were his mother, his brothers and his sisters, and his dad, but he  did
    not know where any of them are.  He suggested that  the  smugglers  had
    removed phones to avoid tracing.

 8. Mrs O'Brien submitted that the appellant's evidence about documentation
    and his family was not credible.

 9. Mr Winter submitted that the starting point is that  the  appellant  is
    from Tuz Khurmato, a dangerous area at the time of his  departure;  the
    situation was such that he might have left  documents  behind,  and  be
    unable to retrieve them since; it was plausible a smuggler  might  take
    away  phones;  there  was  no  significant   inconsistency   over   the
    appellant's last contact with his mother; he might have appeared  vague
    about his dealings with the Red Cross, but his account was supported by
    evidence from that organisation  -  a  note  on  a  "compliments  slip"
    stating that the appellant asked for an appointment with  their  family
    tracing service, but they are unable to see him until after 13 December
    2017 (item 3, appellant's 2nd bundle in the FtT).

Credibility of the appellant.

10. The appellant answered questions intelligibly and in reasonable detail,
    up to the point where he was asked about any information he  had  given
    to the Red Cross to enable them to trace his family.  He then said that
    the Red Cross asked him a lot of questions, but he could  not  remember
    any details he gave them.  A succession of his answers were  vague  and
    non-responsive.

11. If the appellant genuinely has been separated from his family by  force
    of events, he would be acutely anxious to trace them.  Their last known
    whereabouts  are  simple  matters  about  which  he  could  give  clear
    information to the Red Cross, to the respondent, to his solicitors, and
    to tribunals.

12. The appellant would have been motivated to set enquiries in  motion  as
    soon as he came to the UK, not belatedly, in the run-up to a  rehearing
    of his case.

13. The appellant apparently contradicted himself over whether he has  only
    one sister in Iraq, as he appears to have said up to the  date  of  the
    hearing, or a number of  brothers  and  sisters,  as  he  said  in  re-
    examination; but as this was not picked up in submissions,  I  give  it
    little significance.

14. The FtT judge rejected the credibility of the appellant on  the  events
    which allegedly caused him to flee.  He may of course  be  reliable  on
    some matters although not on others, but the surrounding  circumstances
    have been found to be not as he claims, and that is another  reason  to
    think that there is no genuine difficulty in communication.

15. The appellant contradicted himself about when and from  where  he  last
    spoke to his mother.  If he lost touch, it should be clear in his  mind
    whether their last conversation was while  he  was  in  Turkey,  or  in
    Calais, just before he came to the UK.  His attempt to deal  with  this
    in evidence was unpersuasive.  I  find  this  another  indication  that
    there is no genuine difficulty in communication.

16. For all those reasons, the appellant  fails  to  establish  his  claims
    about his lack of documentation and family contacts.

Further resolution of the claim.

17. The case now falls to be approached on the footing that  the  appellant
    has identity documentation readily available and has family contacts to
    assist him on return.

18. Mr Winter submitted that although the appellant's case was strengthened
    if he had no documents, or the ability to replace them, and  no  family
    contacts,  his  case  could  be  established  in  any  event   by   the
    difficulties he would face in Iraq, such as to exclude his  home  area,
    the IKR, Baghdad or elsewhere.

19. Those submissions magnify any problems  the  appellant  would  face  on
    return. His difficulties would be no  more  than  those  of  any  other
    reasonably able young Iraqi Kurdish man; perhaps less, as he comes from
    a family of at least reasonable financial substance.

20.  As  Mrs  O'Brien  submitted,  Salah-al-Din  province,  including   Tuz
    Khurmato, is no longer subject to Daesh and is no  longer  a  contested
    area in terms of the country guidance. However, there have been  recent
    significant clashes leading to the  flight  of  civilians  on  a  large
    scale. The current  evidence  might  be  interpreted  as  reaching  the
    threshold of protection.

21. Relocation to Baghdad raises some  problems.   Although  not  generally
    reliable, it may be that, as the appellant says, he is  not  fluent  in
    Arabic and has no family or other contacts there.  On the  other  hand,
    he  would  have  a  CSID  and  would  return  with  the  benefit  of  a
    resettlement package.  His overall situation would fall short of  undue
    harshness.  However, this is not the first  alternative,  and  not  the
    decisive issue.

22. The case is completely answered by the availability  of  relocation  to
    the IKR.  The appellant's references and his expert report  include  no
    material of such force as to over-ride the clear country guidance.  The
    IKR remains virtually free of violence.  The appellant faces  no  undue
    harshness there.

23. The decision of the FtT has been set aside.  The following decision  is
    substituted:  the  appeal,  as  brought  to  the  FtT,  is   dismissed.



24. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            1 February 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


