
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/09695/2016
     PA/09697/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8th September 2017                 |On 19th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [T J]
                                    [J K]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Jegarajam (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Robertson, promulgated on 18th April 2017, following a  hearing
    at Sheldon Court Birmingham on 28th March 2017.  In the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

 2. The Appellants are husband and wife.  The principal Appellant,  is  the
    wife, born on [-] 1990, and her dependent husband was born on [-] 1986.
     Both are citizens of Sri  Lanka.   The  principal  Appellant  appealed
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 31st August 2016, refusing
    her application  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim was that her father  was  involved
    in the Liberation Tiger Tamils of Eelam (LTTE) from 1991 to  2003.   He
    was arrested during the war.   There  were  round  ups.   He  was  then
    released after a day.  She states that in 2009 her father told her that
    he was going away and to tell the police that he had gone missing.   He
    had a death certificate made out and it  was  sent  to  show  that  the
    police came looking for her (see paragraph 14).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant did not succeed in  her  claim.   Her
    principal findings are set out at paragraph 35 where the  judge  refers
    to the country guidance case of GJ (Sri Lanka) [2013]  UKUT  00319  and
    the judge makes the following findings.   First  that  the  Appellant's
    husband confirmed that during the hearing that they were  not  involved
    in any political activities in the UK and had not joined any  political
    organisations  and  had  not  raised  any  money  for   any   political
    organisations during the time in this country.

 5. Second, that the Appellant's husband also confirmed that he had no fear
    of return to Sri Lanka.

 6. Third, that there was no reliable evidence before the judge that either
    the Appellant or her husband fell within any of the risk categories set
    out in GJ.  The judge then went on to consider  the  Appellant's  human
    rights claims (paragraphs 38 to 39), and went on to dismiss the appeal.



The Grant of Permission

 7. The Upper Tribunal granted permission on 5th July 2017 expressly on the
    basis that the judge failed properly to consider the  Appellant's  case
    that the first Appellant would  be  placed  at  risk  as  a  result  of
    enquiries and in any event  arguably  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    lawyer's letter.

 8. On 20th July 2017 a Rule 24 response was entered  to  the  effect  that
    having rejected her account, it was not incumbent  upon  the  judge  to
    speculate as to what did in fact cause the  Appellant's  mental  health
    issues, and nor was it for the judge to speculate on the  statement  of
    the Sri Lankan lawyer.





The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me Ms S Jegarajam made the following submissions.
      First,  that  notwithstanding  a  very  detailed  and   comprehensive
    determination by the judge,  the  reference  to  the  lawyer,  and  his
    correspondence with the lawyer in the UK, had simply  been  overlooked.
    She submitted that there was a letter from the  Appellant's  solicitors
    (see page 117 of the Appellant's bundle) to the effect  that  they  had
    written to the Appellant's Sri Lankan lawyer, who had actually appeared
    on behalf of the principal Appellant in proceedings in Sri  Lanka  (see
    page 157).  The lawyer in this case is by the  name  of  TK  Dharmsena.
    The letter by e-mail is dated 20th April  2016.   What  is  significant
    about this, submitted Ms Jegarajam, is that it  is  a  lawyer-to-lawyer
    exchange, which confirmed that the Appellant had actually been produced
    in court.  Mr T K Dharmsena obtained a  certified  copy  of  the  court
    documents in order to establish the issue of the  arrest  warrant  that
    then followed.  It is clear from page 159 that there is information put
    before the Magistrates' Court.  At page 161 there is confirmation  that
    "the suspect should report to the Wellawatte Police Station  on  second
    and fourth Sundays of each and every month at 10 a.m., which  is  clear
    evidence, submitted Ms Jegarajam, that bail  proceedings  were  carried
    out with respect to the Appellant, who had  been  previously  detained.
    Moreover, at page 162 there is no warrant of arrest itself.  All  these
    documents, submitted Ms Jegarajam, are internally consistent with  each
    other.  No reference has been  made  by  the  judge  to  any  of  these
    documents.

10. Second, there is nothing on the face of these documents  that  actually
    remotely suggested that they were fraudulent or all contrived  for  the
    purposes of the claims that the Appellant now made.  Not only is  there
    contact between the lawyer in the UK and the lawyer in Sri  Lanka,  but
    the letter actually produces exhibited documents to back up every claim
    that he makes.  The absence of  a  reference  by  the  judge  to  these
    documents led the judge into error.

11. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that this was a case where he  would
    have to concede that the failure to refer to these  documents  led  the
    judge to overlook significant evidence that should have  been  referred
    to.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge, in what is
    otherwise a clear and comprehensive determination, was  an  error  that
    was material to the ultimate decision made, such that it amounts to  an
    error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007), and that  the
    only appropriate course of action is to remit this matter back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other Judge  Robertson.



13. It would have been otherwise, if the judge in coming to her conclusions
    at paragraph 35, where the evidence is rejected, and the  finding  made
    that there is no risk of harm to the Appellant and the  husband,  if  a
    reference had also been made earlier to the  documents  that  have  now
    been highlighted by Ms Jegarajam before this Tribunal.

14. The documents on the face of it are  internally  consistent  with  each
    other and there is no suggestion that they are fraudulent at this stage
    of the proceedings, and it is a matter therefore,  for  a  fact-finding
    Tribunal below to reach clear findings of fact  in  relation  to  these
    documents, before a decision can be made either way, whether or not  to
    allow the appeal or not.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  allowed.
 This matter is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  Practice
Statement 7.2(a).

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th September 2017
