
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09278/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Filed House (via Skype) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 September 2020             |           On 23 September 2020  |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                ER (albania)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lams, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors (Balham)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is an Albanian national who was born on 28 October  2001.
    He appeals, with permission  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill,
    against First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian's decision  to  dismiss  his
    appeal on international  protection  and  human  rights  grounds.   The
    decision of the FtT was sent to the parties on 13  November  2019,  and
    followed a hearing which had taken place on 28 October 2019.



Background

 2. The appellant entered the country on 20 July 2016, aged 14.  He claimed
    asylum, stating that he was at risk on account of a blood feud  between
    his family and the [S] family.  The feud was said  to  have  originated
    when the appellant's uncle, a police officer, found a member of the [S]
    family stealing timber from a forest.  A shot was fired, the thief  was
    injured, and matters had then followed the  course  prescribed  by  the
    Kanun of Lek Dukagjini.  The appellant had been sent out of the country
    before he reached the age of 15, his  family  having  been  told  by  a
    village elder that the [S] family would seek to target him at that age.

 3. Asylum was refused but discretionary leave was granted as a  result  of
    the appellant's status as an Unaccompanied  Asylum-Seeking  Child.   He
    appealed against the former decision, and his appeal came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs on 23 February 2017.  On 20 March 2017, Judge
    Gibbs issued a decision in  which  she  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.  She  accepted  that  the  appellant's  account  was  'broadly
    credible' and that 'there were tensions ... between the [S] family  and
    the appellant's  family'.   She  did  not  accept,  however,  that  the
    'tensions' could be classified as a blood feud, or that  the  appellant
    had been entirely truthful about his contact with  his  family  or  his
    uncle's whereabouts.  The appellant did not secure permission to appeal
    against Judge Gibbs' decision.

 4. The appellant made further submissions in support of his  asylum  claim
    on  25  April  2019,  prompted  by  the  forthcoming  expiry   of   his
    Discretionary Leave.  The fear of the [S] family was re-asserted.   The
    application was again refused on 25 August 2019.  I do not  propose  to
    set out the contents of the letter of refusal, which spans 17 pages  of
    single-spaced type.  It suffices to note  that  the  respondent  placed
    significant weight on Judge Gibbs' conclusions and considered that  the
    appellant could turn to the authorities in Albania for  protection,  or
    that he could relocate internally.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant  gave  evidence  before  Judge  Andonian  ("the  judge").
    Submissions  were  made  by  both  representatives.    Mr   Lams,   who
    represented  the  appellant  then  as  he  does  now,   developed   the
    submissions he had made in a skeleton argument which had  been  settled
    the day before the hearing.  The Presenting Officer (Ms  Ahmed)  relied
    on the  refusal  letter  and  made  oral  submissions  on  the  matters
    summarised above.  The judge reserved his decision.

 6.  The  judge's  decision   is   comparatively   lengthy   and   somewhat
    unconventionally structured.  At [2], he noted that he had 'highlighted
    certain paragraphs which  deal  with  the  appellant's  credibility  as
    regards his contact with his family in Albania'.   Those  paragraphs  -
    which are  partly  or  entirely  emboldened  -  appear  throughout  the
    decision.  The first such paragraph appears under the sub-heading  'The
    appellant's evidence', on the second page of the decision, and contains
    observations by the judge that the appellant had given  incredible  and
    contradictory evidence.  The  judge  then  returned  to  the  narrative
    before making similar observations at [10], [11] and [16]-[19] and [38]-
    [40].  The structure of the decision is rendered all the  more  unusual
    by the manner in which the judge sets out  his  conclusions,  at  [31]-
    [34], before mentioning the burden of  proof  and  then  returning,  at
    [36], to express further conclusions about the appellant's  credibility
    and the other grounds upon which  he  had  concluded  that  the  appeal
    should be dismissed. As  I  understand  his  ultimate  conclusions,  he
    decided that the appellant's family had been involved in a dispute with
    the  [S]  family  but  that  the  appellant  had  otherwise  mounted  a
    'fictitious claim for asylum in the UK with a view to  remain  in  this
    country': [31].  The  judge  concluded  in  the  alternative  that  the
    appellant could obtain a sufficiency of protection  from  the  Albanian
    police and that he could relocate within Albania so as to  obviate  any
    risk to him in his home area: [37]-[41].

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. Four grounds of  appeal  were  advanced  on  the  papers  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gill.  She granted permission on the first,  second  and
    fourth and refused permission on the third.  Mr Lams  accordingly  made
    no submissions orally or in writing on the third ground of appeal.  The
    grounds of appeal may be summarised as follows:

      i) The judge erred in his application of Devaseelan [2003] Imm  AR  1,
         because he departed impermissibly from Judge Gibbs' conclusion that
         the appellant's account was 'broadly credible'.

     ii) The judge failed to take material evidence  into  account  when  he
         concluded (as had Judge Gibbs) that the appellant was too young  to
         be targeted by a blood feud and that killing was a prerequisite for
         such a feud.

    iii) (...)

     iv) The judge failed to consider the appellant's evidence that the  [S]
         family held sway over the Albanian police force in  coming  to  the
         conclusion that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  or  an
         internal relocation alternative.

 8. The papers were placed in front of me on 31 March 2020.  I reached  the
    provisional view, at that stage, that  the  appeal  might  properly  be
    determined on the papers.  I sought submissions  from  the  parties  on
    that course and on the  merits  of  the  appeal.   I  received  written
    submissions from Mr Lams and Mr Diwnycz.  The  respondent  opposed  the
    appeal and was content for it to be  determined  on  the  papers.   The
    appellant sought an oral  hearing.   Having  considered  the  competing
    submissions, I directed that the appeal should be listed remotely.   It
    was as a result of that direction that the appeal came before me on  17
    September 2020, when Mr Lams represented the appellant and  Mr  Diwnycz
    represented the respondent.

 9. Mr Lams submitted, as he had in writing, that the judge  had  erred  in
    his  application  of  Devaseelan.   Although  he  had  mentioned   that
    decision, and was clearly aware of the principles settled by it, he had
    erred in his consideration of Judge Gibbs' decision.  In  finding  that
    the appellant was 'broadly credible', Judge Gibbs must be taken to have
    accepted various matters  which  Judge  Andonian  had  found  unproven.
    Judge Gibbs must have accepted, for example, the appellant's  assertion
    that Mr [S] had said that he would kill the appellant's uncle and  that
    the appellant's father had attempted to kill Mr  [S].   She  must  also
    have accepted the appellant's evidence that Mr [S] had  issued  threats
    against the appellant's family, after which they had  lived  in  'semi-
    confinement'.  Equally, she must have accepted that threats  were  made
    against the appellant as he approached his  fifteenth  birthday,  as  a
    result of which he was sent from Albania by his family.  The judge  had
    erred in failing to take these positive findings as his starting point.

10. In relation to grounds two and four, Mr Lams noted that he had provided
    the judge with a skeleton argument and that there was no mention of the
    document in the decision.   Had  the  judge  turned  his  mind  to  the
    arguments contained in that skeleton (as developed  orally),  he  might
    not have concluded that it was inherently unlikely that  threats  would
    have been issued against the appellant before he attained his majority.
     The country guidance in EH (blood feuds) Albania CG  [2012]  UKUT  348
    (IAC) and the respondent's Country Policy and  Information  Note  spoke
    with one voice in suggesting that boys were potentially at risk from an
    extant blood feud from the age of 15.  Equally, the judge had failed to
    turn his mind to another point made in the  skeleton,  which  was  that
    Judge Gibbs was wrong to conclude that a killing was a prerequisite for
    a blood feud; EH (Albania) stated that a blood feud began with either a
    killing or an offence committed by one family against another.   As  to
    ground four, the judge had failed to engage with  the  submission  made
    orally and in writing,  which  was  that  the  appellant's  ability  to
    relocate or to access sufficient protection from the Albanian state was
    compromised by the assertion that the [S] family had senior connections
    within the Albanian police.

11. In response, Mr Diwnycz submitted that the judge had clearly taken into
    account and made reference to Judge Gibbs' decision.  He accepted  that
    the decision was unconventionally structured but submitted that it  was
    nevertheless sustainable.  I asked Mr Diwnycz whether he  could  locate
    any reference in the judge's decision to either the  skeleton  argument
    or to any of the arguments advanced therein.  He could  not.   I  asked
    whether the judge's assessment  of  credibility  could  stand  when  it
    seemed to be the case, as asserted in ground two, that he  had  reached
    his finding that  the  appellant's  account  was  'fictitious'  without
    reference to  those  arguments.   Although  he  did  not  withdraw  his
    opposition to the appeal, Mr Diwnycz did not seek to make  any  further
    submissions.

12. Mr Lams did not seek to respond.

Discussion

13. I have come to the clear conclusion that the  judge  erred  in  law  as
    contended in grounds two and four.  As will be apparent from the record
    of the submissions above, the respondent was unable to advance any real
    defence against these grounds of appeal.  That is not a criticism of Mr
    Diwnynz; it is a reflection of the merit of those grounds.

14. The reasons I find for the appellant in respect of ground  two  are  as
    follows.

15. Judge Gibbs had, as noted above, found that the appellant's account was
    'broadly credible'.   She was plainly concerned, in considering whether
    there was an 'active blood feud' as defined in EH  (Albania),  by  what
    she perceived to be inaction on the part of the [S]  family  since  the
    incident between the two men had occurred in 2011-2012.  It was in that
    connection that she noted at [17] that the appellant had been  able  to
    attend school. Judge Gibbs had also found, at  [20],  of  her  decision
    that there could be no blood feud, as defined, because there  had  been
    no killing.  She considered an initial killing to be a prerequisite  to
    a blood feud, citing a Home Office CIG in support of her conclusion.

16. Conscious of the fact that these conclusions would  form  the  starting
    point for the next judge's assessment, Mr Lams had taken the trouble to
    address these two points 'head on' at [5]-[7] of his skeleton  argument
    before the judge.  He submitted that it was permissible for boys to  be
    targeted from the age of fifteen and that a blood feud could begin with
    an offence; a killing was not required.  Oddly, there is  no  reference
    to the skeleton argument in the judge's decision.   Nor  is  there  any
    reference to these two arguments, or to the background  material  cited
    by  Mr  Lams  in  support  of  his  argument.   At  [14],   the   judge
    misunderstood the first of those submissions, when he stated that  boys
    did not become targets until they reached the age of majority (which he
    seemingly took to be eighteen) and, at [26], he failed to consider  the
    background material relied upon by Mr Lams  to  show  that  an  offence
    could suffice  to  generate  revenge  killings.   These  concerns  were
    plainly material to the judge's overall conclusion that the  claim  was
    nothing more than an embellishment of a simmering dispute  between  two
    families.

17. As to ground four, the judge's error may also be simply  described,  in
    that he failed again to consider  arguments  and  evidence  which  were
    identified in the skeleton argument before him.  Mr Lams had submitted,
    at [7]-[10] of  his  admirably  concise  skeleton  argument,  that  the
    appellant could not receive a sufficiency of protection in Albania  and
    that there was no realistic internal relocation  alternative.   Amongst
    the reasons for those submissions were the claim made by the  appellant
    that the appellant's family had been threatened even  after  moving  to
    Tirana and that 'the [S] family  have  connections  with  the  Albanian
    authorities'.  The latter submission was a reference to the appellant's
    claim in interview that his uncle had been dismissed from the  Albanian
    police force at the request of the [S] family,  who  were  said  to  be
    particularly well-connected.

18. In considering whether this  particular  appellant  could  relocate  or
    could turn to the Albanian police, however, the judge  failed  to  take
    this evidence  into  account.   His  consideration  of  sufficiency  of
    protection, at [38]-[40] in particular, is at the  most  general  level
    and fails to consider the question posed  by  Auld  LJ  at  [55](6)  of
    Bagdanvicius [2004] 1 WLR 1207:  whether,  notwithstanding  a  systemic
    sufficiency of protection, the authorities would be unlikely to provide
    the  additional  protection  required  by  the  applicant  due  to  his
    particular circumstances.

19. The errors disclosed by ground two go to the judge's assessment of  the
    appellant's credibility and to the risk which might or might not  exist
    in Albania.  The errors disclosed by ground  four  go  to  the  judge's
    assessment of sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.  Since
    I have accepted that those  grounds  disclose  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the judge, I conclude that the decision cannot stand in its
    entirety.  In fairness to Mr Diwnycz, he did not attempt to respond  to
    grounds two and four and he did not attempt to submit that  there  were
    aspects of the decision which might properly be preserved in the  event
    that these grounds were made out.  In  the  circumstances,  I  conclude
    that the decision of the FtT involved the making of errors on points of
    law and that the decision must be set aside.

20. Both advocates submitted that the proper course, given  that  the  next
    hearing would have to be de novo, was for the appeal to be remitted  to
    the FtT.  Having regard to the Senior President's  Practice  Statement,
    and given the scope of the hearing now required, I agree.

21. I have reached these conclusions without expressing a  view  on  ground
    one.  Since it is unnecessary for the resolution of the appeal,  I  can
    state my conclusions on that ground quite shortly.

22. It is quite clear that Judge Andonian  was  aware  of  the  conclusions
    reached by Judge Gibbs and that he  was  also  aware  of  the  approach
    required by Devaseelan.  The  findings  reached  by  Judge  Gibbs  were
    mentioned at [3] and [22], amongst other places, and there  is  express
    reference to Devaseelan at [4].  As I listened  to  Mr  Lams  make  his
    submissions  before  me,  it  became  progressively  clearer  that  the
    difficulty  in  this  case  was  not  in  the  judge's  application  of
    Devaseelan, it is in the precise 'starting  point'  provided  by  Judge
    Gibbs' decision.

23. Judge  Gibbs  certainly  accepted  that  the  appellant's  account  was
    'broadly credible' and she certainly expressed some concerns about  the
    extent and nature of the risk to the appellant.  What Mr Lams sought to
    submit was that, in finding the  appellant  'broadly  credible',  Judge
    Gibbs 'must have' been taken to accept various other matters,  although
    there was no express finding on those matters within her decision.   He
    submitted that she must have accepted that the appellant's  family  had
    been threatened by the [S] family and that a particular threat had been
    communicated  about  the  appellant  as  he  approached  his  fifteenth
    birthday.

24. With respect to Mr Lams, however, I consider that this is to  read  too
    much into the judge's finding that the appellant's account  is  broadly
    credible.  It is imperative to recall the flexibility of the Devaseelan
    guidelines; they do not  represent  a  straitjacket  for  a  subsequent
    judicial finder of fact: R (on the application of  MW)  v  SSHD  [2019]
    UKUT 411 (IAC).  It is also imperative  to  recall  the  difficulty  of
    drawing a bright line around what a finding of  fact  actually  is:  AB
    (Iraq) [2020] UKUT 268 (IAC).  Where there are,  in  truth,  simply  no
    findings on certain relevant matters, it is for  the  second  judge  to
    reach their own conclusions on the matters in issue.  They  must  treat
    the first judge's decision as a starting point but there will be  cases
    - and this appears to be one - in which proper resolution of the appeal
    is unlikely to be achieved by attempting to define what must  and  must
    not have been accepted by the first judge in  the  absence  of  express
    findings on those matters.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of errors on points of  law  and
it is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the FtT for  rehearing  de  novo
by a judge other than Judge Andonian.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                           21 September 2020
