

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09800/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 17th January 2017                     |On 18th January 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                NIAZ MOHAMMED
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who says he was born on  1st
      January 1999. He is therefore, according to his dates, just  18  years
      old. He arrived in the UK on 9th June 2015,  and  claimed  asylum  the
      following day. His claim was refused on 31st August 2016.  His  appeal
      against the decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bart-
      Stewart in a determination promulgated on the 22nd November 2016.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Osborne on 16th December 2016 on the basis that it was  arguable  that
      the First-tier judge had erred in law in  failing  to  deal  with  the
      claim that the appellant was entitled to  refugee  status  as  he  was
      afraid of being recruited into the Taliban or other militias; and  for
      failing to deal with the claim  that  he  could  not  be  returned  to
      Afghanistan due to the situation makes his return in contravention  of
      Article 15 (c) of the Refugee Qualification Directive. The  First-tier
      Tribunal was clearly requested to  consider  these  arguments  by  the
      appellant's representatives.

   3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal
      had erred in law

Submissions

   4. The appellant contends that at the hearing he argued  that  he  feared
      forcible recruitment by the Taliban and other militias if returned  to
      Afghanistan, and that arguments were put to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      that Afghan men of fighting age were a particular  social  group,  and
      reference was made to UNHCR materials on this point, and to country of
      origin evidence supporting this risk. No reference, it is argued,  was
      made in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  this  basis  of
      appeal.

   5. The appellant also contends  that  he  argued  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal that he could not be returned because Article  15(c)  of  the
      Qualification Directive was engaged as  the  level  of  indiscriminate
      violence had risen so that it was so high that he faced a real risk to
      his life and person simply by being present in that  country.  Country
      of origin  evidence  was  provided  showing  a  deterioration  in  the
      security situation since AK (Article 15(c) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT
      00163 was decided. There  is,  it  is  argued,  no  reference  in  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal to this basis of appeal.

   6. The appellant  also  contends  that  there  was  no  consideration  of
      evidence from UNHCR about reintegration problems for returnees that he
      put before the First-tier Tribunal, and thus, he  argues,  the  First-
      tier Tribunal did not properly consider whether  the  appellant  would
      have very significant obstacles to integration on return and  in  turn
      unlawfully failed to consider whether the  appeal  under  the  private
      life Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) should  have  been
      allowed.

   7. Mr Nath observed that the First-tier Tribunal had found the  appellant
      not to be credible in relation to the individual claim he had made  to
      be at risk and the findings with respect to  this  are  set  out  from
      paragraph 39 - 47 onwards of the decision. Findings had also been made
      that the appellant could live with his uncle  or  mother/siblings  and
      grandfather for whom he had contact details.

   8. Both parties agreed that if I found the First-tier Tribunal had  erred
      in law that the appropriate course would be for me to remit the matter
      back for hearing de novo by the First-tier Tribunal.



Conclusions - Error of law

   9. The appellant is  comprehensively  disbelieved  with  respect  to  his
      individual claim.

  10. The First-tier Tribunal has erred in law in failing to  make  a  clear
      finding as to the appellant's age.

  11. There is no reference in the decision to whether  the  return  of  the
      appellant would be contrary to Article 15  (c)  of  the  Qualification
      Directive or discussion of the situation in Afghanistan  with  regards
      to indiscriminate violence; or whether the appellant is at  real  risk
      of serious harm as a result of a general  risk  of  recruitment  to  a
      militia/ Taliban; or any consideration  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
      Immigration Rules. I do not find that a  finding  that  the  appellant
      could live with relatives addresses the test of whether he would  have
      very significant obstacles to integration,  and  thus  any  ground  of
      appeal under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

  12. The grounds of  appeal  mention  a  fear  of  general  lawlessness  in
      Afghanistan and base the appeal on humanitarian protection and Article
      8 ECHR. The skeleton argument makes reference to a fear of recruitment
      by the Taliban on the basis of the appellant being of fighting age and
      made  arguments  about  the  appellant's  entitlement  to   subsidiary
      protection given the security situation  in  Afghanistan  setting  out
      extracts from country of origin reports. I  therefore  find  that  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal errs in law for  failure  to  deal
      with these grounds of appeal which the appellant had clearly raised.

  13. I find that this failure  is  a  material  error  notwithstanding  the
      decision in R (On the application of HN and  SA)  Afghanistan  v  SSHD
      [2016] EWCA Civ 123 with respect to Article 15(c) of the Qualification
      Directive, particularly as this appellant submitted country of  origin
      materials going to risks from indiscriminate violence which came  into
      existence after the date of the  decision  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
      reviewing in HN and SA.




    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision in its entirety.

      3. I remit the remaking of this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 17th January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

