
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09615/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2019                     |On 01 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                ZOHAIB AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Young-Harry promulgated on  11  May  2018  in  which  he  dismissed  on
    protection grounds the Appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 14 September 2017 refusing asylum in the UK.



2.   The Appellant has not attended before the  Upper  Tribunal,  either  by
    way of representative or in person.  Although  the  Appellant  has  had
    some legal assistance hitherto, his previous representatives  wrote  to
    the Tribunal on 4 April  2019  indicating  that  they  were  no  longer
    instructed in the proceedings.  That  letter  identified  the  date  of
    today's appeal hearing, and in such circumstances I am  satisfied  that
    the Appellant has had due notice of the hearing.  No communication  has
    been received from him to explain his non-attendance.  An  attempt  was
    made to contact him by way of  a  contact  e-mail  address  during  the
    course of this morning, but by the time the appeal  was  called  on  at
    12:45pm there had been no response.



3.   In all of the  circumstances  -  including  being  satisfied  that  due
    notice of the hearing has been given to the Appellant, that he has  had
    the opportunity of attending the  Tribunal  in  person  or  by  way  of
    representative to amplify upon his grounds of appeal, and that  in  any
    event he has had the opportunity to send to the Tribunal any  documents
    or submissions upon which he might wish to rely - I was satisfied  that
    it was appropriate to proceed with the hearing in the  absence  of  the
    Appellant.



4.   The Appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  born  on  15  May  1990.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 21 January 2012  pursuant  to  a  student
    visa.  An application for further leave to remain as a student was made
    on 12 March 2014 which, in due course, was refused  with  no  right  of
    appeal on 16 June 2015.



5.   The next contact with the immigration authorities appears to have  been
    on 20 March 2017 when the Appellant claimed asylum.  It is unclear from
    the materials before me the exact circumstances in  which  he  came  to
    make that claim - whether it was, as it were, of his own  volition,  or
    whether it was pursuant to some sort of enforcement action.  Be that as
    it may, a screening interview was conducted on 20 March 2017 and on  29
    June 2017 a substantive asylum interview was conducted.



6.   The Appellant's application for protection was refused for the  reasons
    set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated  14  September
    2017.



7.   In the screening interview the Appellant indicated  the  basis  of  his
    claim in the following terms:

         "Family dispute which started 1992-94 and 2 people were  killed  at
         that time between the families.

         My father is afraid that I will be killed and I cannot return to my
         village because of the dispute.

         If the dispute is resolved I will be happy to go back to Pakistan".
         (paragraph 4.1)



8.   It is to be noted that at section 3.1 of the  screening  interview  the
    Appellant gave his reasons for coming to the United  Kingdom  in  these
    terms:

         "At the time my father sent me [as] a student  because  of  another
         family is at war with my family.

         A family dispute".



9.   I also pause to note that at section 5.3 the  Appellant  answered  "No"
    to the question "Have you ever, in any country,  been  accused  of,  or
    have committed an offence for which you have been, or could  have  been
    convicted? (including traffic offences)".



10.  At  the  substantive  asylum  interview  the  Appellant  put  his  case
    primarily on a quite different basis.  At  the  interview,  some  three
    months after the initial screening interview, the Appellant produced  a
    handwritten statement (exhibited in the Respondent's  bundle  at  Annex
    D).  In the  statement  he  claimed  to  be  at  risk  in  Pakistan  in
    consequence of his  association  with  a  woman,  'S',  in  the  United
    Kingdom. S had also been  a  student  in  the  UK  from  Pakistan;  the
    Appellant indicated that he was initially accused of rape, subsequently
    charged with stalking / harassment, but that charges  in  the  UK  were
    eventually dropped.  The Appellant said  that  members  of  S's  family
    wished harm upon him in the event that he returned to Pakistan, and  to
    that end a First Information Report ('FIR') had been filed against him.



11.  That this statement was only produced for the first time at the  asylum
    interview is evident from both  question  3  and  question  19  of  the
    interview. Indeed it is at question 19 where the Appellant,  indicating
    the statement, says that its narrative is the main reason for his claim
    rather than the family dispute mentioned at the screening interview.



12.  The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for protection.



13.  The Appellant appealed to the IAC.



14.  The  Appellant  attended  the  appeal  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and was represented.



15.  The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in the  'Decision  and
    Reasons' of Judge Young-Harry promulgated on 11 May 2018.



16.  In respect of the change to the basis of  claim,  the  Judge  made  the
    following observations at paragraphs 18-20:

         "18. The appellant failed entirely  to  mention  in  the  screening
             interview the incident involving [S]; an  incident  which  now
             appears to be the central thrust of his claim.

         19.  The appellant  refers  only  to  the  family  dispute  in  the
             screening interview.  He claims it began between 1992 and 1994
             and 2 people were killed.  He states because  his  father  was
             concerned for his safety,  he  instructed  him  to  leave  the
             village.  He goes on to state that if the dispute is  resolved
             he would be happy to  return  to  Pakistan.   The  appellant's
             screening interview was conducted on the 20th March  2017  and
             the rape allegation was made in 2013.

         20.  I find had the appellant genuinely been concerned about  [S]'s
             family in Pakistan and the police in Pakistan, he  would  have
             mentioned this in his screening interview.  I  find  the  fact
             that the appellant failed entirely to mention what now appears
             to be the central part of his claim, leads  me  to  doubt  his
             claim.   I  find  this  failure  significantly   damages   his
             credibility".



17.  The Judge made further reference  to  this  failure  at  paragraph  23,
    stating that it "suggests that this  story  is  a  recent  fabrication,
    introduced after the screening interview in an attempt to  bolster  his
    weak asylum claim".  The Judge then concludes "I find  his  account  is
    entirely incredible and without merit" (paragraph 25).



18.  Notwithstanding these observations in respect of  the  presentation  of
    the Appellant's asylum claim, the  Judge  also  gave  consideration  to
    elements of the Appellant's narrative account upon which he now relied.
     In this regard the Judge found that the Appellant  could  not  explain
    why, if an FIR had been filed against him in 2013 and his  parents  had
    known about it at that time, they had not informed him about  it  until
    2015 (paragraphs 26 and 27).  The Judge found that  the  Appellant  was
    simply trying to explain away some of the time that had elapsed between
    the events that he relied upon and his  making  of  the  asylum  claim.
    Indeed, the Judge found the delay in making the asylum claim to  be  an
    adverse factor in the assessment of credibility (paragraph 28).



19.  The Judge also gave consideration to  the  documents  produced  by  the
    Appellant.   Applying  the  principle  in  Tanveer  Ahmed,  the   Judge
    concluded that he could not attach  weight  to  the  First  Information
    Reports produced by the Appellant,  or  a  summons,  noting  again  the
    Appellant's failure to make any  reference  to  these  matters  in  the
    screening interview, and not even having produced such documents at his
    later substantive interview.



20.  At paragraph 30 the Judge also made this observation:

         "The appellant, for the first time in his witness statement, claims
         that [S]'s family are influential and have political connections in
         Pakistan.  There is nothing elsewhere in the  evidence  to  suggest
         that her family are rich or influential.   I  do  not  accept  this
         claim.  I find the appellant has added this in order to explain why
         internal relocation is not viable".



21.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted on 22 June 2018.  The grant of permission  to  appeal
    essentially distils the grounds of appeal and identifies three  aspects
    of challenge. The three bases of challenge are essentially these:

         (i)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  arguably  erred  in  law  in
         "bestow[ing] a considerable weight" on the Appellant's  failure  to
         mention the core component of his asylum claim at the time  of  the
         screening interview.

         (ii) The Judge erred in  attaching  weight  to  the  apparent  late
         introduction of the evidence that [S]'s family was influential  and
         politically connected in Pakistan.

         (iii)    The Judge had not  given  adequate  consideration  to,  or
         otherwise explained his findings in  respect  of,  the  Appellant's
         offered an explanation for delay in claiming asylum - that  he  had
         had no money, and had gone to four solicitors  who  had  asked  for
         money to help which he could not pay them.



22.  I do not find that any of those lines of challenge have any merit.



23.  In my judgement it was entirely a matter for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to  consider  what  weight  to  attach  to  the  manner  in  which  the
    Appellant's asylum claim and the elements of it emerged as between  the
    screening interview and the substantive interview.



24.  Whilst of course it is the case that the screening  interview  is  very
    much a preliminary stage of the process, and that a degree  of  caution
    needs to be exercised in considering  the  contents  of  the  screening
    interview both generally and in terms of comparing  it  to  what  might
    later emerge, this was not a case where the Appellant had just  arrived
    in the United Kingdom after a lengthy or difficult journey.   Far  from
    it; he had been present in the United Kingdom for a significant  period
    of time.



25.  Whilst, as I have observed above, it is  not  clear  to  me  the  exact
    circumstances in which the Appellant came to make his  application  for
    asylum,  it  seems  to  me  that  realistically  there  are  only   two
    possibilities. If this was not a 'planned' claim for asylum -  that  is
    to say it was made subsequent to some  sort  of  unexpected  arrest  or
    detention - then the 'section 8'  considerations  are  that  much  more
    adverse.  If, however, it was an application made of volition, then  it
    is inevitably adverse that the Appellant was not able to articulate the
    basis of his claim clearly, or indeed  had  not  made  arrangements  to
    ensure that he had supporting  evidence  with  him  when  he  presented
    himself to the Secretary of State.



26.  I also recognise and acknowledge that  the  purpose  of  the  screening
    interview is not to obtain full details of an asylum claim but just the
    essential elements.



27.  However, in  the  instant  case  the  essential  elements  subsequently
    relied upon were not referred to at all.  This  was  appropriately  and
    understandably  the  focus  of  the  deliberations  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



28.  Indeed, it seems to me that  the  nature  of  the  difficulty  for  the
    Appellant's case goes further than simply not mentioning these matters:
    not only was there no mention of the basis of the core claim  as  later
    articulated, but the  Appellant's  comments  and  observations  at  the
    screening interview are inconsistent with the  details  claimed  later.
    In particular it is to be  noted  that  the  Appellant  indicated  that
    absent the family dispute that had commenced in 1992 to 1994  he  would
    be "happy to go back to Pakistan".  Necessarily this is  an  indication
    that there was nothing else that might prevent his return to  Pakistan.
    Similarly, his statement that there were no offences of  which  he  had
    been accused is inconsistent with  his  claim  to  be  the  subject  of
    outstanding FIRs in Pakistan.



29.  Accordingly,  I  find  nothing  of  substance  in  the  first  line  of
    challenge identified in the grant of permission to appeal.



30.  In respect of the second line of challenge, I do not  accept  that  the
    Appellant's comments in his witness statement as to  the  influence  of
    S's family were merely an additional element, or elaboration, upon what
    he had said at the asylum interview,  and  so  could  not  be  seen  as
    adverse.  In my judgement it is apparent that his claim in his  witness
    statement as to the influence of S's family contradicted  his  evidence
    in the substantive asylum interview.  In the  interview  the  Appellant
    was expressly asked about the S's family's influence at question 83:

         "Q.  Does [S] family have any  influence  over  the  government  or
             authority in Pakistan.

         A.   I have no idea maybe her brother or father".



31.  In any event, it  seems  to  me  that  such  a  matter  is  essentially
    peripheral to the core element of the Judge's reasoning.



32.  In my judgement  the  third  line  of  challenge  is  also  essentially
    peripheral.



33.  It is to be acknowledged that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  in
    terms engage with the Appellant's offered explanation as to why he  had
    not previously sought asylum. However, I note  in  the  first  instance
    that the mere inability to afford a representative does not provide  an
    adequate or  reasonable  explanation  for  not  seeking  protection  in
    circumstances  where  a  person's  presence  in  the  UK  is  otherwise
    unlawful.  Even if it might  be  said  that  the  Appellant's  comments
    provided some element of explanation for delay in claiming  asylum,  it
    does begin to offer  any  explanation  why,  when  an  application  was
    eventually made, it was initially presented not only without mentioning
    the real substance of the claim, but in fact offering  answers  at  the
    screening interview that were inconsistent with the real subject of the
    claim. The Judge's failure expressly to  engage  with  the  Appellant's
    evidence on delay is essentially immaterial.



34.  For all these reasons I can find no basis for  impugning  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

35.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    accordingly stands.



36.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



37.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 27 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

