
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09928/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2017                             |On 2 May 2017                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                    [A P]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms R. Head, Solicitor
For the Respondent:     Mr. P. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, who was born on [ ] 1983, is a national of Iran.  It  is
    his case that he crossed over into Turkey by foot on 25  December  2015
    and made a clandestine entry into the United Kingdom on 8  March  2016.
    He claimed asylum on that same day. At his screening interview, he said
    that he had had difficulties with  the  Iranian  government.   He  then
    attended a substantive asylum interview on 1 September 2016.

2.   His application was refused on 4 September 2016.  He  appealed  against
    this decision but  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  dismissed  his
    appeal in a decision promulgated on  5  December  2016.  The  Appellant
    appealed against this decision  on  18  December  2016  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne granted him permission  to  appeal  on  6  March
    2017.

ORAL HEARING

3.    Counsel for the Appellant stated that she was relying on  her  grounds
    of appeal. She noted that in paragraphs 24 - 25  of  the  decision  and
    reasons the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
    account was internally consistent. But she submitted  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had made clear errors in his findings  of  fact  in
    relation to whether or not the blogs written by the Appellant had  been
    in the public domain. He had also made errors of fact  in  relation  to
    the   circumstances   surrounding   the   Appellant's   conversion   to
    Christianity. She also submitted that, although the Appellant  had  not
    provided a copy of the email to which photographs of  the  two  summons
    and one search warrant had been  attached,  this  issue  had  not  been
    raised at the appeal hearing.

4.   She also relied on the fact that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  not
    made any findings of fact in relation to the Appellant's conversion  to
    Christianity. She submitted that, if it was the case that the Appellant
    was now attending church, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  have
    considered whether he would continue to attend church  if  returned  to
    Iran and whether this would place him at risk. She also noted that  the
    Appellant's blog had a photograph attached  to  it,  which  potentially
    placed him at risk.

5.   In response, the Home Office Presenting  Officer  accepted  that  there
    was a date on one of the Appellant's blogs but noted that, in paragraph
    26 of his decision and reasons, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had found
    that the contents of the blog did not appear to be very  controversial.
    In paragraph 27 he also found that the blogs did  not  appear  to  have
    attracted any adverse interests on the part of the Iranian  authorities
    despite posting his blogs in 2013 and not leaving Iran until  2015.  He
    added that there was no  evidence  of  any  "views"  of  his  blog  and
    submitted that the Appellant did not have a  political  profile,  which
    would attract the adverse attention of the Iranian government. He  also
    submitted that the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  were
    open to him and that, in particular, he had given adequate reasons  for
    his findings about the Appellant's conversion to Christianity.

6.   The Home Office Presenting Officer also relied on  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had said that he was a Muslim  in  his  screening  interview,
    that he had only provided a pro-forma letter from the church in England
    and that he had not yet  been  baptised.  In  reply,  counsel  for  the
    Appellant submitted that the reference to the blogs not being dated  in
    paragraph 27 of the decision and reasons was material as the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had found that it was "significant"  that  none  of  the
    publications were dated. She also submitted  that  criticism  of  Islam
    cannot reasonably be deemed to be uncontroversial  in  the  context  of
    Iran and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to refer to  key
    evidence about the Appellant's conversion.

THE DECISION


7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne gave  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    basis that First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain had made  errors  of  fact
    when considering the evidence before him/her.

8.   The circumstances in which an error of law could amount to an error  of
    law were discussed in R (Iran) & Others v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ  982.  In  paragraph  28  Lord  Justice
    Brooke considered when an appellate body like the  IAT,  whose  primary
    role during the relevant  period  was  restricted  to  identifying  and
    correcting errors of law, could entertain an  argument  to  the  effect
    that the outcome in the lower court  was  unfair,  as  a  result  of  a
    mistake of fact, and that  this  constituted  an  error  of  law  which
    entitled it to interfere.

9.   In paragraph 29 he reminded himself of the decision in E and R  v  Home
    Secretary [2004] EWCA Civ 49  and  accepted  that  the  Tribunal  could
    interfere where common law fairness demanded  it  did  so  and  when  a
    minister has taken a decision on the basis of  a  foundation  of  fact,
    which was demonstrably wrong. At paragraph 64 of that case Carnwath  LJ
    said that there was a  common  feature  of  all  the  cases  previously
    referred to which may be when the  Secretary  of  State  had  a  shared
    interest with both the particular appellant and with  any  tribunal  or
    other decision-maker that might be involved in  the  case  in  ensuring
    that decisions were taken on the best information and  on  the  correct
    factual basis. At paragraph 66 he identified asylum law as representing
    a statutory context in which the parties  shared  an  interest  in  co-
    operating to achieve a correct result but went on to state that he  was
    not laying down a precise code.

10.   Furthermore,  in  Karanakaran  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2000] EWCA Civ 11 it was held  that  it  was  necessary  to
    consider all of the relevant evidence,  to  assign  each  part  of  the
    evidence appropriate weight and then reach a decision  on  the  overall
    credibility of the evidence.

11.  In paragraph 23 of his decision and  reasons  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did state that he was aware that he had to  have  regard  to  the
    background evidence but he did not remind  himself  of  the  principles
    contained in Karanakaran.

12.  In paragraph 27 of his decision and  reasons  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge found that it was "significant that none  of  these  publications
    show the date they were on the internet". However,  the  item  entitled
    Research Issues - Third Front Reformist Constitute  indicates  that  it
    was posted on 7 October 2013. It is also the case that at the bottom of
    the  blogs  there  were  clear  URLs  ("Uniform  Resource   Locators").
    Therefore, they were in  the  public  domain.  This  in  itself  was  a
    potential risk factor; as was the fact that the Appellant's  photograph
    was on the top of one of the blogs.

13.  In her Rule 24 response and during  oral  submissions,  the  Respondent
    submitted that, in any event, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  noted
    that the content of the blogs did not appear to be very  controversial.
    However, it is arguable that the contents  of  that  post  were  highly
    political in the context of Iran, as the Appellant states that:

         "With regards to the dictatorial environment in Iran and repression
         and human rights laws of Islam, I have always strived to  enlighten
         and expose the nature of Islam and the Islamic Republic to others.


         About the laws of the Islamic Republic of Iran that  are  based  on
         Islamic laws that in any society where politics  and  religion  are
         mixed, many problems emerge in that society".

14.  The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on the  dates  of  the  blogs
    being some time before the Appellant left Iran  but  this  ignores  the
    fact that it was the Appellant's case that it was a raid on  his  store
    room and home, which caused him to flee from Iran.

15.  There were also two errors  of  fact  relating  to  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's conversion to Christianity. In paragraph 29 of his decision
    and reasons the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  "the  appellant's
    evidence in the written statement that his  friend  Saeed  was  himself
    attracted to the faith years earlier when he heard people singing in  a
    house lacks complete plausibility given the inability for Christians to
    practice their faith openly  in  Iran".  But  in  question  80  in  his
    substantive asylum interview, the Appellant was asked, "...  before  he
    told you about Christianity were you aware he  was  a  Christian?"  The
    Appellant replied, "I knew from some  time  ago  he  used  to  live  in
    Turkey, on his return he told me he had converted". The clear inference
    from this answer is that Saeed had converted to Christianity in Turkey.



16.   Furthermore, in paragraph 29 of his decision and  reasons  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant's evidence about  when  he
    was introduced to  Christianity,  as  a  convert,  was  incoherent  and
    inconsistent. However, when  reviewing  this  evidence  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to take into account the fact  that  it  was  not
    only that Saeed had told him that "Jesus had performed many  miracles".
    It was also that it was the Appellant's case that after  hearing  this,
    he had begged God to cure his child and a few hours later  doctors  had
    given him good news about his child.

17.  The Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  relied  on  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had given his religion as Islam in his  screening  interview.
    However, I remind myself of the findings in paragraph 19 of YL (Rely on
    SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 145, where the Tribunal held that:


         "When a person seeks asylum in the United Kingdom  he  is  usually
         made the subject  of  a  'screening  interview'  (called,  perhaps
         rather confusingly a "Statement of Evidence Form - SEF  Screening-
         ).  The purpose of that is to establish the general nature of  the
         claimant's case so that the Home Office official  can  decide  how
         best to process it.  It is concerned with the country  of  origin,
         means of travel, circumstances of arrival in the  United  Kingdom,
         preferred language and other matters that might help the Secretary
         of State understand the case.  Asylum seekers are  still  expected
         to tell the truth and answers given in screening interviews can be
         compared fairly with answers given later.  However, it has  to  be
         remembered that a screening interview is not done to establish  in
         detail the reasons a person gives to support her claim for asylum.
          It would not normally be appropriate for the Secretary  of  State
         to ask supplementary questions or to entertain  elaborate  answers
         and an inaccurate summary by an interviewing officer at that stage
         would be excusable.  Further the screening interview may  well  be
         conducted when the asylum seeker is tired after  a  long  journey.
         These things  have  to  be  considered  when  any  inconsistencies
         between the screening interview and the later case are evaluated".

18.  Furthermore, in order to comply  with  Karanakaran,  this  one  answer
   needs to be viewed in the context of the significant amount of  evidence
   which indicated that he had converted to Christianity.

19.  For these reasons I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain made  a
    clear and material errors of fact and law in his decision and  reasons.



DECISION

20.  The appeal is allowed.

21.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hussain's  decision  and  reasons  are  set
    aside.

22.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.




Nadine Finch

Signed

Nadine Finch
                                Date 24 April 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


