
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09287/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2018                          |On 21 December 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               CNP (ZIMBABWE)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/
Claimant:     None.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Specialist Appeals Team appeals on behalf of the Secretary of State
    for the Home Department ("the Department") from  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Rothwell sitting at Hatton Cross on  14  May
    2018) allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  her
    protection claim which she had brought on the basis that she had a well-
    founded fear of persecution in her home area of Zimbabwe on account  of
    her sur place activities in the UK, and that  internal  relocation  was
    not a reasonable option.  The Judge also allowed the claimant's  appeal
    under Article 8 ECHR, and there is no appeal against this finding.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 24 October 2018 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gill  granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons: "It is arguable  that  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Rothwell  may  have  materially  erred  in  law  in
    assessing the future risk in the  appellant's  home  area  and  in  her
    consideration of whether she has a safe and reasonable internal  flight
    relocation option."

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The claimant is a national of Zimbabwe, whose date of birth  is  9  May
    1977.  She entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 27  August  2003.
    Her visa was valid until 27 February 2004.  She applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a general visitor, and her  application  was  refused  on  18
    October 2004.  However she remained in the UK.  On 12 December 2008 she
    was served with a removal notice as an overstayer.  On 2 March 2011 she
    was served with a notice of decision that she should  be  removed  from
    the UK.

 4. Her appeal against this decision came before Judge  Walker  sitting  at
    Newport on 16 June 2011.  Both parties were legally  represented.   The
    claimant relied solely on human  rights  grounds  in  order  to  resist
    removal.  In his subsequent determination, the  Judge  found  that  the
    claimant was not a genuine visitor, but had entered the UK in order  to
    obtain employment as a Nurse.  He  found  that  the  claimant  had  not
    established any family life in the UK, and that the  private  life  she
    had established was "limited".

 5. It is suggested in the decision letter of 7  September  2017  that  the
    claimant challenged the outcome of  this  appeal  by  way  of  judicial
    review, rather than by a statutory appeal.  At  all  events,  whichever
    route the claimant took, it was  unsuccessful.   She  was  served  with
    another notice as an overstayer on 20 October 2014.   It  appears  that
    she claimed asylum in response to this notice, but she failed to attend
    her asylum interview unit appointment  on  19  January  2015.   She  is
    recorded as eventually claiming asylum on 9 May 2017.

 6. Her claim was that since December 2014 she had been  attending  rallies
    outside the Zimbabwean Embassy in London every Saturday.  She said that
    she had joined the London branch of  the  ROHR  (Restoration  of  Human
    Rights), and she had recently become a member of  the  ROHR  Committee.
    She said that the Zimbabwean authorities would have a specific interest
    in her, because she was known  as  an  activist  as  a  result  of  her
    presence  outside  the  Embassy  being  picked  up   by   the   Embassy
    Surveillance cameras and also because her name and picture were on  the
    ROHR website.

 7. On 7 September 2017 the Department gave their reasons for refusing  her
    claim for asylum or humanitarian protection.  In her asylum  interview,
    she had incorrectly stated that the ROHR was a sub-section of  the  MDC
    (Movement for Democratic Change).  The  background  information  stated
    that the ROHR was a non-political organisation.   When  she  was  asked
    about the address of the Zimbabwean Embassy, she said that  it  was  in
    central London, but she did not know the street or district that it was
    in.  The ROHR website had been researched, and the list of names of the
    main members of the Board had been found.  She did not appear  on  this
    list.  In  addition,  no  photographs  of  the  named  members  of  the
    committee were on the ROHR website.

 8. On the issue of risk on return, the case law of EM & Others (Returnees)
    Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) found that the evidence did  not  show
    that, as a general matter, the return of a failed  asylum  seeker  from
    the UK, having no significant MDC profile, would result in that  person
    facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the Zanu-PF.  In
    addition, a returnee to Harare would in  general  face  no  significant
    difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density area.

 9. It was noted that she claimed to be from  Marondera,  which  background
    information showed was in Mashonaland East.   The  Country  Information
    report on Zimbabwe dated January 2017 did not indicate that there would
    be any risk on return to this part of Zimbabwe.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. Both parties were legally represented before  Judge  Rothwell.  In  her
    subsequent decision,  the  Judge  found  that  the  claimant  had  been
    involved in the ROHR and the vigil, and she had seen photographs of her
    attending.  The Presenting Officer did not dispute that  she  had  been
    involved, but disputed the frequency of her attendance.  The claimant's
    partner, SN, confirmed that they attended every week.  There was also a
    letter from Rose Benton, Zimbabwe Vigil Coordinator, who confirmed  the
    claimant's association with them.  The Judge accepted that the claimant
    could be found online, although she had not  produced  any  screenshots
    that showed her picture and her name together.

11. On the issue of risk on return,  the  Judge  found  that  although  the
    claimant  had  not  been  a  member  or  even  involved  in  the   MDC,
    demonstrating outside the Zimbabwean Embassy "on a very regular  basis"
    and being involved in the ROHR  would  be  enough  for  the  Zimbabwean
    Government  to  assume  or  perceive  that  she  opposed  the   current
    Government.

12. She considered that the claimant would be at risk  in  her  home  area.
    She found that her absence for some 14 years would attract the interest
    of the Zanu-PF.  She would be unable to  show  her  allegiance  to  the
    Government, as she had been away for so long.  Accordingly,  she  would
    be at risk of serious harm.

13. She had considered whether she could relocate within Zimbabwe, but  she
    was a pregnant woman who suffered from HIV and had no family support in
    Zimbabwe.  Accordingly, it would be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  her  to
    relocate, especially when she had been away for so long.



The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, there  was  no  appearance  by  the  claimant,  or  by  her  legal
    representative, Mr A Billie of A Billie Law Ltd,  who  had  represented
    her before the First-tier Tribunal.  There was, however, an  appearance
    by the claimant's partner, SN, who had given evidence in support of her
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. SN produced a letter dated 22 November 2018 which had  been  signed  by
    the claimant.  She had noticed that  the  Department  was  not  arguing
    against the ruling on Article 8 grounds.  Considering the stance  taken
    by the Department, she asked to be  excused  from  the  hearing  on  30
    November 2018.  She did not have anyone to look after their baby in her
    absence.  She continued: "Since I no longer oppose the application made
    by the Home Office, I have informed my  legal  representatives  not  to
    appear on my behalf on 30 November 2018."

16. However, in my file there was a Rule 24 response dated 19 November 2018
    from Mr Billie making detailed submissions as to why  the  decision  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  disclose  any  error  of  law,  and
    submitting that the grounds of appeal to the UT were nothing more  than
    an attempt to re-argue the appeal.

Discussion

17. It is strongly arguable that the claimant has conceded the error of law
    challenge of the Department, as  her  letter  post-dates  the  Rule  24
    Response opposing it. But in case she has not, I address the  error  of
    law challenge on its merits.

18. In reaching her conclusions on risk on return, the Judge relied on  the
    country guidance given in CM (Zimbabwe) which reflected the position as
    it stood in October 2012, which was over 5 years before the date of the
    hearing of the appellant's appeal in the First-tier Tribunal.

19. As highlighted in the Department's grounds of appeal, paragraph (3)  of
    the  headline  guidance  in  CM  (Zimbabwe)  states  as  follows:  "The
    situation is not uniform across  the  rural  areas  and  there  may  be
    reasons why a particular individual, at first sight appearing  to  fall
    within the category described in the preceding  paragraph,  in  reality
    does not do so.  For example, the evidence might disclose that  in  the
    home village Zanu-PF power structures or other means  of  coercion  are
    weak or absent."

20. In support of the case that Judge Rothwell  had  failed  to  factor  in
    "where the claimant is actually from in the analysis of risk," Ms  Kiss
    submitted an undated printout from the  internet  reporting  an  upbeat
    message from the new Mayor for Marondera.  He is quoted as saying  that
    they have one Zanu-PF councillor and 11 from the MDC Alliance, but they
    are not going to segregate their Zanu-PF colleague.  While the majority
    of councillors are affiliated to the MDC Alliance, this does  not  mean
    they will not work together peacefully to develop their town.

21. It is not shown that this particular piece of evidence was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, but it illuminates the fact that it was inherently
    unsatisfactory for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to base her assessment
    of risk on return to the appellant's home area on the general situation
    in rural areas as it stood in October 2012, and not to engage with  the
    background evidence cited in the refusal decision  that  the  political
    climate in the appellant's home area had improved as of 2017.

22. I also do not consider that the Judge's finding  on  the  viability  of
    internal relocation was adequately  reasoned.   Although  she  was  HIV
    positive, the Judge rightly held that this did  not  give  rise  to  an
    Article 3 medical claim.  Although she was pregnant,  this  argued  for
    her removal being delayed until she had given birth (depending  on  the
    stage  of  her  pregnancy),  rather  than  establishing  that  internal
    relocation was an unduly harsh option. In finding that the claimant did
    not have any family support in Zimbabwe, the Judge does not  appear  to
    have applied Devaseelan and taken as her starting point the findings of
    Judge Walker on this issue in his determination of 28  June  2011.   He
    held that the claimant still had her  closest  relatives  in  Zimbabwe,
    namely her mother and her sisters.  In addition, the  appellant's  case
    before her was that she was in a durable relationship with SN, a  claim
    which the Judge accepted, but she nonetheless fails  to  entertain  the
    likelihood of SN supporting the appellant financially in Zimbabwe in  a
    place of relative safety, such as Harare, if she were to be removed.

23. Of course this was all theoretical, as  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
    claimant had established family life in the UK  with  SN  and  his  two
    daughters by a previous relationship, and that it would be contrary  to
    the best interests of his  children  for  the  claimant  to  return  to
    Zimbabwe to obtain entry clearance.

24. While the Judge gave adequate reasons for finding  that  requiring  the
    claimant to return to Zimbabwe to obtain entry  clearance  would  be  a
    disproportionate outcome justifying the claimant being granted  Article
    8 relief outside the Rules, the Judge did not give adequate reasons for
    finding that the claimant met the more  onerous  test  of  establishing
    that internal relocation would be unduly harsh. (By the same token, the
    Judge did not give adequate reasons for finding that the  claimant  met
    the requirements of Rule 276ADE(1)(vi). But this is  academic,  as  the
    claimant succeeds under Article 8 outside the Rules.)

25. Accordingly, the decision on the protection claim and the  claim  under
    Article 3 ECHR is vitiated by an error of law, such that it must be set
    aside and remade. The extent of the fact-finding that will be  required
    means that the First-tier Tribunal is  a  more  appropriate  forum  for
    remaking.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  claimant's  appeal  on
human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds did not contain an error of  law,  and
accordingly the decision stands.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
allowing the claimant's appeal on protection grounds and/or under Article  3
ECHR contained an error of law, and accordingly the decision is  set  aside.
The claimant's appeal  on  these  grounds  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal  at  Hatton  Cross  for  a  de   novo   hearing   (Judge   Rothwell
incompatible).

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the Department.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 5 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


























