
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09195/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th September 2017                       |On 10th  January 2018         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     FF
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr. S Tettey; Counsel instructed by Broudie
                  Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr. J Harrison; Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies
       to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
       direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


    2. This is an appeal against a decision by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Brookfield promulgated on 7th February 2017.


 Background


    3. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.   She arrived in the  UK
       on 4th August 2011 with her husband ("HF"), her son ("AS")  who  was
       born on [ ] 2010, and her brother-in-law ("DF").  She has a daughter
       ("SF") who was born in the UK on [ ] 2013.   The appellant's husband
       has previously claimed asylum and the appellant  and  her  son  were
       named as dependant's.  That claim for  asylum  was  refused  by  the
       respondent on 16th June 2014.  The appeal  against  the  refusal  of
       that claim was dismissed by FtT Judge Birrell following a hearing on
       30th October 2014, but HF was granted permission to  appeal  to  the
       Upper Tribunal.  For the reasons set out in a  decision  promulgated
       on 16th September 2015, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lever  found
       there to be no material error of law in the decision  of  FtT  Judge
       Birrell, and upheld the decision of the FtT  Judge.   Permission  to
       appeal to the Court of Appeal was refused by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Kebede on 9th November 2015.


    4. It is useful to note at this stage that a summary of the claim  made
       by the appellant's husband is to be found at paragraph [16]  of  the
       decision of FtT Judge  Birrell.   The  account  relied  upon  by  HF
       included a claim that on 2nd April 2011,  the  appellant  here,  was
       given what appeared to be a wedding invitation but it was a  warning
       letter saying that they knew who her husband was, and that he worked
       in the UK Embassy.  The letter also claimed that they knew that  the
       appellant's brother-in-law DF was also working for  foreigners,  and
       that they should resign and await punishment.  The appellant did not
       give evidence before FtT Judge Birrell. The findings and conclusions
       of FtT Judge Birrell are to be found at paragraphs [33] to  [48]  of
       her decision.  For present purposes, it suffices to  note  that  FtT
       Judge Birrell accepted, at paragraph [43] of her decision, that  the
       appellant's husband had received a letter  from  the  Taliban  dated
       29th August 2008 and then another one on 2nd April 2011.  FtT  Judge
       Birrell found that the claim made by the appellant's husband that he
       also received threatening phone calls between the two letters, to be
       an embellishment.  At paragraphs [44] to [46] of her  decision,  FtT
       Judge Birrell stated:


             "44. I am therefore satisfied that between the dates of  these
             two letters the Appellant had?no direct  or  indirect  contact
             from the Taliban in spite of the fact  that  he  continued  to
             work for the British Embassy, apparently travelled  on  public
             transport to work and did not change his  address.  Given  the
             background material above and the number of people who  worked
             for ISAF I am satisfied  that  the  Taliban  did  indeed  view
             people such as the Appellant as  low-level  collaborators  and
             therefore did not take  direct  action  against  him  although
             clearly they had the opportunity to do so.


             45.  I also note that although the Appellant  states  that  he
             received a second threatening   letter  from  the  Taliban  in
             April 2011 he nevertheless continued to work  at  the  Embassy
             until 18 July 2011 without incident and took the time to  sell
             his property before fleeing. Again I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Taliban had the opportunity to take direct action against  the
             Appellant during this period but did not do so which  suggests
             that the Appellants profile is not such  as  to  lead  to  the
             Taliban to carry out their threats.


             46.  I also note that those members of the Appellant's  family
             who have remained in Afghanistan have had no problems from the
             Taliban and therefore the Appellant and his family would  have
             support on return."


    5. I pause at this juncture to also note that the appellant's  brother-
       in-law, DF, had also made separate a claim for  asylum.   His  claim
       for asylum was refused by the respondent and an appeal was dismissed
       by FtT Judge Turquet on 2nd September 2011.  He was removed from the
       UK on 20th September 2011.


    6. On 19th February 2016, the  appellant  claimed  asylum  in  her  own
       right, naming her husband and their two children as her  dependants.
       The claim was refused on 12th August 2016.  It is  the  decision  of
       FtT Judge Brookfield in which she dismissed the appellant's  appeal,
       that is the subject of the appeal before me.


 The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    7. The appellant attended the hearing of her appeal before  the  First-
       tier  Tribunal.   She  was  represented  and  gave  evidence.    The
       appellant's husband was not called to give evidence. The Judge  sets
       out the background to the appeal before her at paragraphs [1] to [3]
       of her decision.   A  summary  of  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
       evidence before the FtT is to be  found  at  paragraph  [9]  of  the
       Judge's decision.   The  Judge  records  at  paragraphs  [9(ii)]  to
       [9(iv)] of her decision as follows:


             "The appellant claims that her family  have  warned  her  that
             they will kill her, her husband and  their  children  if  they
             return to Afghanistan because they believe she and her husband
             have converted to Christianity because  her  husband  used  to
             work for the British embassy. She claims her  father  believes
             that the UK authorities have brought  the  appellant  and  her
             family to the UK as spies and that they are in  the  UK  on  a
             mission.


             The appellant also claims that her family have  threatened  to
             kill her because she sent two photographs of herself and  with
             her husband to her sister in Kabul, which her sister showed to
             their father. The appellant's father has noted that she is not
             wearing a hijab in either photograph and she and  her  husband
             are standing outside a church in the UK. He has concluded  the
             appellant and her husband have converted to Christianity.  The
             appellant claims her father is very religious and  would  kill
             her on her return to Afghanistan.


             The appellant claims that she and her husband would be  unable
             to rely on support from her husband's  family,  as  they  have
             been  shown  the  photographs  and  have  reached   the   same
             conclusion as her family."


    8. The Judge records her findings and conclusions at paragraph [10]  of
       her decision.  The Judge found that the appellant is a  national  of
       Afghanistan and upon return, would have the protection  and  support
       of her husband.  She would not therefore be at risk of gender  based
       harm on return at the hands of her father or anyone else.  The Judge
       found that the appellant's claim that her father wishes to kill  her
       husband because he believes he has converted to  Christianity  as  a
       result of his work as an interpreter at the British  Embassy,  lacks
       credibility and merit. She did not believe it.


    9. As for the photographs that the appellant claimed to  have  sent  to
       her sister, the Judge found, at [10(xi)], that  it  was  implausible
       that she would send two photographs to her sister in  which  she  is
       not wearing a hijab or that she would  write  on  the  back  of  the
       photographs that she is at a party and standing  outside  a  church.
       The Judge found the appellant's account to be incredible and did not
       believe  it.  The  Judge  concluded  the  appellant  has  failed  to
       establish there is a reasonable likelihood that she sent photographs
       to her sister in Afghanistan which  show  the  appellant  without  a
       hijab outside a church in  Liverpool,  or  at  a  party.  The  Judge
       rejected the claim  that  the  appellant's  father  has  seen  these
       photographs, or threatened to kill her and her husband, or  that  he
       believes she and her husband are Christian converts.  The Judge went
       on to find  that  even  if  the  appellant's  father  has  seen  the
       photographs, it is not credible that he would reach  the  conclusion
       that the appellant and her  husband  are  Christian  converts.   The
       appellant and her husband remain Muslims and have not  converted  to
       Christianity and whilst her father might not accept what is said  by
       the appellant, there is no evidence to suggest that the  appellant's
       father would not accept the word of the man that he had selected  to
       marry the appellant.


   10. At paragraph [10(xvi)], the Judge states:


             "I noted that the appellant and her husband sold their home in
             Kabul before they  came  to  the  UK.  I  find  this  strongly
             suggests that the appellant has never  had  any  intention  of
             returning to  Afghanistan  with  her  family,  even  when  her
             husband's asylum appeal rights were exhausted in late 2015.  I
             therefore cannot discount the probability that this  appellant
             has invented an asylum claim simply to prevent  or  delay  her
             and her family's removal from the UK."





The appeal before me


   11. The appellant contends that the  FtT  Judge  has  made  a  number  of
       material errors in paragraph [10] of her decision that have adversely
       affected the outcome of the appeal.  It is said that in a  number  of
       respects, the Judge has omitted to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the
       findings made, and she has misdirected herself in relation  to  legal
       and factual matters relating to the appeal. The errors relied upon by
       the appellant are  identified  in  paragraphs  [6]  to  [13]  of  the
       appellant's Grounds for permission to  appeal,  dated  21st  February
       2017.


   12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mailer
       on 5th June 2017.  He noted that it is arguable that  the  Judge  did
       not properly consider the evidence as to  the  current  risk  to  the
       appellant given the  passage  of  time  that  has  passed  since  her
       husband's earlier appeal, and that it  is  arguable  that  there  was
       inadequate reasoning supporting  her  finding  that  the  appellant's
       family  would    be     supportive     on     their     return     to
       Afghanistan.


   13. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response dated 16th June 2017. The
       appeal is opposed. The respondent submits  that  the  FtT  Judge  has
       given sufficient reasons as to why she concludes that  the  appellant
       would not be at risk from her family and that in any  event,  as  the
       Judge found, it is open to the appellant and her family to internally
       relocate in Afghanistan.  The respondent submits that the appellant's
       grounds of appeal amount to a disagreement with the  outcome  of  the
       appeal.


Discussion


   14. I remind myself of the observations made by Mr. Justice Hadon-Cave in
       Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


             "It is generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier
             Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in
             a case. This leads  to  judgments  becoming  overly  long  and
             confused and is  not  a  proportionate  approach  to  deciding
             cases. It is, however, necessary for judges  to  identify  and
             resolve key conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and
             brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can  understand
             why they have won or lost."


   15. I have also had regard to the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
       Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  IAC
       where it was stated in the head note that:


           "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief  explanation  of
           the conclusions on the central issue  on  which  the  appeal  is
           determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the  decision
           makes sense, having regard  to  the  material  accepted  by  the
           judge."


   16. The appellant gave evidence before the FtT  and  the  Judge  had  the
       advantage of hearing the evidence of the appellant. It is unfortunate
       that the appellant did not  give  evidence  at  the  hearing  of  her
       husband's appeal, and that her husband did not give evidence  at  the
       hearing of her appeal.  At paragraph [10], the  Judge  confirms  that
       she has taken account of all the evidence and has considered  all  of
       the evidence in the round before making  her  findings.  Having  made
       that clear, there is no reason for me to believe  that  she  did  not
       adopt that approach.


   17. The first criticism made of the decision of the FtT Judge is that  at
       paragraph [10(vi)], the Judge's finding that it is  implausible  that
       the appellant's father would risk detriment to himself by harming the
       appellant or her family, is unreasoned.  I  reject  that  claim.   At
       paragraphs [10(iv)] to [10(vi)], the Judge  carefully  considers  the
       evidence relating to the work  of  the  appellant's  husband  at  the
       British Embassy in Kabul, the background to the appellant's  marriage
       to her husband, and the fact that the appellant and her husband  were
       able to live in Afghanistan in  the  same  city  as  the  appellant's
       parents until the appellant left Afghanistan. At paragraph  [10(vi)],
       the Judge puts the appellant's claim in context, and in  my  judgment
       it was open to the Judge to conclude that that aspect of the claim is
       implausible.


   18. The second criticism made by  the  appellant  is  that  at  paragraph
       [10(vii)], the Judge adopted the previous finding made by  FtT  Judge
       Birrell that  the  appellant's  husband  is  considered  a  low-level
       collaborator and would not be at risk upon return to  Kabul,  without
       undertaking her own assessment of the current risk to  the  appellant
       given the passage of time.  In AA Somalia -v- SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
       1040, the Court of Appeal held that the guidelines in Devaseelan,  on
       the weight to be attached on a second appeal by the same applicant to
       the findings of the adjudicator who had rejected  his  first  appeal,
       had been extended by the case of GO (Columbia) -v-  SSHD  [2007]  Imm
       A.R. 225 to apply to a case  where  the  earlier  decision  involved
       different  parties  but  where  there  was  "a  material  overlap  of
       evidence", meaning that the applications had arisen out of  the  same
       factual matrix. In such a case, the earlier decision was not  binding
       in the technical sense of issue estoppel or res judicata, but was the
       starting point and should be followed in the absence of a  very  good
       reason not to do so. In applying the guidelines  to  cases  involving
       different applicants there  might  be  a  valid  distinction  if  the
       earlier decision was in favour of the SSHD, as she would have been  a
       party to the previous proceedings and the  applicant  may  have  been
       only a witness, and it would be unfair to prevent an  applicant  from
       relitigating the issue, if he had not been a  party  to  the  earlier
       decision.  Mr Tettey accepts that the Devalseelan principles form the
       starting point, but submits that as this is an appeal by a  different
       individual, it was incumbent upon the Judge  to  carry  out  her  own
       analysis as to the risk upon return.


   19. At paragraph [10(vii)] of  her  decision,  the  Judge  addresses  the
       question of whether the appellant would be at risk  of  harm  at  the
       hands of the Taliban.  As to that aspect of  the  appellant's  claim,
       there had been no new evidence and no reason for  the  Judge  not  to
       follow the earlier decision.  The appellant's  claim  for  protection
       was based upon events that did not form part of the claim made by the
       appellant's husband  and  in  my  judgement,  a  careful  reading  of
       paragraphs  [10(ii)]  to  [10(xxvi)]  demonstrates  that  the   Judge
       carefully considered the claim now being made by the  appellant,  and
       by undertaking  her  own  assessment  of  the  current  risk  to  the
       appellant and her family.  It follows that  I  reject  the  criticism
       made by the appellant as to the Judge's approach.


   20. The third criticism made of the decision of the FtT Judge is that  at
       paragraph  [10(xii)],  the  Judge  provides  inadequate  reasons  for
       rejecting the appellant's account on the basis that she did not  find
       it credible that the appellant's father would not accept  an  account
       relayed by the appellant's husband.  The appellant  claims  that  the
       Judge erred by omitting to consider the position of  the  appellant's
       husband as to the information he could relay.  The  fourth  criticism
       made by the appellant is that at paragraph [10(xii)], the Judge erred
       in finding that it is "highly probable" that the  appellant's  family
       would  be  supportive  of  the  appellant  were  she  to  return   to
       Afghanistan.  It is submitted by the appellant that the Judge  offers
       no reason  why  she  finds  that  the  appellant's  family  would  be
       supportive upon their return to Afghanistan.  Mr Tettey submits  that
       the use of the phrase "highly probable"  at  paragraph  [10(xii)]  is
       unfortunate, and that the finding of the Judge was one that  was  not
       open to the Judge when there was no evidence that the appellant,  her
       husband and their children would  be  supported  by  the  appellant's
       family, and against the backdrop of a claim in  which  the  appellant
       claims to be at risk from her family.


   21. I reject the  criticisms  made  by  the  appellant  as  to  paragraph
       [10(xii)] of the decision. At paragraph [10(xi)] of her decision, the
       Judge concludes that the appellant has failed to establish that there
       is a reasonable likelihood that  she  sent  the  photographs  to  her
       sister  in  Afghanistan.   The  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
       appellant's father has seen the photographs or threatened to kill the
       appellant and her husband, or that he believed the appellant and  her
       husband are Christian converts.  The appellant's husband did not give
       evidence. At paragraph [10(xii)] of her decision, the Judge correctly
       notes that there was no evidence adduced before her to  suggest  that
       the appellant's father would not accept the word of the man  that  he
       selected to marry the appellant.  The Judge cannot be criticised  for
       omitting to consider the position of the appellant's  husband  as  to
       the information he could relay,  when  he  was  not  called  to  give
       evidence.  The finding of the FtT Judge that the  appellant  and  her
       husband would not be at risk of harm at the hands of  her  father  as
       perceived Christians and  that  it  is  "highly  probable"  that  the
       appellant's family would provide support to  the  appellant  and  her
       family on return to Afghanistan was one that was,  in  my  judgement,
       open to the Judge. The decision of the FtT Judge as  to  whether  the
       appellant's family would provide support cannot be read in isolation,
       and must be considered in light of  the  prior  findings  made.   The
       decision must be read as a whole, and when properly read, it is clear
       that the Judge rejected the appellant's claim  that  she  is  a  risk
       because her father believes the  appellant  and  her  husband  to  be
       converts to Christianity. The Judge rejected  the  account  that  the
       appellant's father has seen the photographs or threatened to kill the
       appellant and her husband. Having made those findings as to the  core
       of the appellant's account, the conclusion reached by the Judge  that
       the  appellant's  family  would  provide   support   on   return   to
       Afghanistan, was one that in my judgement, was open to the  Judge  on
       the evidence.


   22. The fifth criticism made  by  the  appellant  is  that  at  paragraph
       [10(xvi)] of her decision, the Judge provides inadequate reasons  for
       finding that the sale of the appellant's family home in Kabul  before
       they came to the UK, strongly suggests that the appellant  has  never
       had any intention  of  returning  to  Afghanistan  with  her  family.
       Again, the decision must be read as a whole.  In looking at the claim
       as a whole, it was open to the Judge  to  note  that  she  could  not
       discount the probability that the appellant has  invented  an  asylum
       claim simply to prevent or delay her and her  family's  removal  from
       the UK.


   23. The sixth criticism made  by  the  appellant  is  that  at  paragraph
       [10(xvii)] of her decision, the Judge provides  inadequate  reasoning
       and misdirected herself as to the evidence by conflating the  factual
       account offered by the appellant and  the  opinion  offered  by  her.
       Again, I reject that criticism. Paragraphs [10(vii)]  and  [10(viii)]
       must  be  read  together.  It  is  clear  that  the  Judge  carefully
       considered the history of the claim and it was open to the  Judge  to
       find that the appellant's delay in making her  claim  undermines  the
       credibility of her claim, when assessing the claim as a whole.


   24. Finally, the appellant claims that the Judge erred in her  assessment
       as to the availability of internal relocation.  The appellant submits
       that the Judge does not address the difficulties that  the  appellant
       and her husband would have,  as  perceived  Christian  converts  more
       widely, in light of the claim that  their  perceived  conversion  has
       been dispersed amongst their  known  relatives  in  Afghanistan.  The
       appellant also submits that the Judge makes no adequate finding as to
       whether it would  be  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to  return  to
       Afghanistan with her husband to areas outside of  Kabul,  where  they
       may be perceived as low-level collaborators.  I  reject  this  ground
       too. The appellant seeks to ignore the findings made by the Judge  as
       to the core of the appellant's account.  Notwithstanding the  Judge's
       rejection of the core  of  the  appellant's  account,  at  paragraphs
       [10(xx)]  to  [10(xxvi)]  of  her  decision,  the   Judge   carefully
       considered whether the appellant and her family  could  live  outside
       Kabul. At paragraph [10(xxi)], the  Judge  expressly  considered  the
       applicant's claim that her and her husband's families would find them
       and kill them wherever they went  in  Afghanistan.  In  reaching  her
       decision, the Judge had  regard  to  the  relevant  Country  Guidance
       decisions and the objective evidence.


   25. In my judgement, the Judge carefully considered the  evidence  before
       her. It is now well established that although there is a  legal  duty
       to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on the  central  issue
       on which  the  appeal  is  determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be
       extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense,  having  regard  to
       the material accepted by the Judge.  It is equally  well  established
       that a finding might only be set  aside  for  error  of  law  on  the
       grounds of perversity if it was irrational  or  unreasonable  in  the
       Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.
       On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at first
       instance, unless it really cannot  understand  the  original  judge's
       thought process when the Judge was making material  findings.   Here,
       it cannot be said that  the  Judge's  analysis  of  the  evidence  is
       irrational  or  perverse.  The  Judge  did  not  consider  irrelevant
       factors, and the weight that she  attached  to  the  evidence  either
       individually or cumulatively, was a matter for her.  I  am  satisfied
       that the Judge's findings are sufficiently reasoned, and it was  open
       to her on the evidence, to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given.




   26. In my judgement, it was open to  the  Judge  to  conclude,  that  the
       appellant has not discharged the burden of proving  a  well-  founded
       fear of persecution for a Convention reason.   It  follows  that  the
       appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


   27. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date       6th January 2018



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


No fee is payable and there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date    6th January 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




