
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/09523/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent |     Determination Promulgated       |
|On 10th November 2017                  |     On 21st November 2017           |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    R U A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Thelma Ihebuzor (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Butler, promulgated on 16th May 2017, following a  hearing  at  Sheldon
    Court on 24th May 2017.  In the determination, the judge dismissed  the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.







The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Nigeria, and was born  on  15th
    September 1980.  She arrived  in  the  UK  having  been  granted  entry
    clearance as a dependant on her husband's student visa, valid from 20th
    September 2007 until 31st October 2008.  On  14th  December  2007,  she
    gave birth to her  daughter  in  Coventry.   Following  this,  on  17th
    October 2008 she made an application for leave to remain in the UK as a
    dependent spouse, which was granted on 17th November  2008.   This  was
    valid until 31st January 2010.  Thereafter, further extensions of leave
    to remain were granted.  On 25th December 2011, she gave birth to  her
    first son and on 11th November 2013, she gave birth to another son.   A
    final decision with respect to her leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    family and private life grounds was refused on 5th March  2015.   There
    was no further right of appeal.

 3. On 5th February  2016,  however,  the  Appellant  made  an  asylum  and
    protection claim, alleging that she belongs to the Igbo tribe, and that
    she was circumcised when she was a child, and that she feared the  same
    fate awaited her daughter if she were to return to Nigeria.

The Refusal Letter

 4. The refusal letter explained why the Appellant's protection claim stood
    to be rejected.  It was not accepted that the Appellant's relatives and
    those of her husband insisted that their daughter undergo FGM.  She had
    returned to Nigeria following the death of her father  in  2009,  after
    all, and had stayed there for three weeks, and her daughter and husband
    remained in Nigeria for a month.  Second, it was noted that the  police
    were not informed  about  any  proposal  to  circumcise  her  daughter.
    Third, under federal law, Nigeria had outlawed the practice of  FGM  so
    that adequate remedies lay at hand for the Appellant's use  were  there
    to be such a threat.  Fourth, the Appellant failed to demonstrate  that
    there was a sustained and systemic failure of state protection.  Fifth,
    the Appellant could relocate internally to another part of Nigeria.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge, having heard the evidence noted that  the  Appellant  had  a
    degree in computer science from Nigeria and her husband had  an  MC  in
    engineering (paragraph 25).   The  judge  heard  submissions  that  the
    Appellant's failure to claim asylum early should not count  against  it
    (paragraph 30).  Thereafter,  the  judge  considered  the  question  of
    credibility (paragraph 34).  The judge did not find the Appellant to be
    credible (paragraph 36).  This was not least because the Appellant  had
    visited Nigeria (paragraph 37).  The Appellant had also failed to claim
    asylum at the earliest opportunity (paragraph 39).  Moreover, there was
    objective evidence that the practice of FGM had declined  substantially
    among the Igbo tribe (paragraph 40).  The judge concluded that this was
    a fabrication to bolster the Appellant's weak asylum  claim  (paragraph
    41).

 6. Thereafter, consideration was given to Article 8.  The judge  gave  the
    benefit of the doubt  to  the  Appellant  and  held,  contrary  to  the
    conclusion of the Secretary of State, that the Appellant's daughter had
    indeed lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  seven  years  immediately
    preceding the application (paragraph 44).  However, the Appellant could
    not succeed under  the  Rules.   This  is  because,  "her  husband  and
    children, being dependants in her claim, are not  British  citizens  or
    settled in the UK" (paragraph 45).  Consideration was thereafter  given
    to  the  position  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  regard   was
    specifically had to Section 55 of the BCIA 2009.   The  judge  observed
    that, as far as the children were concerned, "their best interests  are
    a primary consideration which may be outweighed by other countervailing
    factors" and that the best interests of  the  children  must  first  be
    established (paragraph 45).

 7. In looking at the position  of  the  Appellant's  daughter,  the  judge
    observed that she was now 9 years old, and had lived in the UK all  her
    life, the sons were aged 5 and 3 years,  and  regard  was  had  to  the
    leading case of Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197, where it was noted  that,
    "if both parents were being removed from the UK, the starting point was
    that the children should be removed with them" (paragraph 46).

 8. The judge took a nuanced approach observing that Azimi-Moayed suggested
    that it would be in the best interests of the Appellant's  daughter  to
    remain and be educated in the UK, but that would not necessarily be the
    case for her sons (paragraph 48).  It remained the case, however,  that
    all three of the Appellant's children required  the  support  of  their
    parents.  The balancing exercise, however, required account to be taken
    of public interest considerations as set out in  Section  117B  of  the
    NIAA 2002 (see paragraph 49).  Regard was had to the leading  cases  in
    the jurisdiction, namely those of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 44  and  EM
    (Lebanon) [2008] UKHL 64, so that the child's best interests cannot  be
    compromised by the misdemeanours of its  parents  (see  paragraph  50).
    The Secretary of State's IDI was  also  referred  which  contained  the
    statement that the longer a child has resided in the UK,  the  more  it
    will be the case that it will be unreasonable to expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK and strong reasons will be required in order to  refuse  a
    case with continuous UK residence of more than seven  years  (paragraph
    50).

 9. As against all of the above,  the  judge  observed  that  the  family's
    immigration status as overstayers counted against the  Appellant.   The
    parents were well educated to degree level.  Their qualifications would
    secure them employment in Nigeria.  They had returned to Nigeria.   The
    Appellant's husband had returned on three occasions since the birth  of
    their daughter.  There was an education system in Nigeria.   They  have
    many siblings between them in Nigeria (paragraph 51).

10. Evaluating the circumstances as a whole, the judge observed that,  "the
    question of reasonableness in this appeal is not an easy one", but that
    it would be reasonable to expect the Appellant's daughter to leave  the
    UK with the rest of the family (paragraph 54).   A  balancing  exercise
    had to be undertaken to ensure that the decision  was  a  proportionate
    one.  Regard was had to Lord Bingham's five step approach in Razgar, so
    that it would be necessary to effect the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State in the interests of the economic wellbeing of the  UK  (paragraph
    55).  The interference was legitimate and proportionate (paragraph 56).



11. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application state that the Tribunal erred in  coming  to
    the decision that it did given Section 55 of the BCIA 2009.  The  judge
    did not take proper regard of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.  Article 8
    had also not been properly evaluated.

13. On 7th September 2017, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal
    on the basis that the judge, having found (at paragraphs  44  and  46),
    that the Appellant's eldest child had resided in the UK for  more  than
    seven years, it was arguable that, in the light of the Court of  Appeal
    decision in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, that the judge had erred
    in law.

14. A Rule 24 response was entered on 18th September 2017.  First,  it  was
    stated that the judge had applied Section 117B correctly,  in  that  it
    would be reasonable for the  Appellant's  eldest  child  to  return  to
    Nigeria.  Furthermore, paragraph 59  of  the  determination  refers  to
    Section 117B(6) in a  manner  that  the  reasonableness  assessment  is
    properly  conducted.   Second,   the   judge   had   directed   himself
    appropriately.

Submissions

15. At the hearing before me, Ms Thelma Ihebuzor, appearing  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant, began by making an adjournment application on the  basis
    of an e-mail from the Appellant's husband, that this morning,  as  they
    were preparing to get the children  ready  for  school,  the  Appellant
    "developed a stabbing pain on the left side of the breast" and that  an
    ambulance had to be called, and that she was  driven  to  accident  and
    emergency services at the hospital.  Mr Bates, appearing on  behalf  of
    the Respondent submitted that he was aware as early as 9  o'clock  this
    morning that an adjournment application was to be made today.  I  asked
    Ms Ihebuzor, what  the  relevance  of  the  Appellant's  attendance  at
    today's hearing would be.  She submitted that she  could  proceed  with
    the submissions on the error of law, given that no evidence was  to  be
    called, without having the Appellant present at the hearing  today.   I
    concluded, bearing in mind the overriding interests, that reference  to
    a "stabbing pain on the left side of the breast" did not  suggest  that
    the Appellant could not attend this hearing today had she wanted to, or
    that she was incapacitated medically, in a manner which  prevented  her
    from doing so.  There was, in any event, no medical evidence,  and  not
    least, from the hospital. Ms Ihebuzor submitted that she  had  to  make
    the application quite simply because she had  been  instructed  by  her
    client to do so.  She was content to proceed.

16. In her submissions, Ms Ihebuzor submitted that there was only one issue
    before this Tribunal.  This was that the  Appellant's  eldest  daughter
    had been in the UK for seven years.  It was unreasonable now to  expect
    her to leave the UK and  return  with  her  parents  back  to  Nigeria.
    Second, however, there was the ancillary issue  of  the  risk  of  FGM,
    although permission had not been granted on this, and she would have to
    accept this.

17. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that the FGM issue could not be raised
    now because permission had not been granted on  this,  with  the  judge
    holding that there was no risk of  ill-treatment  in  Nigeria,  and  no
    exceptional circumstances being shown.  As for  the  Appellant's  child
    having been in the UK for seven years, the judge had given this  aspect
    of the case very careful and proper consideration.  First, he addressed
    this question head on at paragraph 45 of the  determination,  observing
    that the best interests of the child is a  primary  consideration,  but
    which may be outweighed by other countervailing factors.  He would have
    to accept that the Appellant's daughter was a "qualifying  child",  but
    there was an additional requirement of it being necessary to show  that
    it was not reasonable for the Appellant  to  leave  this  country.   At
    paragraph 46 the judge had regard to Azimi-Moayed, and the benefits  of
    children growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which  they
    belong.

18. Second, as against this, regard had to be had to Section 117B  and  the
    maintenance of immigration control.  The judge had explicit  regard  to
    the two prongs of Section 117B(6).  Reference was made to  there  being
    both a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship", as well as, ("it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK").

19. Third, the leading cases, in the form of ZH (Tanzania) and EM (Lebanon)
    were considered, and the Secretary of State's IDI which  observes  that
    the longer that the child has been in the UK the more the balance  will
    shift in terms of favouring the child remaining in this country  unless
    there are "strong reasons" to the contrary  (paragraph  50).   However,
    the parents were well  educated  middleclass  parents  with  university
    degrees and prospects of a real job  in  Nigeria  and  the  judge  made
    express reference to this at paragraph  51,  observing  also  that  the
    Appellant's husband had returned back on three separate  occasions,  so
    that there was clearly the possibility of adaptation to life there, for
    a diaspora community of people who  had  only  come  to  the  UK  on  a
    temporary basis.

20. Fourth, it is not the case that the only possible outcome for  a  child
    who has been in the UK for seven years is to sanction  their  right  to
    remain in this country.  Section 117B was not to this effect.

No Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  I come to  this
    view, fully recognising that  another  judge  may  well  have  taken  a
    different view of the  circumstances,  but  that  this  judge,  on  the
    evidence before the Tribunal, was entitled to come to the decision that
    the Tribunal did eventually come to.  It cannot be said that the  judge
    has overlooked any factual aspect of the claim.  It cannot be said that
    the judge has applied the  legal  authorities  in  this  case  wrongly.
    Indeed, there are two reasons why the approach of the judge falls to be
    upheld.

22. First, Section 117B expressly states that, bearing in mind  the  public
    interest in favour of immigration  control,  there  is  a  two  pronged
    approach to be satisfied, so that  it  is  necessary  to  show  both  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,
    as well as being able to show that it would not be reasonable to expect
    the child to leave the UK.

23. Second, the Court of Appeal's latest decision in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 and makes it quite clear that  had  parliament  wished  to
    direct the decision maker to the effect that any child who had been  in
    the UK for seven years should be allowed to remain in this country, the
    legislative intent would have plainly been so expressed.  It is not  so
    expressed.  It is expressed in the terms that it is.

24.  The  question  is  whether  the  judge  interpreted  the   legislative
    provisions in the correct way.  I can see no reason  to  conclude  that
    the judge made a material error in this respect.  The findings of  fact
    are ultimately for the judge and this  supervising  Tribunal  can  only
    intervene if there has been an error of law.

Notice of Decision

25. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

26. An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th November 2017




