
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09573/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by way of a remote hearing     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 21 May 2021                   |On the 07 June 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     Z B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L. Brakaj, of behalf of Iris Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ali  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
         "FtTJ") promulgated on the 2 October 2020, in which the appellant's
         appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection  claim  was
         dismissed.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took  place  on  21  May  2021,  by  a  remote  hearing
         conducted on Microsoft teams which has been consented  to  and  not
         objected to by the parties. A face- to- face hearing was  not  held
         because it was not practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all
         issues could be determined  in  a  remote  hearing.  The  advocates
         attended remotely via video as did the appellant who  was  able  to
         see and hear the proceedings. There were no issues regarding sound,
         and no technical problems were encountered during the hearing and I
         am satisfied both advocates were  able  to  make  their  respective
         cases by the chosen means.

Background:

      4. The appellant is a national of Georgia. His immigration history  is
         set out in the decision letter, the decision of the  FtTJ  and  the
         papers before the tribunal. It can be summarised as follows.

      5. The appellant arrived in the UK on 1 March 2016 and claimed  asylum
         on 22 March 2016. He arrived with his wife and his 3  children  who
         were minors at the time that the appellant claimed asylum, and  all
         4 family members were dependents upon his asylum claim.

      6. The basis of  that  claim  related  to  his  son  and  his  claimed
         sexuality. The account given by the appellant was that when his son
         was aged 10 or 11  the  problem  started  for  the  family  when  a
         neighbour had told his wife that he had seen his son  with  another
         boy together. Soon after this their son was bullied by locals.  The
         news relating to their son quickly spread and  he  was  bullied  on
         many occasions.

      7. It was said that the family moved away from the home area  in  2012
         but the problems followed them, and the same problems arose in that
         community.

      8. In 2014 the family moved to another part of Georgia where the  main
         appellant had been working however, they stayed  only  for  a  very
         short time due to the problems their  son  had.  As  people  spread
         information quickly it was said that his son was bullied  by  other
         children, teacher's, neighbours, and the police.

      9. A particular incident was relied upon that occurred  in  2016  when
         the main appellant was in London on business. He was  told  by  his
         wife that his son had been badly  beaten  by  his  schoolmates  and
         burned with a cigarette on his lip.  She  said  that  he  tried  to
         commit suicide. She also  told  him  that  her  daughter  had  been
         involved trying to help her brother and was pushed down the stairs.
         Her wrist had been broken. As a result, the main  appellant  stated
         that he would return to Georgia on the first available  flight.  He
         changed his ticket and returned home.

     10. A month after returning to Georgia, the main appellant brought  his
         family (his wife and 3 children) to the UK and  made  a  claim  for
         asylum based on the risk of persecution or serious harm to his  son
         as a result of his sexual orientation.

     11. In a decision letter of 7 October 2019, the  respondent  considered
         the basis of claim on the  basis  of  membership  of  a  particular
         social group (the appellant's son's sexuality). At paragraphs 28  -
         46  the  respondent  considered  the  evidence  presented  to   the
         Secretary of State to support the appellant's claim  that  his  son
         would be at risk of harm on account of his sexual orientation.

     12. The respondent set out the factual claim made by the  appellant  in
         the SEF and then undertook a consideration of the evidence provided
         by the appellant's son and from the  asylum  interview  which  took
         place on 6 September 2019 as permission had been given to  use  the
         information to decide the main appellant's claim.

     13. When making an assessment of that claim, the respondent set out the
         account given but highlighted within that  account  inconsistencies
         in  the  evidence.  For  example,  respondent  set  out  that   the
         appellant's son stated he told his parents  of  his  sexuality  but
         nobody else however  alternatively  he  stated  he  told  a  priest
         (question 45 - 46 and question 45). He also stated that he told his
         parents of his sexuality but did not remember what was said to  him
         in response (question 63). As to when incidents occurred whilst  at
         school, he stated that he was bullied  every  day  because  of  his
         sexuality (question 57 - 58) but at another part could not remember
         when the bullying started that believed it was around the age of 14
         but then stated it was before it was 14 but he could  not  remember
         how old he was (question 52). He did  not  know  how  the  boys  in
         school discovered his sexuality.

     14. The respondent also recorded that  when  the  appellant's  son  was
         asked to explain the reasons why he left Georgia he was recorded as
         saying that he "did not want to talk about his past" which  he  was
         trying to forget and when asked by the interviewing officer  if  he
         was happy to answer questions about his sexuality, the  appellant's
         son replied, "I don't want to talk about my personal life" (Q  65).
         The respondent set out in the decision letter at paragraphs 38 - 41
         the opportunities given to the appellant's son to provide  evidence
         at the interview which was declined. It was also noted at [41] that
         the interviewing officer gave the appellant's and  the  opportunity
         to put matters in writing or  to  write  a  statement  rather  than
         answer questions but that the appellant's son was not willing to do
         this.  In  the  light  of  the  lack  of  evidence  submitted,  the
         respondent concluded that  there  was  a  lack  of  information  to
         confirm the appellant's son's sexual orientation and  as  a  result
         that material fact was rejected.

     15. The remainder of the decision letter made reference to Section 8 of
         the 2004 Act relevant to the main appellant's claim that he arrived
         in the UK on 1 March 2016 and whilst he claimed that  he  travelled
         with the intention of escaping harm in Georgia and to claim asylum,
         he did not do so at the earliest opportunity. Reference was made at
         paragraph 49 that he made a claim for asylum after being notified a
         decision that he would be granted leave to  enter  the  UK  with  a
         multi-visit visa. The decision was made on 16 February 2016 and  he
         claimed asylum on 22 March 2016. It was recorded that his claim did
         not rely wholly on matters arising after he  was  notified  of  the
         decision and his failure to claim asylum before being  notified  of
         an immigration decision damaged his credibility.

     16. At paragraphs 54  -  64  the  respondent  addressed  the  issue  of
         sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  appellant's  son   and   the
         appellant's family  members  and  set  out  the  country  materials
         relevant to this issue. The respondent concluded that the appellant
         had failed to demonstrate that the authorities of Georgia would  be
         unable or unwilling to offer protection if it had been sought.

     17. At paragraph 65  -  75,  the  respondent  addressed  the  issue  of
         internal relocation and concluded  that  based  on  the  individual
         circumstances of the claim and on the background evidence, that the
         appellant had not shown that it would be unreasonable to expect the
         appellant's family members to return to Georgia or to  relocate  to
         one of the other areas outside of the capital city.

     18. The remainder of the decision letter related to article  8  of  the
         ECHR where it was noted that in the light of the  short  length  of
         residence in the  United  Kingdom  the  appellant  and  his  family
         members could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE nor was
         it accepted that they would be very significant obstacles to  their
         integration into Georgia if required to leave  the  United  Kingdom
         (at paragraph 94). At paragraphs 97 - 114 consideration  was  given
         to whether there are any unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the
         appellant's that would render refusal of their claim to be a breach
         of article 8. Having considered  the  relevant  considerations  the
         respondent  concluded  that  there   were   no   such   exceptional
         circumstances nor were there any such factors to demonstrate that a
         grant of discretionary leave should be given.

     19. Consequently, the claim was refused on protection and human  rights
         grounds.

The decision of the FtTJ:

     20. The appellant appealed that decision, and it came  before  the  FtT
         (Judge Ali) on 9 September 2020. In a  decision  promulgated  on  2
         October 2020, the FtTJ  dismissed  his  appeal.   The  judge  heard
         evidence from the appellant and also from his son.

     21. The FtTJ set out the relevant issues at [14] of  his  decision  and
         that the first  issue  related  to  the  appellant's  son's  sexual
         orientation.

     22. His analysis of the evidence and his factual findings on this issue
         are set out at paragraphs [30]-[41]. In  summary,  the  FtTJ  found
         that the evidence of  the  appellant  and  his  son  was  both  not
         credible and was  inconsistent  in  material  matters.  There  were
         discrepancies between the evidence given by the appellant  and  his
         son relating to when the appellant's began a  sexual  relationship,
         that there was an absence of evidence and information about who the
         perpetrators were and how  they  or  anyone  found  out  about  the
         appellant's  son  being  gay.  At  [34]  the  judge  set  out   the
         inconsistent evidence given by the appellant's son who claimed that
         he was unable to recall the names and faces of those who had beaten
         and bullied him however he also claimed that  after  reporting  the
         matter to the police they would speak to the parents of  the  boys.
         The judge found that this was inconsistent with his claim and  that
         the police would not be able to approach families  of  the  alleged
         perpetrators  if  their  identities  had  been   unknown   to   the
         appellant's son. The judge also considered the core  of  the  claim
         which was based on being at risk of harm in Georgia and  that  this
         had led to him moving home and school on 4 different occasions. The
         judge found that there were no letters from of any of  the  schools
         in Georgia to support his transfer to new schools and there was  no
         information as to which schools he went to or how long. Given  that
         the appellant provided an abundance of documents regarding finances
         and employment, it was noted that the appellant failed  to  provide
         any letters  from  the  school  and  this  undermined  the  account
         concerning the transfer of his son to  a  number  of  new  schools.
         Further factual findings were  made  relating  to  his  absence  of
         evidence concerning the nature of relationship he claimed  to  have
         had when in Georgia.

     23.  The  judge  therefore  concluded  that  the  appellant   had   not
         demonstrated his sexual orientation to the lower standard of proof.

     24. The FtTJ dismissed the appeal.

     25. Permission to appeal was issued relying on the  grounds  of  appeal
         and permission to appeal was refused by Judge Parkes but in renewal
         was granted by UTJ S. Smith on 26 November 2020.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     26. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on indicating that it was provisionally of the view that
         the error of law issue could be determined without a face- to- face
         hearing and directions were given for  a  remote  hearing  to  take
         place and that this could take place via Skype. Both  parties  have
         indicated that they were content for the hearing to proceed by this
         method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to  enable  oral
         submissions to be given by each of the parties with the  assistance
         of their advocates.

     27. Ms Brakaj on behalf  of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal. There was a Rule 24 response filed on behalf  of
         the respondent dated 1 February 2021.

     28. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

     29. Ms Brakaj in her  oral  submissions  relied  upon  her  grounds  at
         paragraph 4 where it was  submitted  that  the  assessment  of  the
         evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  son's  sexual  identity  was
         flawed. She submitted that at paragraph 32 of the  decision  whilst
         the judge stated he appreciated that the topic of his sexuality was
         sensitive, it was for the appellant to  establish  his  claim.  She
         submitted that this was the only reference to any  issue  that  the
         appellant's son had by way of difficulties or had faced. Thus,  she
         submitted that such an approach was incorrect where young  man  was
         discussing such sensitive issues and where he had been living in  a
         deeply homophobic area. She submitted that he had given evidence in
         his interview question 28 about events in Georgia and it was  clear
         that the appellant's son had been struggling to give evidence.

     30. Ms Brakaj submitted that while credibility was to  be  assessed  by
         the judge, he did not look at  the  full  picture  and  that  those
         within the LGBT community faced a lifetime of persecution.

     31. She further submitted that whilst it was not his asylum claim,  the
         appellant's son was dependent on his father's claim and that he had
         struggled to give information and that  this  ought  to  have  been
         taken account of during an assessment of  the  credibility  of  the
         claim.

     32. In any event she submitted, the appellant' son did give detail  and
         did confirm his sexual orientation and the difficulties that he had
         faced in Georgia, but the  judge  gave  no  consideration  to  that
         evidence.

     33. Ms Brakaj then referred to paragraph 33 of the decision of the FtTJ
         and  submitted  that  there  the  judge  had   stated   there   was
         inconsistent evidence given by the appellant  and  the  appellant's
         son. However, looking at paragraphs 33 and 36  there  was  no  such
         inconsistency on the evidence. Looking at the son's history it  was
         around the age of 13 that he discovered his sexuality and  that  he
         had engaged in a sexual relationship at the age of  10  however  he
         was looking back at the issue a number of years  later.  Ms  Brakaj
         submitted that this evidence was consistent with those  discovering
         their sexuality and their identity and that the judge  had  adopted
         an incorrect approach on that evidence of sexual identity.

     34. Dealing with the other grounds, it was submitted that the judge set
         out issues relating to corroboration  of  the  appellant's  account
         from the appellant school and that the judge failed  to  appreciate
         the nature of the appellant's  evidence  and  that  the  homophobic
         incidents had happened at the school. The appellant's son  and  the
         appellant were not able to say how the school had found  out  about
         the appellant's son's sexuality. Their account was that information
         may have been passed by the teachers, but no consideration of  that
         evidence was undertaken by the judge. She submitted that there were
         points put forward as to how it occurred and that  potentially  the
         could be a link between the church, but the appellant's father  did
         not know but it did  not  feature  in  the  judge's  assessment  at
         paragraph 34. She submitted that if they were not told by those who
         bullied or persecuted them, then they could not know in any  event.
         Against that background she submitted that it was not reasonable to
         expect the appellant's father to obtain information from the school
         and to expect letters in support (at paragraph 37 of the decision).

     35. By reference to the grounds  that  she  submitted  that  the  judge
         failed to place weight on the medical evidence in  support  of  the
         incident that occurred in 2016.  However,  the  evidence  from  the
         appellant's son was available and there  was  a  written  statement
         from the appellant's wife. The judge  had  reached  the  conclusion
         that as she was not in attendance at the  hearing  the  appellant's
         wife's evidence only merited little  weight.  Ms  Brakaj  submitted
         that this was insufficient. All the judge had  stated  was  a  bald
         assertion that the written evidence was not accepted.

     36. Ms Brakaj submitted that there were other minor  issues  identified
         by the judge when refusing the claim set out at paragraph  37,  but
         those minor issues were insufficient to decide the case against the
         appellant.

     37. As regards paragraph 38 she submitted it was of particular  concern
         and that the judge placed weight on the fact that he was not  in  a
         relationship in the UK.  However,  that  does  not  mean  that  the
         appellant was not gay and was a neutral point. She  submitted  that
         this was not the correct approach and that the fact  there  was  no
         evidence he had a partner could not be considered in the negative.

     38. In summary she submitted in finding that the  appellant's  son  was
         not gay, the judge gave no consideration to  the  overall  evidence
         and whilst he criticised evidence that  was  missing,  he  did  not
         consider the evidence  that  was  there.  They  had  been  detailed
         evidence given. Thus, she submitted the approach  to  the  evidence
         was flawed and demonstrated a lack of consideration.

     39. Ms Pettersen on behalf of the respondent relied upon  the  rule  24
         response filed on 1 February 2021.

     40.  She  submitted  that  the  judge   gave   consideration   to   the
         circumstances of the appellant's son and had regard and  explicitly
         referred to the fact that he was aware of the difficulties a person
         may have when discussing the topic of their  sexuality.  Thus,  the
         judge did give consideration to the difficulties a person may  face
         in disclosing sensitive issue. However, the judge then went  on  to
         consider factors in the appellant's claim  before  concluding  that
         the nondisclosure was a matter relevant to his credibility. It  was
         further submitted that the judge was entitled to have regard to the
         circumstances overall and the number of opportunities in  different
         forums in which the appellant's son had the opportunity to disclose
         the basis of the claim but that the judge was able to find that his
         actions had an adverse impact on his credibility.  It  was  further
         submitted that the finding was in no way determinative of the claim
         overall and the judge went on to consider the appellant's claim and
         provided adequate reasons to enable the appellant to understand why
         his claim failed.

     41. In her oral submissions Ms Pettersen  submitted  that  the  grounds
         were a challenge  to  the  credibility  findings.  In  relation  to
         paragraph 11 of the grounds, it was stated that little  weight  was
         placed on the appellant's wife's evidence.  However,  she  did  not
         give evidence orally before the judge  and  thus  it  was  untested
         evidence. Furthermore, an explanation was given as to why  she  was
         not at the hearing, but that explanation was not  accepted  by  the
         judge.

     42. Paragraph 9  of  the  grounds  argued  that  the  identity  of  the
         perpetrators was not known but  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
         children had to change school  and  the  issue  about  whether  the
         police could be approached and therefore the judge was entitled  to
         consider the police and whether they were inactive or not and there
         was no evidence the police had been  approached  as  those  persons
         concerned could not be identified.

     43. Paragraph 10 criticised the findings made  concerning  the  injury,
         but it was open to the judge to conclude that the medical  evidence
         did not confirm the cause of the injury that it was open to him not
         to give weight to that medical evidence

     44. As to the grounds where it was asserted  that  the  judge  required
         corroboration, that was not reflected in the decision and the judge
         did not require corroboration.

     45. Overall, she submitted the judge had given  full  consideration  to
         all  the  evidence  and  the  grounds  were  nothing  more  than  a
         disagreement with those factual findings.

     46. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my  decision  which  I
         now give.

Decision on error of law:

     47. The first issue  raised  in  the  grounds  relates  to  the  FtTJ's
         assessment of the evidence and in particular that which related  to
         the appellant's son's sexual identity. The  grounds  and  the  oral
         submissions assert that the judge erred in law in his assessment of
         the appellant's son's credibility based  on  his  unwillingness  to
         answer questions about his sexuality in the asylum interview.

     48. Ms Brakaj  submits  that  the  appellant  had  provided  a  witness
         statement subsequent to the interview and had given evidence at the
         hearing. Furthermore, there was no consideration by the judge as to
         how an applicant might feel in discussing details relating  to  the
         claim and that the difficulties in this regard  were  not  properly
         taken into account by the judge.

     49. I have carefully  considered  the  grounds  in  the  light  of  the
         evidence and the decision of the FtTJ. Having done  so,  I  am  not
         satisfied that the judge fell into error in  the  way  the  grounds
         assert. At [14] the judge set out the issue to be determined in the
         appeal and the principal issue was whether the appellant's son  was
         gay and therefore the evidence relating to his  sexual  orientation
         was central to that assessment.

     50. In my view it is not correct to  state  that  the  judge  summarily
         dismissed the appellant's claim on the  basis  of  the  appellant's
         son's reluctance to provide evidence in his  asylum  interview.  At
         paragraphs  [31]  -  [40]  the   judge   addressed   the   evidence
         holistically  to  reach  a  conclusion  on  the  appellant's  son's
         sexuality and did so by taking into account not only his reluctance
         to provide evidence in interview but  also  made  factual  findings
         based on the evidence and the account that the appellant's son  did
         in fact provide.

     51. At  [31]  the  judge  did  observe  that  the  appellant  had  been
         interviewed as part of the asylum claim brought by his father. That
         is not an unusual occurrence given that the appellant's father  and
         other family members relied upon the appellant's son's  account  in
         establishing their factual claim.

     52. It is also correct as the FtTJ stated that during the interview  he
         was asked about the reasons for claiming asylum and he referred  to
         his sexuality but then refused to give any further  information  or
         provide answers to questions  asked  of  him,  however  sensitively
         foot. At [31] the judge  highlighted  the  questions  that  he  was
         asked, and the questions refused to answer.

     53. At [32] the judge took into account relevant issues including  that
         at the time of the interview the appellant was not a minor but  was
         an adult and that he had refused to answer questions concerning the
         core of the claim.

     54. Contrary to the grounds, and the submissions made,  the  judge  did
         place in the balance and take account of the  sensitive  nature  of
         disclosure of such information and it is  not  the  case  that  the
         judge ignored  this  as  a  relevant  factor  (see  paragraph  32).
         However, he was entitled to also take into account  the  fact  that
         the appellant had agreed to come forward and to have  an  interview
         but also that he had also been offered the alternative approach  of
         putting his claim in writing (so as to provide an  account  of  his
         claim without the need for any  questioning  on  the  part  of  the
         interviewing officer) which was an approach that he  also  refused.
         The judge was also entitled to take into account  that  his  former
         representatives had provided a letter stating  that  the  appellant
         would not discuss the factual claim with them and described him  as
         a "minor". However, as the judge observed, that  was  incorrect  as
         the appellant was an adult at the time.

     55. Overall, I do not consider  that  the  judge  was  unaware  of  the
         difficulties  someone  may  have  in  disclosing  evidence  of   an
         intensely personal nature which related to their sexuality. He  was
         plainly aware of this at [32] when addressing  the  credibility  of
         the claim, it was a factor to which he was entitled  to  have  some
         regard.

     56. Had the FtTJ found the appellant's failure to answer  questions  to
         be the overarching finding on credibility and to dismiss the appeal
         on that basis, then the judge would have  erred  in  law.  However,
         that was not the approach taken by the judge and  as  submitted  on
         behalf of the respondent, the judge went on to consider the factual
         account given by  the  appellant  and  his  family  members  before
         reaching the overall conclusion that the appellant's  son  had  not
         given a credible or consistent account of his sexuality.

     57. I am satisfied having read the decision as a whole that  the  judge
         did not regard his failure to disclose the nature of  his  case  in
         interview as determinative of the claim overall and in this regard,
         I reject the submission made by Ms Brakaj that the judge approached
         the evidence in a flawed way. I do not consider that  is  reflected
         in the decision when it is read in its entirety.

     58. The grounds go on to challenge the factual  findings  made  by  the
         judge by reference to the remainder of his decision.

     59. Ms Brakaj seeks to challenge the decision in paragraph  [33]  where
         the judge identified discrepancies  between  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant and his son. She submits that there was no discrepancy in
         the evidence and that  both  witnesses  gave  evidence  as  to  the
         approximate  age  the  appellant's  son  entered  into   a   sexual
         relationship. She further submits that this had been  described  in
         greater detail in the witness statements.

     60. At paragraph 33, the  judge  referred  to  the  evidence  that  the
         appellant had given in interview relating to  his  son's  sexuality
         and that his son was involved in a sexual relationship at  the  age
         of 10 (see questions 22 and 23  of  the  interview).  There  is  no
         ambiguity as to those answers which are set out  in  the  interview
         and recorded at page 135 of the respondent's bundle.  However,  the
         judge recorded that when cross-examined he stated that his wife had
         told him that their son had  a  sexual  relationship  when  he  was
         around 10 or 11 years old, and that this  relationship  lasted  for
         around a year. The appellant's son during cross examination  stated
         that he found out that he was gay when he was aged 13 and not 10 as
         his father had put in his evidence. The judge recorded the evidence
         that when the inconsistency was put  to  the  appellant's  son,  he
         failed to provide an explanation for this, and the  judge  recorded
         "he simply reverted to saying that his father would  never  say  he
         was aged 10." The  judge  identified  further  discrepant  evidence
         given after re-examination when his representative  had  asked  him
         about his relationship with the boys and he then stated his witness
         statement was incorrect which had referred to him being aged 10 and
         he stated that he was aged 9 (this was directly  inconsistent  with
         his witness statement at paragraph 4).

     61. Whilst the grounds seek to assert that there was  no  inconsistency
         in the evidence, it is plain from paragraph  33  and  the  evidence
         recorded by the FtTJ that when seen in the light of the evidence of
         the appellant son's witness statement (at paragraph 4) there was  a
         clear inconsistency in the evidence. That was material  as  it  was
         the appellant son's case that it was after his sexual  contact  had
         taken place the local community began to abuse him, and the  family
         moved away for those reasons.

     62. The grounds also seek to challenge paragraph 34  of  the  decision.
         Part of the appellant's son's factual claim was that  he  had  been
         the subject of abuse  and  bullying  by  a  number  of  individuals
         including boys at school and in  the  local  community.  The  judge
         considered this aspect of the claim at  [34]  and  found  from  the
         evidence that there was  an  absence  of  factual  information  and
         evidence given as to those identified as the perpetrators  involved
         and secondly, how they or anyone had found out that the appellant's
         son was gay.

     63. The judge  identified  the  lack  of  evidence  expressly  at  [34]
         pointing to the failure to answer the question as to how people had
         found out about his  sexuality  at  question  44.  Earlier  in  his
         interview the appellant was asked "why did you move to a  different
         area? The appellant replied "because of the people. My country is a
         small country and stories are shared quickly  and  everybody  knows
         everything. Everyone is aggressive towards you. If  you  are  rich,
         they hate you. When they see me and know my story, they hate me due
         to this as well. Due to being rich and sexuality." At  question  44
         the appellant  was  asked  "how  do  people  find  out  about  your
         sexuality?" The appellant replied, "I don't know". At  question  45
         the appellant was asked "who did you tell about your sexuality" the
         appellant replied, "my parents". He was then asked, "did  you  tell
         anyone else". The  appellant  replied  "no".  Thus,  the  FtTJ  was
         correct to identify that the appellant was unable to say how people
         had found out about his sexuality. Further as set out  in  question
         52, the appellant was unable to recall when  his  problems  started
         and was unable to recall the names or faces of the people who  were
         involved in bullying him or had beaten him. He did not  provide  an
         account as to how the boys had found out about his sexuality either
         (see question 60 and 62).

     64. Not only was there a lack of factual evidence concerning the  basis
         of his claim relating to his sexual identity, but  the  judge  also
         considered the lack of evidence undermined his account. He  claimed
         that after reporting the matter to the police they would  speak  to
         the parents of the boys  involved.  However,  the  appellant  son's
         evidence that he did not know the names or recognise the  faces  of
         his persecutors was inconsistent with the claim that  he  had  been
         able to provide evidence to the police so that they  were  able  to
         speak to the parents of the boys involved. As the judge  identified
         "it begs the question as to  how  the  police  could  approach  the
         family of the alleged perpetrators if their identities were unknown
         to the appellant's son" (at [34]).

     65. In my judgement the grounds and  submissions  made  on  behalf  the
         appellant where it is suggested that the police were able to obtain
         details  since  it  occurred  at  school,  offer  no  more  than  a
         disagreement with that finding and does not  acknowledge  the  core
         inconsistency in that evidence.

     66. The grounds challenge the FtTJ's findings at paragraphs 35, 36,  37
         and paragraph 38.

     67. Paragraph 35 is challenged on the basis that the  judge  only  gave
         limited weight to the medical evidence  and  that  the  appellant's
         sister had not given evidence but that the appellant  and  his  son
         had done so. Paragraph 36 is  challenged  on  the  basis  that  the
         appellant's wife had provided a written statement and that that was
         not given weight and it was only as a result of her not giving oral
         evidence that it was rejected.

     68. In my judgement, the decision of the FtTJ should be read as a whole
         and that the reference to individual credibility findings  and  the
         challenge to them fails to consider the assessment that was reached
         by the judge on the totality of the evidence.

     69. At [35] the judge was  addressing  the  evidence  relevant  to  the
         family leaving Georgia and an incident where  it  was  claimed  the
         appellant's sister had become involved and as a result had received
         an injury to her wrist. The  judge  identified  that  there  was  a
         medical report or letter which referred to an injury.  However,  it
         was open to the judge to attach less weight  to  that  evidence  as
         corroborating evidence in the light  of  the  letter's  failure  to
         confirm the causation of the injury. The fact that the  appellant's
         sister had an injury to her wrist does not demonstrate that such an
         injury occurred  in  the  circumstances  or  way  claimed.  It  was
         therefore open to the judge to give little weight to that letter in
         the light of the failure  of  the  appellant's  sister  to  provide
         either a statement or even a letter confirming what  had  happened.
         There was no dispute that she was in the UK along with other family
         members and therefore was in a position to  provide  evidence.  The
         appellant's father was not present at the incident as he was in the
         UK and therefore could not have given any supporting evidence.

     70. At [36] the judge returned to the issue of the appellant's evidence
         relevant to his sexuality and observed that the appellant's  mother
         provided a witness  statement  but  had  not  attended  court.  The
         relevance of the evidence was that the appellant  had  stated  that
         the neighbours had told his wife that his son had  been  seen  with
         another boy when aged 10 or 11 (witness statement paragraph 2)  and
         then when his son was 14, he had told her about his  sexuality  and
         then she was the one who had  informed  the  appellant.  The  judge
         therefore identified that the appellant's mother was central to the
         disclosure of her son's sexuality. However, while  she  provided  a
         witness statement, she did not attend the hearing. The judge stated
         "the appellant's wife has provided a statement in support  of  this
         appeal, but she was not in attendance in court to give evidence.  I
         find that given her son X confided in her and she  knew  about  his
         issues more than the appellant then it would have  made  sense  for
         her to attend the hearing as a witness."

     71. Ms Brakaj submits that the judge was  requiring  corroboration  and
         that someone seeking asylum is not required  to  corroborate  their
         account and furthermore that the only reason given by the judge for
         failing to attach weight to his mother's statement was because  she
         had not given oral evidence.

     72. I do not accept those submissions. Firstly,  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant's wife was in written form only and as the  issues  under
         consideration related to the credibility of the appellant  and  the
         appellant son's account, the  written  evidence  as  it  stood  was
         untested evidence in the  sense  that  as  a  result  of  her  non-
         attendance, she could not be asked questions  about  the  statement
         she gave. In those circumstances the judge  was  entitled  to  give
         that witness evidence limited weight.

     73. Furthermore, it is not correct to state as the grounds  have  done,
         that he only gave limited weight because  she  did  not  give  oral
         evidence. At [36] as Miss Petterson submitted, the judge considered
         the explanation given for her  non-attendance  which  was  she  had
         children to look after. As the judge observed, her son was  11  and
         her daughter was 16 and he was entitled to find that that was not a
         reasonable  explanation  for  her  lack  of  attendance  given  the
         potential importance of such evidence.

     74. As to requiring corroboration, the judge did not use that term when
         referring to the evidence.   The  relevant  principles  are  to  be
         found, so far as the European jurisprudence is concerned,  in  A  v
         Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie  (United  Nations  High
         Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR intervening) [2014] EUECJ C-148/13
         ( "ABC") and, so far as the domestic jurisprudence is concerned, in
         SB (Sri Lanka) v The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2019] EWCA Civ 160.

     75. Those cases  make  clear  that  a  lack  of  corroboration  for  an
         appellant's account may be a relevant factor to take  into  account
         when assessing an asylum claim, including a claim based  on  sexual
         orientation. In ABC the  CJEU  held  (at  paragraph  58)  that,  in
         accordance with Article  4(5)  of  Directive  2004/83,  a  lack  of
         corroborative evidence can be taken into account where (among other
         things) the applicant has not made a genuine effort to substantiate
         his application, or has not provided a satisfactory explanation for
         any relevant elements that are missing, or where the applicant  has
         (without good reason) failed to apply for international  protection
         at the earliest possible time. In SB the Court of Appeal  held  (at
         paragraph 46) that a lack of corroborative evidence could be  taken
         into account  where  the  applicant  fails  to  produce  supporting
         evidence on relevant issues where "logically" the applicant  should
         be able to do so, although a material error in logic  would  be  an
         error of law (paragraph 48). It was open to the FtTJ to  take  into
         account the lack of oral evidence from a witness who would  plainly
         have been able to provide evidence.

     76. Paragraph 12 the grounds seek to  challenge  paragraph  37  of  the
         FtTJ's assessment of the evidence. At [37] the judge addressed  the
         appellant's account that the family had to move home on 4 different
         occasions and that the appellant had to change his son's school  on
         each occasion. In consideration of that claim, the judge took  into
         account that there was no evidence of any of the schools in Georgia
         to support that he did transfer to new schools and  no  information
         had been provided as to which schools he went to and for how long.

     77. Ms Brakaj submitted in her oral submissions that these were  "minor
         issues" and that they were  not  terminal  to  the  case  and  were
         insufficient to decide the case against the appellant.

     78. In my view this was finding open  to  the  judge  to  make  on  the
         evidence before him. As a judge stated, the  appellant  provided  a
         large number of documents from Georgia concerning his finances  and
         employment but failed to provide any supporting evidence concerning
         his son's school and the changes of school and thus had  failed  to
         provide any  supporting  evidence  and  that  this  undermined  his
         account that he had transferred his son to a number of schools as a
         result of the ill-treatment or abuse that his son had undergone.

     79. The second part of paragraph 37 addresses the issue of  how  people
         in the community became aware of the appellant son's sexuality.  As
         set out earlier in the judge's decision at [34] by reference to the
         appellant's son's evidence in interview, he was unable to state how
         other boys had found out about his sexuality.  At  [37]  the  judge
         addressed the evidence of the appellant  and  his  explanation  and
         evidence that  people  knew  about  his  son  because  "information
         spreads quickly". The  appellant's  son's  evidence  was  that  the
         teachers at his new schools knew about him being gay  because  they
         made enquiries with the old schools and this is how they had  found
         out. The  judge  considered  that  evidence  but  rejected  it.  He
         concluded that on the evidence before him  "neither  the  appellant
         nor his son was able to identify  how  information  about  his  son
         being gay was ever discovered and I do  not  accept  is  reasonably
         likely that the teachers would take  it  upon  themselves  to  make
         enquiries about their son's background."

     80. Against that evidential background, I reject  the  submission  made
         that it was not clear how they would even  know  such  information.
         This does not offer any proper explanation for the lack of evidence
         in this regard. However, as the judge recorded there had been  some
         explanation which the judge had rejected  in  the  context  of  the
         claim.

     81. At [38] the judge addressed his claimed sexuality in the context of
         personal relationships. It is not correct as submitted on behalf of
         the appellant that the judge placed too much weight on whether  the
         appellant's son had been in a relationship in the UK. Ms Brakaj  in
         oral submissions stated that paragraph 38 was a particular  concern
         and that whether the appellant's son had a relationship or  not  in
         the UK it does not mean that he was not  gay.  She  submitted  that
         this was the wrong approach, and it was  indicative  of  the  wrong
         approach adopted throughout the decision by this judge.

     82. At [30] the judge referred to the appellant's length  of  residence
         in the UK and found that there was no evidence of any relationships
         whilst in the UK. However, the judge was careful in his  assessment
         to take into account that he had been in  a  relationship  did  not
         detract away from the claim  of  persecution.  The  judge  did  not
         consider this in an evidential vacuum but in  the  context  of  the
         appellant's  claim  which  was  that  he  had  been  in  a   sexual
         relationship since the age of 9 or 10 and thus  the  absence  of  a
         relationship  was  of  some  relevance.  Furthermore  at  [38]  the
         appellant claimed to be in a relationship with a person in  Georgia
         who had gone to Europe. The judge  found  from  the  evidence  that
         there was an absence of any information about who that person  was,
         information concerning the  relationship  and  that  the  appellant
         himself "knew very little about this relationship".

     83. At [39] the judge noted the absence  of  evidence  to  support  the
         claim that the appellant had gone  to  the  police  to  report  the
         matter on numerous occasions but there  were  no  reports,  or  any
         letters provided despite the occasions it was claimed that  he  had
         attended at the police. The judge found that this was also a factor
         which undermined the factual basis of the account given.

     84. In this case, the FtTJ had determined the credibility  issues  that
         were before him, being those which were regarded as  being  central
         to the question of  whether  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  his
         sexual orientation and the problems  he  claimed  had  occurred  in
         Georgia.

     85. Equally, it is to be recalled that judgments at first instance  are
         necessarily an incomplete impression made upon  the  judge  by  the
         primary evidence. This FTT judge reached the conclusion that he did
         on the issues raised and he expressed himself succinctly  on  them.
         This is what Lord Hoffmann said on  the  point  in  the  well-known
         passage of his speech in the House of Lords in Biogen Inc. v Medeva
         plc [1997] RPC 1 at 45:

             "The need for  appellate  caution  in  reversing  the  judge's
             evaluation of the facts is based upon much more solid  grounds
             than professional courtesy. It is because specific findings of
             fact, even by the most meticulous  judge,  are  inherently  an
             incomplete statement of the impression which was made upon him
             by the primary evidence. His  expressed  findings  are  always
             surrounded by  a  penumbra  of  imprecision  as  to  emphasis,
             relative weight, minor  qualification  and  nuance  (as  Renan
             said, la v�rit� est  dans  une  nuance),  of  which  time  and
             language do not permit exact expression, but which may play an
             important part in the judge's overall evaluation...".

     86. Having considered the decision of the FtTJ  in  the  light  of  the
         evidence before the judge and in the context of the grounds,  I  do
         not consider that the judge approached the  evidence  in  a  flawed
         manner and contrary to the grounds, the judge engaged with the core
         aspects of the account based on his son's  sexual  orientation  but
         was entitled to reach  the  overall  conclusion  that  neither  the
         appellant nor his son had given a credible or consistent account.

     87. Accordingly, the decision of the FTJ did not involve the making  of
         an error on a point of law. The appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision.

     88. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT
         shall be stand.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated 25 May 2021


I make a direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as  the  proceedings  relate  to
the circumstances of a protection claim. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.










                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.

