
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09398/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 8 January 2019                             |On 23 January 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                   MR I M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Profumo, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  2  February  1989.   The
    appellant had  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of  his  conversion  to
    Christianity. That claim had been refused and his appeal was  dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal in April 2017.  That decision was upheld  on
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The appellant made a fresh asylum  claim
    on the grounds of  his  religious  conversion  and,  additionally,  his
    political activity in the UK.  The respondent refused his  fresh  claim
    on 12 July 2018.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cohen ("the  FTTJ"),
    in a decision promulgated on 11 October 2018, dismissed his appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
    19 November 2018 who found there were arguable errors  of  law  in  the
    FTTJ's decision.

 3. Before me, Ms Profumo adopted the grounds of appeal.   She also  sought
    to amend those grounds. With regard to ground 5, she had been  provided
    by counsel instructed for the  appellant  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing with a note of the evidence  of  Reverend  Young,  one  of  the
    appellant's witnesses.   With  the  agreement  of  Mr  Kotas,  for  the
    respondent, I was provided with  a  copy.   She  sought  to  amend  the
    grounds of appeal at paragraphs 21 and 22 to submit that the  FTTJ  had
    made errors of law not only in failing to give adequate reasons for his
    decision but also having based his decision on a  mistake  of  fact  as
    regards the appellant's evangelising. She submitted that the  FTTJ  had
    failed to  engage  with  the  appellant's  own  evidence  that  he  had
    evangelised outside the church; he had overlooked or discarded Reverend
    Young's evidence that he was  aware,  albeit  not  directly,  that  the
    appellant had evangelised in the community.  Mr Kotas did not object to
    this amendment, indicating that he  could  address  this  in  his  oral
    submissions. I therefore allowed the amendment to be made.

 4. Ms Profumo made detailed oral submissions. This appeal was  pursued  on
    eight  grounds  which  are  summarised  in  the  sub-headings  in   the
    application as follows:

      1. the approach to political activity

      2. the approach to evidence of encounter with Ettellat.

      3. Incorrect and unjustifiable disregard of expert evidence.

      4. Incorrect approach to documents.

      5. Incorrect  approach  to  evidence  of  church  members  and  church
         attendance.

      6. Failure to consider binding authority and evidence of risk posed on
         return to an  Iranian airport.

      7.  Incorrect  approach  to   evidence   of   appellant's   monarchist
         sympathies.

      8. Incorrect approach to question of  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702
         credibility.

 5. I also heard the oral submissions of Mr Kotas who, in summary, made the
    case for there being no material errors of law.

Discussion

 6. I consider the grounds in the order in which Ms Profumo raised them  in
    her oral submissions. The  following  sub-headings  are  those  in  the
    appellant's application to appeal to this tribunal.

Ground 3 - incorrect and unjustifiable disregard for expert evidence

 7. The appellant had produced an "authentication report" by  Samim  Rashti
    who had been instructed by the appellant's solicitors  to  "provide  an
    authentication report of a prescription, a Real  Estate  Contract,  and
    county [sic] expert report".  The FTTJ finds as follows  at  [31]  with
    regard to this report:

         "... I have significant concerns with this report.  The expert does
         not attach a CV. The English  in  the  report  is  not  of  a  high
         quality. There are typographical errors. The expert was  unable  to
         verify the prescription.  In the absence of the same he appears  to
         have  contacted   a   friend   in   Iran   which   appears   highly
         unprofessional. He indicates that he has a number of  genuine  real
         estate documents in his archive that indicating [sic] the source of
         the same. He indicates that he has checked the appellant's Facebook
         account.  The same however have a very limited number  of  postings
         with increased activity around the  dates  of  his  various  appeal
         hearings.  The authenticity of the real estate  document  is  based
         upon a telephone call to the director  of  a  property  company  in
         Iran.  The expert accepts the appellant's credibility at face value
         and indicates that the documentation appears genuine.  I however as
         indicated above query the methodology of the expert and his ability
         to authenticate this documentation.  In the light  of  the  same  I
         attach very little weight to this report.

 8. It is agreed by the parties  before  me  that  the  expert  had  indeed
    provided a CV, albeit not entitled as such. It is a document at page 33
    of the appellant's bundle which lists the expert's "Personal Background
    and Expertise" as is stated in the heading to it.  It is  detailed  and
    comprehensive.  Thus the FTTJ erred  in  finding  a  CV  had  not  been
    provided.

 9. The FTTJ inferred that the degree of weight to be given to  the  report
    was undermined by the author's poor use of  English  and  typographical
    errors.  It is not suggested, however, in the decision that the content
    of the report was in any way unintelligible or incoherent as a  result.
    Given that English is not the first language  of  the  expert  and  the
    absence of any suggestion by the FTTJ that the report  lacked  cogency,
    this criticism has no bearing on the ability of the expert to give such
    evidence or the quality of the content.

10.  The  FTTJ  also  criticised  the  expert's  reliance  on  others   for
    verification of the documents. The expert makes various comments on the
    real  estate  document.  He  has  confirmed  various  features  of  the
    document, cross-checked the telephone number of the real estate  agency
    which issued it by telephoning the agency himself, telephoned the  real
    estate director on Skype who confirmed the details in the contract.  He
    concluded that "this document, in contrast, can be considered  reliable
    to support any details given by [the appellant] as he  was  present  in
    the real estate on Monday 29/02/2016".  The FTTJ states:

         "the authenticity of the real  estate  document  is  based  upon  a
         telephone call to the director of a property company in Iran".


    This is a misrepresentation of the expert's evidence which is  that  he
    contacted the "Real Estate Director Mr Yazdan on  Skype,  I  asked  him
    about this contract by the reference number 20160, and he confirms  the
    details ... were correct ... Both party (seller and buyer) were present
    in the office when they signed the contract, otherwise the lawyer  name
    should be given."  While it is not clear from the  report  whether  the
    Director was the same person  as  that  who  signed  the  contract,  or
    whether the director saw the appellant in his office, it is clear  from
    the expert's report that he was in contact with  the  Director  of  the
    real estate agency which purportedly issued the contract.  Thus,  while
    there may be scope for criticism of the report as regards the knowledge
    of the director, the actual criticism of the FTTJ is not sustainable on
    the evidence. The FTTJ's finding that "the  authenticity  of  the  real
    estate document is based upon a telephone call to  the  director  of  a
    property company in  Iran"  is  based  on  a  misunderstanding  of  the
    expert's evidence.

11. The FTTJ states at  [31]  that  the  "expert  accepts  the  appellant's
    credibility at face value".   This finding is not  sustainable  on  the
    content of the expert's CV in which he provides various  statistics  to
    demonstrate the number of occasions on which he finds documents  to  be
    genuine and, conversely, not genuine.  The expert also  makes  specific
    reference to his duties as an expert witness. He states  "I  understand
    that credibility assessments are a matter for the  court  and  that  my
    duty is solely to provide my expert opinion on the authentic  [sic]  of
    the documents provided to me". In the light of  these  statements,  the
    FTTJ's finding that the "expert accepts the appellant's credibility  at
    face value" is not sustainable on the evidence.

12. In FS (Treatment of Expert evidence) Somalia  [2009]  UKAIT  00004  the
    Tribunal held that Immigration Judges have a duty to consider  all  the
    evidence before them when reaching a decision in  an  even  handed  and
    impartial manner. In assessing  the  evidence  before  them  they  must
    attach such weight as they consider appropriate to  that  evidence.  It
    may on occasions be appropriate to reject the conclusions reached by an
    expert. What is crucial is that a reasoned explanation is given for  so
    doing.  The FTTJ's reasons for  giving  "very  little  weight  to  this
    report" are inadequate.  The finding is tainted by error of law.

Ground 4 - Incorrect approach to documents

13. It is submitted the FTTJ failed to take into  account  the  appellant's
    explanation for the late production of original documents which had not
    been provided at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing  in  2017.   At
    that hearing the appellant had relied on copy documents only.   In  any
    event, it is  submitted,  late  production  did  not  entitle  FTTJ  to
    discount them.  It is submitted the FTTJ  purported  to  apply  Tanveer
    Ahmed at [32] of the decision but did  not  address  his  mind  to  the
    multiple stages of that authority; he did not consider the documents in
    the round. It was submitted that this ground was parasitic to Ground 3.

14. At [30] the  FTTJ  notes  the  appellant's  explanation  for  the  late
    production of the documents thus:

         "The appellant referred to documentation which sought  to  indicate
         that he was in Iran after being in Greece and indicated that he had
         sold property.  The appellant has produced  property  documentation
         and a prescription in support of his  claim  to  have  returned  to
         Iran. The appellant was  asked  why  he  could  not  produce  these
         earlier and indicated that official documents and  with  the  court
         [sic].  This explanation is illogical in respect of a prescription.
          The appellant still does not explain why when he was put on notice
         in April 2017 that the original documentation was required that  he
         only obtained the same in summer of 2018.  I do not find  that  the
         appellant has produced a credible explanation  in  respect  of  the
         significant delay in producing this documentation".

      The difficulty with this aspect of the decision is that the  FTTJ  has
    only provided a reason for discounting the explanation relating to  the
    production of the prescription. He has not  addressed  the  appellant's
    explanation for the late production of the  real  estate  document  and
    why, by inference, he rejects it (as can be  inferred  from  the  final
    sentence of this paragraph).  An adverse credibility  finding  must  be
    grounded in the evidence.  This finding is inadequately reasoned.

Ground 5 - incorrect approach to  evidence  of  church  members  and  church
attendance

15. I have some concerns about the FTTJ's statement  that  "it  is  not  in
    Reverend Young's  interests  to  be  sceptical  about  the  appellant's
    motives".  Whilst I do not accept the submission that  such  a  comment
    "might be thought to preclude the possibility of any church member ever
    giving evidence in support of genuine conversion" such a finding is not
    in line with the authorities on the issue, culminating with TF (Iran) v
    SSHD [2018] CSIH 58.

16. At [33] of the decision, the FTTJ notes "Reverend Young and the  Bishop
    of Willesden have written in support of his appeal and  Reverend  Young
    has attended before me to give evidence in support of the  same.   ....
    Reverend Young and the Bishop of Willesden  do  not  mention  that  the
    appellant has undertaken  any  of  Angela  activities  [sic]  which  is
    discrepant with the appellant's own evidence. One would expect them  to
    know about such matters if he  had."   I  have  been  provided  with  a
    contemporaneous note of Reverend Young's the oral evidence  before  the
    FTTJ, prepared by the appellant's previous counsel. He told  the  FTTJ,
    in  response  to  a  question  as  to  whether  he  was  aware  of  any
    evangelising activity: "he's come  to  church  with  people  he  knows,
    usually other Iranians. Met with a girl called Mimi, pastor in  Ealing,
    sometimes done street evangelism."  Reverend Young was later asked what
    else he knew about the appellant  evangelising  within  the  Church  of
    England and replied: "No I don't, I see him when comes to church,  I've
    seen him at social occasions at our  house.  He's  coming  to  practice
    [sic] faith in context of worship. Couple of example,  practiced  [sic]
    what seems to me to be evangelism".  Reverend Young was  asked  if  the
    appellant was bringing Iranians to Church and replied "yes".   This  is
    evidence of the appellant evangelising and it is  inaccurate  therefore
    for the FTTJ to  state  that  Reverend  Young  had  not  mentioned  any
    evangelising activities (which is what I take the reference to  "Angela
    activities" in the decision to mean).  This is an error of fact.

Ground 1 - incorrect approach to political activity.

17. It is submitted that the FTTJ's findings showed he had failed  to  have
    regard to the objective material that the Iranian authorities monitored
    protests in other countries. It is submitted  the  FTTJ  had  erred  in
    requiring the appellant to be a leader or organiser  of  the  event  or
    hold a significant role to be at risk on return; this was  inconsistent
    with the objective material.

18.  The  appellant's  asylum  claim  based  on  his  sur  place  political
    activities in the UK was a new matter which had  not  been  before  the
    Tribunal in 2017.

19. The appellant  had  provided  a  photograph  of  his  attendance  at  a
    demonstration  against  the  Iranian  government  outside  the  Iranian
    Embassy in London in 2018.  Ms Profumo noted the FTTJ found  that  this
    was self-serving because  the  appellant  was  facing  in  a  different
    direction to others. However, the FTTJ does not make findings  at  [10]
    where he makes this point; at [10] he merely  identifies  the  evidence
    and the respondent's reasons for refusal. He does not make a finding.

20. At [38] the FTTJ finds the "appellant has undertaken limited  political
    activity in the UK but  he  is  not  a  leader  is  not  prominent  and
    participated in a demonstration involving thousands of people and I  do
    not find that these activities would put him at  risk  upon  return  to
    Iran. He is not a member of a political organisation."  While this  may
    be a valid finding it is unreasoned and fails to take into account  the
    guidance in BA (Demonstrators in Britain -  risk  on  return)  Iran  CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) where the Tribunal  held  that,  given  the  large
    numbers  of  those  who  demonstrate  here  and  the  publicity   which
    demonstrators receive, for  example  on  Facebook,  combined  with  the
    inability of the Iranian Government to monitor all returnees  who  have
    been involved in demonstrations here, regard must be had to  the  level
    of involvement of the individual here as well as any political activity
    which the  individual might have been involved in Iran  before  seeking
    asylum in Britain.  The appellant has only attended one  demonstration.
    While it correct he is not a political  leader  and  does  not  hold  a
    significant role, the  FTTJ  should  have  considered  the  appellant's
    social media evidence as well as the purpose of the demonstration,  the
    documentary evidence of media coverage in Arab News and the location of
    the demonstration, when making a finding as to the degree  of  risk  of
    identification,  if  any,  arising   from   his   attendance   at   one
    demonstration outside the Iranian Embassy. The failure  to  take  these
    matters into account renders unreliable  his  assessment  of  the  risk
    arising  from  his  sur  place  activities.  Even  if  the  appellant's
    motivation for attending the demonstration  was  not  accepted  by  the
    FTTJ, he should have considered the impact of his  attendance  pursuant
    to the guidance in BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return).

Ground 6 - Failure to consider binding authority and evidence of risk  posed
on return to an Iranian airport

21. It is submitted the FTTJ failed to address at all the risks on  arrival
    at an Iranian airport.   It  had  been  submitted  in  the  appellant's
    supplementary skeleton argument that AB  &  Ors  (Internet  activity  -
    state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC) applied in  that   "some
    people were asked about their internet activities on  arrival  and  our
    client would be at risk as his activities on facebook  and  blog  would
    identify him as a converted Christian" (paragraph 27 of the  skeleton).
    It  was  submitted  that,  irrespective  of  the  motivation  for   the
    appellant's activities in the UK and the impact of the expert evidence,
    AB (Internet activity - state  of  evidence)  indicated  the  appellant
    would be at risk at the airport on arrival. It was submitted  that  the
    appellant's posts on facebook and other social media would put  him  at
    risk. It was submitted that the FTTJ's limited findings on this at [44]
    were inadequate.

22. Mr Kotas  submitted  that  the  appellant's  internet  activities  were
    insufficient to give rise to  adverse  interest  on  arrival,  both  in
    relation to his claimed conversion and his  political  activities.   He
    submitted the appellant would state on return that he had made a  false
    asylum claim on religious grounds that he had blogged  to  support  his
    asylum claim.  It was submitted that, if he told the  truth,  he  would
    not be at risk.  Mr Kotas drew my attention  to  paragraph  467  of  BA
    (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return): the mere fact of being  in
    the UK for a long period would not lead to persecution.

23. Irrespective of his adverse findings on credibility and the appellant's
    motive, the FTTJ was required to consider risk on return.  The  country
    guidance is in BA (Demonstrators in Britain  -  risk  on  return).   AB
    (Internet activity - state of evidence)  makes it clear in the headnote
    that  "The  material  put  before  the  tribunal  did  not  disclose  a
    sufficient evidential basis for giving country or other  guidance  upon
    what, reliably, can be expected in terms of the reception in  Iran  for
    those returning otherwise than with a "regular" passport in relation to
    whom interest  may  be  excited  from  the  authorities  into  internet
    activity as might be revealed by an examination of blogging activity or
    a Facebook account. However, this determination is reported so that the
    evidence considered by the Upper Tribunal is available  in  the  public
    domain."  The FTTJ's findings with regard to the  appellant's  internet
    activities are limited: he refers to the  "appellant's  very  low-level
    political activities in the  UK  [having]  been  undertaken  purely  to
    bolster his asylum claim". He states they "would not have come  to  the
    attention of the Iranian authorities. His social media postings are few
    and far between and  would  not  place  him  at  risk".   There  is  no
    assessment of the content of the  appellant's  social  media  posts  or
    whether they would be perceived to be anti-government  or  put  him  at
    risk. The FTTJ relies principally on the  appellant's  motive  for  his
    political activities and the number of posts rather than their content.



24. In BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on  return)  the  Tribunal  held
    that a returnee who meets the profile of an activist  may  be  detained
    while searches of documentation are made. Those who  have  exited  Iran
    illegally are likely to be questioned.  The FTTJ has not addressed  the
    issue of whether the appellant left Iran illegally. It could perhaps be
    inferred from the adverse credibility findings that the FTTJ considered
    he did not, but the decision is silent on this and it is an issue which
    should have been addressed specifically because it is a risk factor.

25. Paragraph 467 of AB (Internet activity - state of evidence) provides as
    follows:

         "The mere fact of being in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  prolonged
         period does not lead  to  persecution.   However  it  may  lead  to
         scrutiny and there is clear evidence that  some  people  are  asked
         about their internet activity and particularly for  their  Facebook
         password.  The act of returning someone creates a "pinch point"  so
         that a person is brought into direct contact with  the  authorities
         in Iran who have both the time and inclination to interrogate them.
          We think it likely that they will be asked  about  their  internet
         activity and likely if they have any internet activity for that  to
         be exposed and if it is less than flattering of the  government  to
         lead to at the very least a real risk of persecution.

26. The appellant has provided documentary evidence of some of his internet
    activity. That evidence warranted close scrutiny by the FTTJ  in  order
    to decide whether, if exposed on arrival, it would put the appellant at
    risk on return.  The FTTJ has only  considered  the  quantity  of  such
    material, not its content ([44] refers).  In AB  (Internet  activity  -
    state of evidence), at [455] the Upper Tribunal rejected the submission
    for the respondent that "a high degree  of  activity  is  necessary  to
    attract persecution".  It stated "It is probably the case that the more
    active persons are the more likely they are to be  persecuted  but  the
    reverse just does not apply.  We find that the authorities do not chase
    everyone who just might be an opponent but if that  opponent  comes  to
    their attention for some reason then that  person  might  be  in  quite
    serious trouble for conduct which  to  the  ideas  of  western  liberal
    society seems of  little  consequence."    The  FTTJ  was  required  to
    undertake a rounded assessment of the appellant's  internet  and  other
    activities in the UK in order to assess the extent, if at all,  he  was
    at risk on return. His assessment was insufficient and inadequate.

Ground 2 - approach to evidence of encounter with Ettellat

27. The FTTJ found at [35] there was no evidence to support the appellant's
    claim that the individual who posted on social media was  a  member  of
    Ettelat.  It is unlikely the appellant would have been able to  provide
    such information given the nature of that organisation.  The FTTJ found
    that the "fact that this person commented positively in respect of  the
    appellant's posting of the photo of himself by  the  graveside  of  the
    daughter of the Shah of Iran to be indicative of the fact that they are
    not a member of the security services in Iran as claimed".  This  is  a
    sustainable conclusion notwithstanding the presence of  other  evidence
    as to  the  identity  of  the  individual  and  his  contact  with  the
    appellant.

Ground  7  -  incorrect  approach  to  evidence  of  Appellant's  monarchist
sympathies

28. By inference, the FTTJ found the  appellant  had  been  in  France  and
    visited the grave of the daughter of the Shah of Iran.   He  noted  the
    photograph taken of the appellant there.  He found  "this"  (presumably
    the photograph) "would not put the appellant at  risk  upon  return  to
    Iran so long after the Shah was dethroned. There is no other indication
    of the appellant being a monarchist".  It is  claimed  this  photograph
    was posted on facebook in 2016.  A copy was provided.  The  appellant's
    visit to the graveside was not the seminal issue, it was the posting of
    the photograph in 2016. The FTTJ has failed to address  the  impact  of
    that post on facebook, an act which, it is  claimed,  demonstrated  his
    monarchist sympathies at the time.  Instead the FTTJ decided  that  the
    appellant's attendance at the graveside would not put him at  risk  "so
    long after the Shah was dethroned".   The issue of the facebook post is
    relevant to the appellant's perceived profile in Iran and the  risk  on
    return.  It has not been considered specifically in that context.

Ground 8 - Incorrect approach to question of Devaseelan credibility

29. The earlier adverse credibility findings of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    April 2017 were based, in part, on the  failure  of  the  appellant  to
    provide original documents in support of his appeal at that time. Those
    original documents were produced at the appeal before the FTTJ in 2018.
     I have already found that the FTTJ erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
    original documents.

30. Devaseelan is authority for the proposition that the  first  Tribunal's
    determination stands as an assessment of the claim  the  appellant  was
    making at that time (in this case an appeal  against  the  decision  to
    refuse his protection claim solely on the grounds of  his  conversation
    to Christianity).  That first decision was not binding on the FTTJ. The
    first decision was  the  starting  point  and  facts  post-dating  that
    decision could be considered. The  FTTJ  was  required  to  treat  with
    circumspection relevant  facts  which  had  not  been  brought  to  the
    attention of the first Tribunal.  If issues and evidence in  the  first
    and second appeals were materially the same, the second Tribunal should
    treat the issues as settled by the first decision,  rather  than  being
    relitigated.  While there will  be  occasions  when  the  circumstances
    surrounding the first appeal are such that it would be  right  for  the
    second Tribunal to look at the matter as if the first determination had
    never been made, this is not one of  those  situations.  The  FTTJ  was
    right to consider the circumstances in  which  the  original  documents
    were produced after the first hearing. However, it  is  not  clear  the
    FTTJ applied  the  guidance  in  Devaseelan  as  regards  the  original
    documents which the appellant  produced  in  2018  to  demonstrate  his
    presence in Iran in 2016.  There is no reference by  the  FTTJ  to  the
    appellant's evidence in his witness statement that he had been  advised
    by his representatives that "an emailed copy will be  sufficient  so  I
    did not even attempt to try and get the originals. I have since managed
    to get the original deed and prescription proving that I  was  in  Iran
    from January 2016 to May 2016."  The FTTJ merely had regard, judging by
    the content of [30], to the appellant's oral  evidence  on  the  issue.
    This his assessment was incomplete.

31. Furthermore, as I have  found  above,  his  assessment  of  the  expert
    evidence regarding the authenticity of those documents was erroneous. I
    do not go so far as to find that the FTTJ was entitled  to  "revisit...
    the previous judicial credibility findings" (as  is  submitted  in  the
    grounds to this tribunal), because those findings were made on a  wider
    basis than merely the lack of original  documentation  to  support  his
    claim to have been in Iran in 2016. Nonetheless the FTTJ did not  apply
    the guidance in Devaseelan: he states at [41] that, "in the light of my
    adverse  credibility  findings  herein,  I  wholeheartedly  adopt   the
    findings of the previous Immigration Judge".  This was not the  correct
    approach which, according to Devaseelan, was to use the first  decision
    as his starting point.

32. I have identified above the  adverse  credibility  findings  which  are
    inadequately reasoned.  As was said by  Keene  LJ  in  IA  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 323:

         "... in public law cases, an error of law will be regarded as
         material unless the decision-maker must have reached the same
         conclusion without the error ... [A]n error of law is material if
         the Adjudicator might have come to a different conclusion ... "

33. The FTTJ's reasoning for ascribing very little  weight  to  the  expert
    report is flawed. He gave greater weight  at  [32]  to  the  background
    material regarding the prevalence of fraudulent documents in Iran.  The
    basis for his preferring the background  material,  and  therefore  his
    finding that the original documents warranted very  little  weight,  is
    erroneous.  The authenticity of the documents is but one aspect covered
    in the expert report which underpins the appellant's claim  in  several
    respects.  Mr Rashti also gives his opinion on the risk  on  return  on
    the grounds of the appellant's  claimed  conversion,  support  for  the
    Iranian monarchy and political activities  in  the  UK,  including  his
    activities on social media. While the FTTJ gives "very little  weight",
    i.e. some weight, to the report, he makes no reference  to  it  in  his
    assessment of the risk on return.  Thus the erroneous assessment of the
    weight to be given to the expert report  also  impacts  on  the  FTTJ's
    findings on risk on return. While I acknowledge that many of the FTTJ's
    adverse credibility findings are not challenged before me, taking  into
    account  the  flawed  assessment  of  the  expert  evidence   and   the
    unsustainable adverse credibility findings, identified  above,  I  find
    that the decision as a whole is infected by errors of fact and law  and
    is untenable.  While it is possible that the FTTJ  might  have  reached
    the same conclusion, it cannot be said that he must have done so, given
    the number and wide-ranging nature of the errors.

34. The decision must be set aside in its entirety. The parties were agreed
    that, in such circumstances, it was appropriate for the  appeal  to  be
    decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

35. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved material
    errors on points of law.  The decision is set  aside.   The  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,  pursuant
    to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and Enforcement Act  2007
    and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before any judge aside from FTTJ Cohen.

36. I maintain the anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 11 January 2019



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 11 January 2019
