
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09723/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 August 2020                    |On 8 October 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     YAE
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes instructed by Shawstone Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals with permission a decision of First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Howard ('the Judge') promulgated on 14 February 2020
       in which the appellants appeal on protection and human rights
       grounds, relied upon as an exception to the respondents duty to
       deport him from the United Kingdom to Somalia, was dismissed.




Background

    2. The appellant is a national of Somalia who entered the United Kingdom
       age 16 with his mother and siblings to join his father, a Somali
       national, already in the UK. It is accepted the appellant left
       Mogadishu aged 3 and lived with his family in Kenya and another
       neighbouring country before coming to the UK.
    3. As a result of the appellants offending, he was sentenced to a term
       of imprisonment and subsequently made the subject of an order for his
       deportation from the United Kingdom pursuant to section 32(5) UK
       Borders Act 2007. In her sentencing remarks of 7 October 2016 Her
       Honour Judge Barrie stated:

           "... You're 27 years of age and you've been convicted after
           trial of the rape of [NS] and it's right that you'd known each
           other for about two years at the time of this incident through
           the local Somali community; and she in the past allowed you and
           your then girlfriend to stay at her home for a period of time.


           But prior to the commission of this offence on the 20, sorry, on
           the 10 July 2014 she said she hadn't heard from you for about a
           year. She said that you rang her out of the blue to say that you
           were in the area with friends and it's apparent from the phone
           schedule that was produced in the trial that you were very
           persistent in trying to make contact with her. You said in your
           evidence this was because you and your friends wanted somewhere
           to stay the night. But in any event, whatever the reason, you
           arranged to pick her up from her sisters and you gave her a lift
           home.


           It was apparent from [NS] evidence that she was happy to welcome
           visitors into her home and this occasion, indeed, was no
           exception. She had two guests staying at her address, along with
           two of her children and she invited you and your friends into
           her property, into her home to watch the end of the football
           match. And it's right that you'd all been drinking vodka and you
           continued to do so at her address until the early hours of the
           morning.


           [NS] agreed to let you and your friends stay the night at her
           home because you're all been drinking and because she was
           concerned that you'd otherwise drive and she accommodated you
           and your friends in one of the bedrooms. She provided you with
           mattresses and blankets. In short, she offered you her home for
           the night and she trusted you in that respect.


           [NS] went to sleep on the sofa in her lounge and she did so
           fully clothed. She was menstruating at the time and she was
           wearing a sanitary pad inside of her knickers and she described
           feeling knocked out and dead just before going to sleep.  She
           awoke to the feeling of pain inside of her and she found herself
           on the floor of the living room with her trousers and knickers
           removed. You were naked on top of her and your penis was in her
           vagina. She said she had no recollection of how she came to be
           moved from the sofa to the floor or how her clothes were
           removed.


           She described in her evidence how she was bleeding from her
           period and how she pushed you and screamed "what are you doing,
           why are you doing this". But you didn't stop, instead you said
           "it's just me, don't worry I'm using a condom". She continued to
           push and scream at you saying she didn't care what you were
           using, why were you doing this to her and to get off her and
           eventually you did so and left to get dressed in the bathroom.


           She described to this court how she was shaking and panicking.
           She was in shock and she immediately called the Police. Your
           friends woke to the screaming and shouting and when you knew
           that [NS] was calling the Police you left the premises. It's
           right that the Police arrived within a matter of minutes and
           discovered [NS] in a highly distressed state. She'd taken a
           photograph of your car as you left and she identified you to the
           policeman and picked you out on Facebook.


           You were later arrested and gave a prepared statement in which
           you asserted that you'd had consensual sexual intercourse, a
           position that you maintained in your trial.


           The impact of this offending on [NS] has been considerable. In
           her victim personal statement she speaks of having nightmares
           and flashbacks and wanting to take her own life in the weeks
           after the attack. She's been ostracised by the Somali community
           who believe that she's brought shame on the community,
           notwithstanding, of course, that she is the victim of this
           offence. She has as a consequence had to leave her home with her
           children to live in a refuge. Her children have been disrupted -
           disrupted and had to change schools and she's gone from being a
           sociable, outgoing woman to someone who's mistrustful of others
           and rarely goes out. She speaks of having had her life turned
           upside down, which in my judgement is a fitting description for
           all that she's had to and continues to endure and in my
           judgement she showed tremendous courage in her speaking out and
           giving her evidence in court."

    4. When undertaken the sentencing exercise the Judge concluded having
       regard to the multiple aggravating factors it was appropriate to take
       an increased starting point before mitigation within the category
       range of seven years.  The Sentencing Judge took into account
       everything said on the appellants behalf, including in particular
       during the course of the trial the claim the appellants father had
       sadly passed away in Somalia and that he was unable to attend his
       funeral and had not had the opportunity to grieve for him with his
       family, which was said to have had a significant impact on both the
       appellant and his family.  A sentence of seven years imprisonment was
       passed although the same was later amended by the Sentencing Judge
       herself to six years.
    5. The appellant was unrepresented before Judge Howard. The Judge
       confirms in the decision having taken into account all the
       documentary evidence provided including a medical report provided by
       the appellant.  The Judge summarises the evidence provided from [14].
    6. The appellant was released in October 2019 and although having taken
       a number of educational courses during the time he was serving his
       prison sentence the Judge finds at [27] the appellant had not
       rebutted the presumption did he constitutes a danger to the community
       or that the notice pursuant to section 72 Nationality, Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 should be set aside, the effect of which is that
       the appellant is excluded from the Refugee Convention.
    7. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [28] of the decision which
       contains the core findings challenged by the appellant. Those
       findings are in the following terms:

         "28  In coming to my decision I have considered all the evidence
             before me, including the background material to which I was
             referred and is noted in the Record of Proceedings and
             including passages that I may not have specifically mentioned.
             I have looked at all the evidence in the round before making
             any findings, including my findings on credibility.


         29   The primary issue for me to determine is the credibility of
             the appellant's account. I must then consider whether it
             satisfies the criteria for international protection or
             humanitarian protection and whether he fulfils the criteria
             for deportation and/or falls within any of the exceptions.


         30   The appellant seeks to challenge the deportation decision by
             arguing that returning him to Somalia, would breach the United
             kingdoms obligations under the Refugee Convention,
             Humanitarian Protection provisions and Article 3 ECHR. He has
             raised a number of separate grounds and I discuss each in
             turn.


         31   The appellant told me that his family are of the Marehan clan.
             This is a sub clan of the Darod. The Darod are the largest
             clan in Somalia. The appellant also said he has no family in
             Somalia. This was exposed when his mother was asked about the
             death of her husband, as claimed by the appellant after trial.
             She stated that the person who died must have been a relative
             of her husbands as it was definitely not her husband or a
             brother in law. The only proper conclusion to draw from this
             is that there are family members still living in Somalia and
             as relatives of her husband of the Marehan. This is not the
             only family of whom his mother spoke. When asked about her
             family in Somalia she said, "None in Mogadishu". When telling
             me about her flight from Somalia she mentioned a sister who
             lived near the Somali Ethiopian border. She said the sister
             was dead, but claimed no knowledge of surviving children.


         32   The fact the appellant is of a majority clan and there are
             family members, albeit not immediate, paints a very different
             picture to that he invites me to accept. This also informs me
             about his claim to fear those his parents initially fled. I
             did not hear from his father and the evidence of his mother
             was vague on this point.  Other member of the family have, on
             any view, been able to make a life in Somalia since the
             appellant's father left. The evidence before me does not
             invite the view he could not do the same.


         33   In addition to the existence of family and clam members in
             Somalia I have also taken note of the Voice of Africa report
             cited by the respondent in her refusal letter. It describes
             the experience of returnees to Somalia from various English-
             speaking countries. The picture the report paints is of a
             bustling city populated with many English-speaking returnees.


         34   The existence of family and the presence of a great many
             English speaking returnees leads me to conclude that there is
             nothing about the appellant's obvious westernisation that that
             he said will result in persecution or other inhumane or
             degrading treatment. The claimed existence of non state actors
             such as Al Shabab is also described as non-existent in
             Mogadishu. This is all in line with the findings of the
             Tribunal in the country guidance case of MOJ and others
             (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 [IAC].


         35   It is correct to observe that the appellant is currently being
             treated for anxiety/PTSD. When asked about the medication he
             takes he stated it helps him sleep. There is no evidence this
             medication is unavailable in Mogadishu.


         36   The appellant fears retribution from fans of his victim. I
             have dealt with this earlier. In her victim personal
             statement, she describes herself as the one ostracised by
             Somalia society. I have already found that I accept this and
             as a consequence find no merit in the assertion by the
             appellant that he is at risk from her fans. The evidence the
             appellant produced, a Facebook page does not even satisfy me
             to the lowest standard that the woman spoken of on Facebook
             and his victim are one and the same person.


         37   The appellant claims that his skills, such as they are, would
             have no application in Somalia. The respondent cites three
             reports which speak of the economic success of returns in
             establishing businesses more usually associated with the
             Europe and America. Further it suggests it is local Somalis
             who are losing out to returnees in securing the associated
             employment.


         38   When I look at the mattress for which the appellant contends
             both individually and collectively I find nothing it what he
             says from which to conclude, even to the lowest standard, that
             by returning him to Mogadishu the respondent would be in
             breach of her obligation to the appellant under Article 3 of
             the 1951 Convention.


         39   I have taken into account all of the oral and documentary
             evidence relied upon before arriving at my decision. I also
             take into account the submissions made by both
             representatives."


Grounds and submissions

    8. The application for permission to appeal made by the appellant in
       person was refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the
       basis the grounds did not highlight any specific error of law in the
       Judge's decision and that the grounds appeared to re-argue the
       appellants case and nothing more.
    9. The appellant renewed the application directly to the Upper Tribunal
       this time with the benefit of the assistance of a solicitor he had
       instructed in the interim. The appellant assert the Judges erred in
       law in failing to take into account his vulnerability and in failing
       to apply relevant guidance to the same, in failing to adequately
       consider the relevant case of MOJ, and in failing to consider Article
       8 ECHR entirely for the reasons set out in further detail in the
       pleadings attached to the renewed application.
   10. Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the Upper Tribunal,
       the operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

         "At paragraph 29 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard
         stated that the primary issue for him to determine was the
         credibility of the appellant's account. However, he failed to take
         into account the fact that that the Appellant suffered from PTSD,
         anxiety and panic attacks. He also failed to take into account the
         fact that the letter from Bradley Therapy Services, dated 31 July
         2019, stated that he was suffering a severe level of distress.


         In these circumstances the Judge should have applied AM
         (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
         EWCA Civ 1123 and treated the Appellant as a vulnerable witness
         when assessing his credibility. It was not sufficient to consider
         whether medication will be available for him in Somalia.


         The other grounds are also arguable, as the Appellant was not
         legally represented at his previous appeal hearing and it was
         unreasonable to draw a potential adverse inference from the fact
         that his father did not give evidence in light of the medical
         evidence which confirmed that he suffered from paranoid
         schizophrenia.


         As a consequence, there were material errors of law in First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Howard's decision and it is appropriate to grant
         permission to appeal."


Error of law

   11. It must be noted that the statement by the judge granting permission,
       that there were material errors of law in First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Howard's decision, is not  a finding open to a judge at that stage
       where no submissions or arguments have been heard, the matter is not
       conceded, and the issue is whether the pleaded grounds are arguable,
       no more.
   12. Although the appellant appeared as a litigant in person before the
       Judge this had not always been the case. The appellant was assisted
       by solicitor's, Fadiga & Co, in relation to the earlier applications.
   13. Following the lodging of the appellants appeal the case was listed
       for a Case Management Review (CMR) hearing at Harmondsworth on 11
       December 2019.  The appellant was represented at that hearing by a
       barrister from Garden Court Chambers in London instructed by Fadiga &
       Co.  The Record of Proceedings in relation to that hearing records
       the judge conducting the hearing being advised there were some health
       issues "Not sure if amount to Article 3. Some issues".  At no time
       has there been any statement made to the First-tier Tribunal to the
       effect the appellant is a vulnerable individual for whom particular
       arrangements need to be made in relation to the manner in which the
       hearing is conducted or otherwise.
   14. On 21st January 2020 Fadiga & Co wrote to the First-tier Tribunal
       indicating that they had had received no instructions from the
       appellant since the CMR on 11 December 2019 and were therefore unable
       to represent him any further in relation to his appeal. For that
       reason, the appellant appeared before Judge Howard as a litigant in
       person.
   15. The Judge's Record of Proceedings shows that he took great care to
       ensure that the appellant, as somebody without the benefit of legal
       representation, fully understood and was able to take part in the
       appeal process. The Judges notes start with a reference to the Judge
       taking the appellant through the elements of the appeal to ensure
       that he fully understood what was being considered and had the
       opportunity to respond. It is clear when the appellant was asked
       questions, he gave answers and there is no indication that he
       experienced any difficulty in relation to the appeal process.
   16. In relation to his medical condition the appellant was asked about
       anxiety/PTSD to which he confirmed he was taking a prescribed tablet
       which he stated helped him sleep and that he had had counselling too.
       The appellant gave no other answer to this question.
   17. In the case of AM (Afghanistan) the First-tier Tribunal had a letter
       from a psychologist setting out not only the difficulties experienced
       by AM but how any hearing should be conducted to ensure that AM was
       able to partake and the measures the judge needed to be aware of both
       in relation to the conduct of the hearing and assessment of the
       evidence. The Court of Appeal were critical of the First-tier
       Tribunal for ignoring that advice and in failing to conduct the
       hearing in a manner best suited to assisting the appellant.
   18. In this appeal there was no medical evidence from a psychologist or
       psychiatrist or anything that indicated to the Judge that the
       appellant had a diagnosed mental health problem which would also set
       out the specific steps, if any, that were required. It was not
       disputed that the appellant received medication and the evidence that
       was given is clearly recorded by the Judge in the decision showing
       the same was properly taken into account.
   19. Whilst the Judge does not mention AM (Afghanistan) in the decision or
       the Presidential guidance for vulnerable witnesses, it is not made
       out the Judge did not take that guidance into account when ensuring
       the appellant received a fair hearing.
   20. It is also not made out that having taken such steps the Judge then
       completely ignored relevant issues when determining the merits of the
       appeal. It is important that the appeal is read carefully, and the
       adverse findings set out by the Judge between [31 - 38] considered.
       This is because a lot of the adverse findings made do not arise
       specifically from the evidence of the appellant but also from the
       evidence of others, including the appellant's mother. Although the
       mother herself has health issues there was nothing to show her
       evidence could not have the weight the Judge gave attached to it.
   21. The claim by all family members regarding family and clan in Somalia
       was also accepted by the Judge by reference to country information
       provided. The comment there is no evidence the medication the
       appellant receives would not be available in Mogadishu is factually
       [35].  It was not made out there was anything in the evidence before
       the Judge that required this element of the appeal to be assessed in
       a manner other than that in which it was.
   22. This is not a case in which the medical evidence, including any
       expert reports, supported a claim the appellant will face a real risk
       of being exposed to a serious, rapid, and irreversible decline in his
       state of health resulting in intense suffering or a significant
       reduction in life expectancy and that any serious, rapid, or
       reversible decline in health leading to intense suffering or the
       substantial reduction in life expectancy will arise as a result of
       the absence of appropriate treatment in Somalia or the lack of access
       to such treatment.
   23. I find the assertion the Judge erred in the manner in which the
       merits of the appeal were assessed, and the hearing conducted, not
       made out. A reading of the determinations shows the Judge did assess
       the merits of the appellants claim holistically taking all factors
       into account when undertaking the required assessment. The Judge was
       entitled to note that no issues were raised regarding vulnerability
       at the CMR nor at the hearing before him and that the appellant
       appeared to be able to engage with the appeal process without
       evidence of any difficulty. It is not made out that the procedure at
       the hearing denied the appellant a fair determination of the merits
       of the appeal.
   24. The other grounds are, in effect, disagreement with the Judge's
       findings regarding the other aspects of the case. The Judge clearly
       took into account the country guidance case law and also the
       availability of family support in Somalia.
   25. The appellant speaks both English and Somali and the information
       provided by the respondents shows those from the English-speaking
       diaspora have the opportunity to do well for themselves in Mogadishu.
   26. The appellant is from a majority clan and it is not made out that if
       returned to Mogadishu he will not be able to make contact with
       members of that clan.
   27. The clan structure, as recognised in MOJ, now provide practical
       assistance including support rather than protection in the modern
       Somalia. The appellant fails to make out he would not be entitled to
       the same.
   28. The respondent in the Refusal referred to the appellant being able to
       benefit from the voluntary return scheme which if that were still
       available would provide him with a capital sum.
   29. Although family members claimed to be reliant on state benefits and
       unable to work as a result of their own health needs in the UK and
       elsewhere, there was insufficient evidence before the Judge to show
       family members would not be able to make any contribution to assist
       the appellant, even if not a large. What may seem a small amount of
       money in the UK might be the opposite in a country such as Somalia or
       Mogadishu and be sufficient to assist a person whilst they get re-
       established.
   30. In any event, the finding of the Judge is that the appellant will be
       able to re establish himself especially as he has transferable
       skills. It is accepted that as a result of the time the appellant has
       been out of Mogadishu any such adjustment will be difficult and may
       lead to initial hardship but it was not made out that any such
       difficulties could not be overcome or that the same warrant a finding
       that the appellant is entitled to a grant of international protection
       on the basis of the humanitarian provisions or articles of ECHR.
   31. The article 8 aspect of the claim was fully set out at [44] in which
       the Judge finds it was not made out it was appropriate in all the
       circumstances for the appeal to be allowed on that ground.  Although
       the assessment is extremely brief, it shows the Judge did consider
       this matter and in light of the other findings the grounds fail to
       establish the overall conclusion that the respondents decision is
       proportionate is outside the range of those reasonably available to
       the Judge on the evidence.
   32. There is no merit in the attempt to undermine the material considered
       by the Judge. No inadmissible material was considered and the weigh
       to be attributed to the same was a matter for the Judge. Whilst the
       manner in which the Voice of Africa article is written was commented
       upon by Mr Holmes, that is the way in which that publication writes,
       in language that enables readers in Africa to understand the reality
       of the news 'on the ground'.  It is not made out it is an
       'entertainment papers' as suggested or that that less weight should
       have been placed upon the same than the Judge did.
   33. Even though Mr Holmes suggests other findings the Judge might have
       made, the findings that were made are within the range of those
       reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence. As such no material
       legal error is made out.

Decision


   34. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   35. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 2 October 2020
