
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09040/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th October 2017                       |On 09th November 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD BURNS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    [M M]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss P Yong of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McIntosh promulgated on 24 January 2017, in which [MM]'s
    appeal against the decision to refuse his asylum claim and human rights
    claim dated 10 August 2016 was allowed.  For ease we continue to  refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal,  with  [MM]
    as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on [ ]  1984,  who  was
    first issued with a visa to study in United Kingdom on 28 August  2008,
    entering on 14 September 2008 with leave to remain  until  31  December
    2009.  He subsequently made applications for leave to remain as a  Tier
    4 (General) student for which further periods of leave to  remain  were
    granted to 30 May 2015.  The Applicant then  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of private and family  life  on  29  April
    2015 which was refused and most recently he claimed asylum on 17 August
    2015.  His claim was on the basis that he feared a real risk on  return
    to Bangladesh because of his political beliefs, namely that  he  was  a
    member of the Bangladeshi Islami Chhatra Shibir party, the student wing
    of the Jamaat-e-Islami party.  Further, he claimed to  be  at  risk  on
    return to Bangladesh on the basis of sur place  activities  campaigning
    against the current government  in  Bangladesh  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 10 August 2016 on  the  basis
    that the Appellant's claim to political activity was  at  a  low  level
    such that he would not be at real risk on return, and even if  he  was,
    it would be a localised problem from which he could internally relocate
    to another area of Bangladesh.

 4. Judge McIntosh allowed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  24
    January 2017  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.  The  Appellant's  evidence  was  found  to  be  credible  and
    consistent by the First-tier Tribunal and he was found to be  a  member
    of the Bangladesh Islami Chhatro Shibir Party.   Judge  McIntosh  found
    that the Appellant had established there was a real risk of persecution
    by the police and/or the ruling party in Bangladesh and that regardless
    of his profile within the party,  he  had  been  actively  involved  in
    opposing  the  current  regime  such  that  there   was   a   risk   of
    identification, apprehension and detention on return.

 5. This appeal first came before Upper Tribunal Judge Storey for the error
    of law hearing on 26 May 2017.  In a decision  promulgated  on  6  June
    2017 (a full copy of the error of law decision is attached as an  annex
    to this decision), he found that Judge McIntosh materially erred in law
    by failing to make any findings about whether the  Appellant  had  been
    subjected to  past  persecution  and  whether  he  was  a  high-profile
    opponent of the government nor was there sufficient evidence  on  which
    to assert such a wide risk category  to  all  opponents  regardless  of
    their profile.  The appeal was adjourned and relisted before us  on  12
    October 2017 to remake the decision.

Findings and reasons

 6. The following findings of fact are preserved from the decision of Judge
    McIntosh and are taking into account as part of our  reasoning  as  set
    out below.  The Appellant was initially a supporter of  the  Bangladesh
    Islami Chhatro Shibir Party rather than as a principal member  and  had
    had involvement with the party over a long period of time in Bangladesh
    and in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant  is  identifiable  as  a
    participant in demonstrations opposing  the  current  ruling  party  in
    Bangladesh and has been  actively  involved  in  opposing  the  current
    regime throughout his time in the United Kingdom.

The Law in Relation to the Appellant's Claim under the Refugee Convention

 1.  The  Appellant  claims  under  Section  82(2)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that a return to home  territory  would
    be a breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the  1951  United
    Nations Convention relating to the Status of  Refugees  and  the  later
    Protocol ("the Refugee Convention").

 2. It is for an Appellant to show that he is a refugee.  By Article  1A(2)
    of the Refugee Convention, a refugee is a person  who  is  out  of  the
    country of his or her nationality and who, owing to a well-founded fear
    of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality or membership
    of a particular  social  group  or  political  opinion,  is  unable  or
    unwilling to avail him or herself of the protection of the  country  of
    origin.

 3. The  degree  of  likelihood  of  persecution  needed  to  establish  an
    entitlement to asylum is decided  on  a  basis  lower  than  the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities.   This  was  expressed  as  a
    "reasonable chance", "a serious possibility"  or  "substantial  grounds
    for thinking" in the various authorities.  That  basis  of  probability
    not only applies to the history of the matter and to the  situation  at
    the date of decision, but also to the question of  persecution  in  the
    future if the Appellant were to be returned.

 4. Under the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006, a person  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
    refugee if they fall within the definition set out in Article 1A of the
    Refugee Convention (see above) and are not excluded by Articles 1D,  1E
    or 1F of the Refugee Convention  (Regulation  7  of  the  Qualification
    Regulations).

The Law in Relation to the Appellant's Claim for Humanitarian Protection

 5. Paragraph 339C  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provide  for  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection  in  circumstances  where  a  person  does  not
    qualify as a refugee but can show  substantial  grounds  for  believing
    that they would, if returned to their country of return,  face  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm.  The applicant must be unable or  owing
    to such risk unwilling to avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  that
    country.

The Law in  Relation  to  the  Appellant's  Claim  under  the  Human  Rights
    Convention

 6. This appeal is also brought under the 2002 Act  because  the  Appellant
    alleges that the Respondent has in making her decision acted in  breach
    of the Appellant's human rights.  The Appellant relies upon Articles  2
    (Right to Life); 3 (Prohibition of Torture) and 8 (Right to respect for
    private and family life).  In respect of Articles 2 and 3,  the  burden
    of proof of demonstration that the  Appellant's  removal  would  breach
    this  country's  obligations  under  the  Convention  rests  upon   the
    Appellant and the standard of proof is the lower standard,  that  there
    is a reasonable chance  or  likelihood  that  harm  will  come  to  the
    Appellant if removed and in respect of Article 8, the standard of proof
    is the balance of probabilities.

The Appellant's evidence

 7. In his written statement signed and dated 5  January  2017,  which  was
    prepared for the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  Appellant
    sets out his immigration history and time spent studying in the  United
    Kingdom.  He described being a member of the Bangladesh Islami  Chhatro
    Shibir Party, which he joined in 2000 and became secretary of the Iqbal
    Memorial College branch in 2002.  The Appellant claimed that because of
    this he was attacked in his college campus in Bangladesh in 2003.   The
    Applicant had not come to the attention of the police in Bangladesh nor
    had he ever been arrested, but claimed that since  2009  the  situation
    has worsened, and opposition party members are at risk of  torture  and
    persecution.

 8. The Appellant has attended demonstrations in United Kingdom against the
    current regime in Bangladesh and provided some  pictures  and  Facebook
    posts about these demonstrations.   In  May  2013,  the  Appellant  was
    questioned by the London Metropolitan Police about one  of  his  tweets
    about the Prime Minister and on the situation in  Bangladesh.   He  was
    advised by the police to be careful about  wording  of  tweets  in  the
    future.  The Appellant does not know how  the  police  knew  about  his
    tweet but considered that it could be someone  from  the  ruling  party
    living in the United Kingdom.

 9.  The  remainder  of  the  Appellant's  written  statement  deals   with
    background country evidence as to the situation in Bangladesh, of which
    various material was included in the original appeal bundle.

10. In his written statement signed and dated 20 December 2016,  which  was
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Appellant   provided   further
    information in relation to his claim.  He referred to  a  copy  of  the
    case filed against him in 2005  (a  First  Information  Report  "FIR"),
    which referred to his nickname 'Palash' and set out  his  other  family
    details.  The Appellant states that the  case  was  filed  against  him
    because he was a member of the Bangladesh Islami Chhatro Shibir  party.
    It was filed by a member of the Jatiotabadi Chhatro Dal, a student wing
    of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party but was subsequently withdrawn when
    the two main parties reached an agreement.

11. In his written statement signed and dated 18 May  2017,  the  Appellant
    claimed that he would be identified by the current regime on return  to
    Bangladesh, believing that it was an agent of  the  current  government
    who had reported his tweets to the Metropolitan Police in London and it
    was not unexpected or unusual to have records of meetings  and  rallies
    held in London.  The Appellant has during his time in  United  Kingdom,
    exercised  his  freedom  of  expression  and  publication,  writing  on
    Facebook and tweeting about the current oppression  in  Bangladesh  and
    fears imprisonment on return for expressing his political views,  which
    is an  offence  under  section  57  of  the  Information  Communication
    Technology Act 2006.

12. In his written statement  signed  and  dated  26  September  2017,  the
    Appellant gave some details of the problems that  he  experienced  from
    2003 until he departed Bangladesh in  September  2008,  which  included
    being beaten up in 2003 by political opponents and that his  name  been
    put on the list in 2005.  He stated that due to the nature of his  work
    as an activist and member  of  the  Bangladesh  Islami  Chhatro  Shibir
    party, there was a sense of danger and  problems,  albeit  on  a  lower
    scale  than  at  present.   This  period  covered  the  time  when  the
    Appellant's party was in government in alliance  with  the  Bangladeshi
    National Party, who were in power until  2006.   After  this  time  the
    military were in power until elections were held in December 2008  when
    the Awami League came to power.  This was after the Appellant had  left
    the country.  Those that the Appellant fears are now in power  and  can
    act with impunity.

13. The Appellant claims that it is not only those with a high profile  who
    face a risk from the current regime, all activists and people like  the
    Appellant who are  involved  with  the  opposition  parties  are  being
    targeted, abused and killed.  The Appellant was initially  a  secretary
    of his ward and  area,  then  the  secretary  of  his  college  and  at
    university he was assistant secretary.

14. The Appellant confirmed that he had attended numerous demonstrations in
    the United Kingdom, some of which  were  held  outside  the  Bangladesh
    Embassy, some outside Downing Street and  some  in  Parliament  Square.
    Evidence of his attendance at some of these has  been  submitted.   The
    Appellant is certain that his activities in  the  United  Kingdom,  via
    social media and attendance at demonstrations will have been  monitored
    by the authorities in Bangladesh which will place him at risk.

15. The Appellant did not give oral evidence at the hearing before us.

The expert evidence

16. The Appellant relies on a report by Dr Morten Koch Andersen,  which  at
    the hearing before us was undated and unsigned, although a  signed  and
    dated document with the  date  of  16  October  2017  was  subsequently
    provided.  Dr Andersen states in the report that he  had  available  to
    him instructions from  the  Appellant's  solicitors;  the  Respondent's
    refusal letter dated 10 August 2016; the  decision  of  Judge  McIntosh
    promulgated on 14 January 2017 and what is described as an  adjournment
    letter from the Upper Tribunal dated 6 June 2017.

17. Dr Andersen's report summarises the Appellant's account as one in which
    he felt persecuted in Bangladesh based  on  his  political  association
    with the Bangladesh Islami Chhatra Shibir and a fear that he will  face
    persecution upon return to Bangladesh.  He considered  that  the  claim
    was  consistent  with  his  own  knowledge  of  events  in  Bangladesh,
    involving harassment of the political  opposition,  violent  abuse  and
    torture against them and false  criminal  cases  being  lodged  against
    individuals.  He describes widespread violence and  harassment  of  the
    political opposition in the aftermath of  the  2014  election  of  both
    prominent politicians and  in  consequence  local  grassroot  activists
    being forced into hiding or stopping their political activities.

18. In terms of the Appellant's position  within  the  party,  Dr  Anderson
    considers that the Appellant's description of his political  career  is
    consistent with him being a member at secretary level and  as  such  he
    would be considered part of the leadership  team  in  local  and  rural
    areas.Consequently the government or law  enforcement  could  plausibly
    consider him as a threat along with other activists and members of  the
    opposition.

19. Dr Anderson was specifically asked whether there was  any  evidence  to
    suggest  that  the  Bangladeshi  authorities  monitored  activities  of
    opponents in the United Kingdom such  that  sur  place  activities  may
    place an individual at risk.  In response he  stated  that  it  was  an
    established fact that the government of Bangladesh have the capacity to
    monitor social media and have used this information against  opposition
    politicians with the Information Technology Act 2006 curtailing freedom
    of expression by those who hold  dissenting  views.   The  offence  now
    carries with it a jail term of between 7 and 14 years and warrants  are
    no longer required to make an arrest under the Act.  Dr  Anderson  does
    not specifically answer the question about monitoring of activities  in
    the United Kingdom.

20. Dr Anderson  stated  that  active  activists  and  politicians  of  the
    opposition parties are  currently  at  risk  of  arbitrary  arrest  and
    detention in Bangladesh.  High and low profile activists  are  targeted
    in an arbitrary way, often  with  connections  to  local  politics  and
    conflicts.  He considered that individuals  with  the  profile  of  the
    Appellant, as an opposition activist, would be considered  a  potential
    threat to the government and that there  is  no  fair  or  due  process
    within the justice system to deal with this.

21. The Appellant's solicitors specifically asked Dr Anderson 'What are the
    present risk implications to the Applicant resulting  from  having  his
    name recorded on a list in 2005?' To which  Dr  Anderson  responded  as
    follows:

         "The so-called 'lists'  are  a  special  feature  of  policing  and
         politics in Bangladesh.  The lists are compiled by police  officers
         at the local police stations  as  a  registry  of  known  political
         activists, mainly of the opposition but also  supporters  of  left-
         wing leaning parties, tend  to  be  unofficially  registered.   The
         lists are used to arrest political activists and local  leaders  in
         times of heightening tension between the  major  political  parties
         and/or  in  connection  with  local  riots,   attacks   or   public
         disturbances such as demonstrations or strikes etc.  To be  on  the
         list means you can be arrested at any time on suspicion  of  crimes
         or events that have taken place in the local community.  The  lists
         usually name locally known political activists and leaders but also
         include unknown assailants  or  persons  taking  part  in  criminal
         activities such as demonstrations, rallies or  riots.   This  gives
         the police and law enforcement agencies almost free hands to arrest
         people, whether they were present or not.  To be named  on  a  list
         puts the  person  in  severe  risk  of  arrest  and  detention  and
         violation of his/her rights."

The Appeal hearing

22. On behalf of the Appellant, Counsel submitted a skeleton  argument  and
    made oral submissions.  The preserved findings of fact from the  First-
    tier Tribunal were reiterated, that the Appellant was involved with the
    Bangladesh Islami Chhatra  Shibir  as  a  low-level  activist  and  has
    actively opposed the current regime in Bangladesh whilst in the  United
    Kingdom.  Up-to-date background evidence  from  2017  which  supersedes
    that previously filed was relied upon specifically, as was  the  expert
    report which concluded that the Appellant would be at risk  even  as  a
    low-level supporter.

23. Overall, on behalf of the Appellant it was submitted that his sur place
    activities will bring him  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  in
    Bangladesh and would resurrect the previous interest in him evidence by
    the FIR in  2005.   It  was  further  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    involvement was not at a low-level,  he  was  a  persistent  and  long-
    standing activist who would be viewed as part of the  local  leadership
    in Bangladesh which the authorities would view as significant.  We were
    taken through the latest objective evidence submitted which was said to
    show that there was no distinction  between  high  level  or  low-level
    activists and although it is accepted that most of this evidence was in
    a different context, it was relied upon to  demonstrate  that  the  key
    issue was whether a person has been critical of the government or not.

24. Counsel  for  the  Appellant  made  reference  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's wife had mental health difficulties and that they  had  two
    children for the purposes of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights, but no detailed submissions on Article 8 were made either
    in writing or orally.

25. In response, the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had not established that he was persecuted between  2003  and
    2008 and would not now face any real risk of serious harm on return  to
    Bangladesh.   It  was  submitted  that  the   Appellant's   claim   was
    essentially based on sur place activities and that  there  had  been  a
    wholesale change in his circumstances since he  left  Bangladesh.   The
    Appellant had distanced himself from  some  of  the  tweets  previously
    made,  he  didn't  advocate  a  violent  overthrow  of  the  regime  in
    Bangladesh and posed no threat to the government there.  There  was  no
    outstanding arrest warrant for him and his  claim  amounted  to  having
    made some tweets and attended demonstrations only.

26. In terms of the background evidence, the report from Amnesty  described
    only 20 enforced disappearances since 2012, which was  on  any  view  a
    very low number of people.  Again, there were comparatively low numbers
    of extrajudicial killings which  should  be  seen  in  the  context  of
    periods of heightened political violence around election  times  and  a
    general volatile situation rather than profiling or  targeting  of  all
    opponents.  The Respondent relies  on  the  background  evidence  which
    shows that leaders and high profile activists have  been  targeted  and
    submits that there is insufficient evidence  to  show  a  general  risk
    category all opponents and insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  this
    Appellant would be  at  risk  on  return.   Much  of  the  most  recent
    background evidence submitted is about general suppression of  dissent,
    focusing on  suppression  of  journalists,  suppression  because  of  a
    person's sexual orientation and religious  oppression  rather  than  of
    opponents of the current regime per se.

27. In terms of the expert evidence, it was submitted that it is clear that
    Dr Andersen had not seen the 2005 documents, nor do these of themselves
    create any risk on return to Bangladesh.  It was noted that Dr Andersen
    did not expressly deal with the Appellant's sur place activity and  did
    not answer the question about whether  the  authorities  in  Bangladesh
    monitored social media in the United Kingdom or whether they even  have
    capacity to do so.

Findings

28. In addition to the  preserved  findings  of  fact  set  out  above,  we
    specifically consider three main points in relation to the  Appellant's
    asylum claim.  First, whether he was persecuted in Bangladesh prior  to
    his departure in 2008; secondly, whether he is at  risk  on  return  to
    Bangladesh from the FIR in 2005 and thirdly, whether he is at  risk  on
    return to Bangladesh as an opponent of or  a  person  critical  of  the
    current regime.

29. The Appellant relies on an incident in 2003 when he was beaten up badly
    at college as past  persecution,  claiming  that  he  was  specifically
    targeted  in  this  attack  because  of  his  political   views.    The
    information about this incident comes primarily  from  the  Appellant's
    substantive asylum interview in which he claimed that he was beaten  up
    because he was secretary of his political  party  and  following  being
    identified helping a member of his party who himself had been attacked.
     There is in our view,  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  was
    specifically targeted in advance but that at worst, he was attacked  by
    unknown assailants after helping another.  We do not find that there is
    anything to suggest that the Appellant  was  targeted  because  of  his
    political views, or that even  if  this  was  a  factor,  that  it  was
    anything other than an isolated incident which arose  following  events
    on a particular day.  This isolated incident does not  amount  to  past
    persecution in Bangladesh.

30. As to the FIR in 2005, we do not find that it  establishes  any  future
    risk to the Appellant on return to Bangladesh.  On the Appellant's  own
    evidence, it was a false charge made against him (as one  of  46  named
    individuals) by a member of Jatiotabadi Chhatro Dal, a student wing  of
    the Bangladesh Nationalist Party  which  was  withdrawn  the  following
    year, in 2006, when there  was  an  agreement  between  the  Bangladesh
    Nationalist Party and the Jamaat-e-Islami party.  The Appellant had  no
    difficulties in relation to the FIR after 2006 until he left Bangladesh
    (nor since) and it is difficult to see why it would now cause  him  any
    further difficulties more than ten  years  later  with  an  unconnected
    political party, the Awami League, now in power.  The Appellant has not
    claimed that there is any specific threat or risk arising from this FIR
    now, but it has been submitted on his behalf that it could  somehow  be
    resurrected against him on return because of his sur place  activities.
    We find no basis for that submission at all.

31. We also find that the 'list' referred to by Dr Andersen in  his  report
    is not the same thing as the FIR in 2005.  Dr Andersen was not provided
    with a copy of the FIR as part of his instructions and he does not list
    it as a document he has seen.  His description of the  'list',  as  set
    out above, is fundamentally inconsistent with the FIR that we have been
    provided with and there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  Appellant
    appears on any such 'list' as described  by  Dr  Andersen  which  would
    place him at risk.

32. Finally, in relation to  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim,  we  consider
    whether he would be at risk on return to Bangladesh as a critic of  the
    current regime from his sur place activities.  We do not find that  the
    Appellant has established that he would be on the evidence  before  us.
    We do not find the evidence of Dr Andersen of any  assistance  in  this
    regard given that he failed to answer the question  about  whether  the
    Bangladesh authorities have the capacity to, or  in  fact  do,  monitor
    social media outside of Bangladesh.  Although, as was  found  by  Judge
    McIntosh, the  Appellant  is  identifiable  on  social  media  for  his
    participation in protests, that does not necessarily mean that he would
    be or has been identified by the authorities in Bangladesh.

33. The background country evidence  which  we  were  taken  to  does  give
    examples  of  the  Bangladesh  authorities   suppressing   freedom   of
    expression and using legal powers to do so, but only  one  example  was
    given of this being  used  for  a  low  level  student  activist.   The
    material  focused  on  examples  of  suppression  of  journalists,  and
    suppression of those with a particular sexual orientation or  religious
    identity and includes relatively low numbers of people  involved.   The
    material falls far short of establishing such a wide risk  category  as
    contended for by the Appellant and to some extent by  Dr  Andersen,  of
    all political opponents being at risk.  We find there  is  insufficient
    material before us to establish such a general risk even on  the  lower
    standard of proof.

34. Dr Andersen suggests that the Appellant would in fact be seen as a high
    level activist locally or rurally as he was secretary  of  his  student
    party.  However, that position was held in 2002 to 2003/4 with no  more
    recent activity for that particular party.  We do  not  agree  that  in
    these circumstances the  Appellant  would  be  seen  as  a  high  level
    activist, even locally, but in any event, even if he was,  there  would
    only be a very limited geographical area of risk, if at all.   On  this
    basis, even taking the Appellant's claim at its highest, there would be
    the option of internal relocation and a sufficiency of  protection  for
    the Appellant in Bangladesh.

35. For the reasons set out above, we dismiss the Appellant's asylum  claim
    and would also dismiss any claim for humanitarian  protection  or  that
    his removal would breach Articles 2 and/or 3 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights on the same basis.  The Appellant's claim  under  these
    alternative provisions would stand or fall with his  asylum  claim  and
    there are no distinctions between the factual  bases  for  any  of  the
    heads of claim.

36. Finally, we deal with the remainder of  the  Appellant's  human  rights
    appeal on the basis of Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  Judge McIntosh, in a single paragraph, referred  very  briefly
    to the Appellant's family circumstances in that his wife and child were
    living with him in  the  United  Kingdom  and  were  dependent  on  the
    Appellant for  emotional  support.   He  then  found  that  there  were
    exceptional grounds for the appellant and his family to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  We read that final conclusion in  the  context  of  an
    appeal which was being allowed on asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds and note that no detailed findings  were  made  at  all  either
    within or outside of the Immigration Rules as  to  family  and  private
    life.

37. The error of law decision did not specifically deal with the Article  8
    part of the decision of Judge McIntosh but we find that in the  absence
    of anything preserving those findings, it was set aside by Judge Storey
    in his decision.  That leaves us to consider  the  matter  afresh  when
    remaking the decision on appeal.

38. In her skeleton argument, Counsel for the Appellant submitted that  the
    Appellant would meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
    Immigration Rules in that there would be very significant obstacles  to
    his reintegration in Bangladesh as he was been away from there  for  10
    years.  No further detail has been given by the  Appellant  himself  in
    evidence, nor has reliance been placed on any  particular  facts  other
    than the length of absence from Bangladesh.  We do not find  that  this
    of itself creates very  significant  obstacles  for  the  Appellant  to
    integrate on return.   He  has  spent  the  majority  of  his  life  in
    Bangladesh, has been educated there and there is nothing before  us  to
    suggest that he has lost all ties (linguistic, cultural, familial) with
    Bangladesh such that he could not re-establish himself on return.

39. It is further suggested by Counsel for the Appellant that the Appellant
    would face serious hardship on return to Bangladesh with his family  (a
    wife and now two children) but again, there is no evidence  to  support
    that assertion and no reason to suggest that the Appellant would not be
    able to maintain and accommodate his family on return.

40. As to family life, the Appellant has not  claimed  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of Appendix FM (he  clearly  can  not)  and  he  would  be
    returning together with his wife and children who are  all  Bangladeshi
    nationals with no leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

41. For completeness and because there  are  children  involved  such  that
    their best interests need to be taken into  account,  we  consider  the
    Appellant's private and family life outside of  the  Immigration  Rules
    under  Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  in
    accordance with the five stage approach set out in Razgar.

42. The Appellant's case before us on Article 8 is very limited indeed.  It
    is said that he has established a private life in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 2008, albeit no detail of any significant ties  or  private  life
    which could not be continued or re-established in Bangladesh  has  been
    given.  In relation to his family, his wife has, at least in the  past,
    had mental health problems but the latest  medical  evidence  available
    before us dates back to February 2016 and refers to improvements in her
    condition at that time.

43. The Appellant and his wife have two children, both  under  school  age,
    and neither of whom have yet established any private life of their  own
    outside of the family.  The Respondent gave detailed  consideration  to
    the eldest child's best interests (the younger child was  born  earlier
    this year after the decision) in the reasons for refusal  letter  which
    we have no basis to disagree with given the lack of evidence  from  the
    Appellant or his wife submitted in the course of his appeal  about  the
    children.  Similarly, we have no reason to consider that  the  position
    would be any different for the younger child.  We find that  it  is  in
    the children's best interests to remain with their parents and there is
    nothing before us to indicate that that should be in the United Kingdom
    rather than in Bangladesh.

44. The Appellant, his wife and children enjoy  family  life  together  but
    would be returning together to Bangladesh such that there would  be  no
    interference with their family life which could continue to be  enjoyed
    on return.  As to private life, although we accept that  it  is  likely
    that the Appellant (and probably his wife) would  have  built  up  some
    private life in the United Kingdom, there is nothing  to  suggest  that
    this is significant or could not be recreated on return to  Bangladesh.
    The Appellant's removal to  Bangladesh  would,  at  worst,  be  a  very
    limited interference with his right to respect  for  private  life  but
    would be in accordance with the law and in pursuit of a legitimate aim,
    namely the economic well-being of the country through  the  maintenance
    of effective immigration control.

45. We find that the Appellant's removal would not  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for private  life,  taking  into
    account the very limited  evidence  of  any  significant  private  life
    established in the United Kingdom, the Appellant's connections with his
    home country and the  factors  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2006.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     8th November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

