
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/09082/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th December 2017                         |                              |
|                                              |On 22nd January 2018          |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   MR ZMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 4th June 1997.   He  arrived
    in the UK on 26th February 2016 claiming asylum on 27th February  2016.
    It was an issue in the proceedings that it was contended  that  he  had
    been fingerprinted in Greece on 13th December  2015.   The  Appellant's
    application for asylum was refused by Notice of Refusal on 10th  August
    2016.  The Appellant had claimed asylum  based  upon  a  fear  that  if
    returned to Iran he would face mistreatment due to his association with
    his cousin who supported the KDP.  The Secretary of State  in  refusing
    the  Appellant's  application  contended   that   he   was   not   only
    fingerprinted in Greece but in Dunkirk on 28th January  2016  and  that
    the Secretary of State contended he was an Iraqi national.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal James sitting at Bradford  on  24th  March  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 25th  April  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 9th April 2017 the Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    materially erred in law by making findings unsupported by any  evidence
    in the case and by failing to resolve the substance of the  Appellant's
    case.  On 18th September 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer  granted
    permission to appeal. Judge Mailer noted that the grounds asserted that
    the Appellant had claimed  in  his  screening  interview  that  he  was
    fingerprinted in Greece on approximately 28th  January  2016  and  that
    there was no evidence presented by the Respondent to  substantiate  the
    assertion that he was fingerprinted in Greece on  13th  December  2015.
    That was an issue which was raised at  the  prehearing  review  in  the
    reply notice dated 4th January 2017.  However it  was  contended  there
    was still no evidence adduced by the Respondent  in  that  respect  and
    this appeared to be determinative in the judge's reasoning.

 4. The prehearing review form dated 6th July 2017 was  before  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal.   In  the  reply  notice  the  Appellant's   solicitors
    requested that evidence relating to the Appellant's  fingerprinting  in
    Greece as asserted by the Respondent should be provided.  Judge  Mailer
    considered that it  was  arguable  that  there  was  no  evidence  that
    supported the material finding made by the judge that the Appellant was
    in Greece on 13th December 2015.  The Respondent's  assertion  in  that
    respect had been contested throughout including at the  appeal  hearing
    where the issue is specifically addressed at paragraph 33.

 5. On 28th September 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.   The  Rule  24  response  contends  that  the
    Grounds of Appeal appear to misunderstand the findings of the Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and that the judge found that the Appellant was
    "equivocal and inconsistent" about being fingerprinted in  both  Greece
    and France.  Neither, it was contended, did the Appellant deny that  it
    was claimed that he was Iraqi on those occasions rather  he  sought  to
    blame other parties for the confusion over his nationality.   The  Rule
    24 reply contends that it was open to the judge to find that this tacit
    acceptance of the facts that he had previously  denied  undermined  his
    claim to have not been  fingerprinted  at  the  time  asserted  by  the
    Secretary of State.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by his  instructed  Counsel
    Mr Holmes.  Mr Holmes is familiar with this matter.  He appeared before
    the First-tier Tribunal and he is the author of the Grounds of  Appeal.
    The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    Mrs Petterson.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Holmes submits that the Grounds of Appeal turns solely on the  basis
    that there was no proof provided despite there having  been  a  request
    for production of evidence by the Secretary of State that the Appellant
    had been fingerprinted in Greece.  He submits that the judge was  wrong
    in merely accepting the  assertion  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    without evidence and by believing without evidence the position of  the
    Home Office.  He submits that it was quite simply not open to the judge
    to come to that conclusion without evidence being provided.   He  asked
    me to remit to the Secretary  of  State  with  a  preservation  of  the
    Appellant's nationality.  Mrs Petterson points out that the  judge  has
    considered these issues at paragraph  36  of  his  decision  where  the
    Appellant it is noted accepts he was fingerprinted in Greece as claimed
    in his asylum interview.  Therefore the Tribunal was entitled  to  make
    its conclusions.  The judge he  submits  has  made  clear  findings  at
    paragraph 42 and that the judge it is noted  had  difficulty  with  the
    Appellant's evidence.

 8.  In  brief  response  Mr  Holmes  emphasises  the  point  that  on  the
    Appellant's own version of events he admits that he was  in  Greece  in
    January/February 2016 and  could  have  been  fingerprinted  there  but
    reiterates that he was not in Greece in December 2015 and  consequently
    could not have been fingerprinted at that  time.   He  emphasised  that
    this is material to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and
    asked me to remit the matter for rehearing.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Material Error of Law

11. The issue herein turns entirely on the Appellant's credibility  and  as
    emphasised at paragraph 39 of Judge James' decision a key  issue  about
    credibility relates to the Appellant's being  fingerprinted  in  Greece
    and France whilst en route to the UK.  Paragraph 40 is  of  importance.
    It is the assertion of the Secretary of State that  the  Appellant  was
    fingerprinted in Greece on 13th December 2015.  The Appellant's version
    of events is that he was not in Greece in  December  2015.   He  admits
    that he was there in the middle of January 2016 and consequently  could
    have been fingerprinted then or, as is submitted by Mr Holmes, in early
    February 2016.

12. The issue is of considerable importance.  Firstly because  it  goes  to
    the credibility of the Appellant's testimony and secondly  because  the
    Secretary of State has despite  constant  requests  failed  to  provide
    evidence  in  support  of  the  contention  that  the   Appellant   was
    fingerprinted in December 2015.  Whilst of course the judge can look at
    all matters in the round bearing in mind the importance of  this  issue
    particular with regard to the consideration of the credibility  of  the
    Appellant's testimony I find that the judge materially erred in law  in
    merely accepting the bare assertion of the Secretary of State  when  no
    evidence  was  produced  particularly  bearing  in  mind  the  specific
    requests made by the Appellant's legal team for the Secretary of  State
    to provide evidence which I assume would not have  been  difficult  for
    them to do.  In such circumstances the  correct  procedure  is  to  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  to  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law and is set aside.  Directions  are  given  for  the  rehearing  of  this
matter.

 1) On finding that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contains
    a material error of law the decision is set  aside  with  none  of  the
    findings of fact to stand.  The matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Bradford to be heard on the first available date 28
    days hence with an ELH of three hours.

 2) The hearing is to be before any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  other
    than Immigration Judge James.

 3) That there be leave to either party to file objective and/or subjective
    evidence upon which they intend to rely at the further hearing of  this
    matter  at  least  seven  days  prior  to  the  restored  hearing.   In
    particular I direct that the Secretary  of  State  do  serve  and  file
    evidence  in  support  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  contention  the
    Appellant was fingerprinted in Greece on 13th December 2015.

 4) In the event that the Appellant requires an interpreter at the restored
    hearing his instructed solicitors must notify the Tribunal within seven
    days of receipt of these directions.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and none is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
