
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09614/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd October 2018                           |On 30th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                Bupinder [S]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Norman (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Jessica Pacey, promulgated on  6th  November  2017,  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham on 27th October 2017.  In the determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on [  ~
    ] 1988.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  19th
    September 2017, refusing his claim,  and  that  of  his  wife  and  two
    children, for asylum and humanitarian protection pursuant to  paragraph
    339F of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is an Afghan  Sikh  who
    cannot return to Afghanistan where he would be persecuted  for  reasons
    of his religion and ethnic orientation.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge's findings began from the premise that there was  a  previous
    decision by another judge, namely,  by  Judge  Garbeet  (AA/12364/2014)
    which was promulgated on 10th November 2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Stoke-on-Trent,  Bennett  House,  on  24th  October   2016.   In   that
    determination the judge  had  wrongly  concluded  (as  it  subsequently
    transpired) that the Appellant was not from Afghanistan, and that there
    were serious concerns about the  credibility  of  his  claim.   At  the
    hearing now before Judge Pacey, it had been conceded that the Appellant
    was indeed from Afghanistan.  His  nationality  was  therefore  not  an
    issue.  The only question that remained now was whether his  claim  was
    credible with respect to the alleged persecution that he complained of.



 5. At the hearing before Judge Pacey, Mr Samra, appearing on behalf of the
    Appellant, submitted that the Appellant's protection claim  should  now
    be accepted given that it was conceded that he  was  from  Afghanistan,
    because it would now be plausible that he would be found credible  with
    respect to other matters.  He did not speak  Dari  or  Pushto,  and  so
    could not obtain employment on return.

 6. On the Respondent's part, the judge noted how, at  the  hearing  below,
    the Appellant had provided statements  and  documents  to  confirm  his
    nationality and that the Afghan Embassy had acknowledged that he was  a
    national of Afghanistan.  He had also provided a DNA test to  establish
    that he was the brother of two people, who had been accepted as  Afghan
    nationals, with full refugee status  in  the  UK,  and  with  leave  to
    remain.  Therefore, it was accepted that the Appellant was  a  national
    of Afghanistan,  see  paragraph  18  of  Judge  Pacey's  determination.
    However, what was  submitted  now  before  Judge  Pacey  was  that  the
    previous judge had not accepted the Appellant's claim that he had  been
    persecuted by the Taliban or that his account of suffering attacks  was
    credible.  The Appellant's home area was Jalalabad, and this was  under
    the control currently of the  Afghan  government,  so  there  would  be
    avenues of protection open to him.  Moreover, Judge Pacey had regard to
    the country guidance case of TG [2015] UKUT 595, where it was  accepted
    not every Afghan Sikh case stood to succeed.

 7. Against this background, Judge Pacey made the following  two  findings.
    First, that given that the starting point was Devaseelan  [2004]  UKIAT
    000282 the decision of  Judge  Garbeet  on  10th  November  2016,  with
    respect to his having found the whole of the Appellant's account to  be
    lacking in credibility, had to be the starting point of  considerations
    now by Judge Pacey (see paragraphs 27 to 29).

 8. Judge Pacey also very properly considered how she might depart from the
    decision of Judge Garbeet, within the structures already allowed for in
    the Rule in Devaseelan, by expressly stating that,

         "The question therefore to my mind is the extent to which the  fact
         that, albeit correctly on the  evidence  before  me,  the  previous
         Immigration  Judge  found  the  Appellant's  claim   to   be   from
         Afghanistan not to be credible, this affected her consideration  of
         the other aspects of his claim, and whether that consideration was,
         to use a word employed in oral submission, 'tainted' by  a  finding
         on nationality" (paragraph 29).

 9. Second, Judge Pacey then looked at the decision of  Judge  Garbeet  and
    observed that his crucial findings were at paragraph 27, where  he  had
    said that, "I am not satisfied even to the lower standard of proof that
    the Appellant is from Afghanistan or that the attacks by the Taliban he
    described took place".  Judge Pacey deduced from this that the  use  of
    the word "or" was one which suggested that  there  were  two  limbs  to
    paragraph 27 and that the second part  was  "a  discrete  and  separate
    finding from a finding that the attacks by  the  Taliban  did  not,  in
    their view, take place.  The second finding is  not  dependent  on  the
    first" (paragraph 33).

10. Based on this, the judge went on to conclude that, "despite that,  with
    respect to the Appellant, despite his apparent  lack  of  knowledge  of
    Afghanistan, he is from that country" but he had simply reasserted  the
    same points made before, and did not  address  the  credibility  issues
    particularly put forward in the previous  determination  (at  paragraph
    23).  The judge so concluded at paragraph 34 of the determination.

11. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  in  law  because
    she proceeded on the basis that the starting point, under the  Rule  in
    Devaseelan, had to be the  decision  of  Judge  Garbeet,  whereas  that
    decision was fundamentally flawed by a wrong decision  on  nationality,
    when it had subsequently been confirmed that the Appellant  was  indeed
    an Afghan national, such that everything that  thereafter  flowed  from
    that initial wrongful conclusion, was bound to have been  also  wrongly
    arrived at.

13. On 3rd January 2018 permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on
    the basis that there was an arguable error of law in the way that Judge
    Pacey assessed credibility, failing to do so entirely for herself,  and
    basing her conclusions to a large extent upon those of Judge Garbeet on
    10th November 2016.  Second, permission was also granted on  the  basis
    that the country guidance case of TG [2015] UKUT  00595  had  not  been
    applied.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 3rd October 2018, Miss Norman, appearing as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the  fact  that  the
    Appellant  lacked  knowledge  of  his  surroundings   in   Afghanistan,
    including the mountains and the terrain, as well as  other  aspects  of
    the country, confirmed that he lived an isolated life in his  home  and
    was afraid to venture out, except to go to the family's  market  stall.
    That being so the  Appellant's  very  ignorance  went  to  proving  his
    particular claim.  It was therefore important for  the  judge  to  have
    undertaken her own assessment of  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant,
    rather than relying upon the credibility  findings  of  Judge  Garbeet.
    Second, she submitted that this was a case where  the  Appellant's  two
    brothers had been  granted  full  refugee  asylum  status  in  the  UK.
    Whereas, of course, it is accepted, that each case must  be  determined
    on its own facts, to the extent that  the  basis  of  their  claim,  as
    Afghan Sikhs, from the same area, was similar to  the  Appellant's  own
    claim, was a matter that could relevantly have been taken into account,
    which the judge did not do.  Third, there ought to be,  accordingly,  a
    finding of an error of law because there should have been  an  entirely
    fresh approach to the credibility of this Appellant by Judge Pacey.  No
    previous finding  should  be  preserved,  apart  from  the  Appellant's
    nationality.

15.  For  her  part,  Mrs  Aboni  submitted  that  if  one  looks  at   the
    determination of Judge Garbeet, it is clear that considerable  time  is
    spent assessing the Appellant's credibility, before the  conclusion  is
    reached that "the Appellant's account is riddled with  inconsistencies"
    (paragraph 23). A number of examples are then  given  in  subparagraphs
    that are carefully set out.  For example, the Appellant had  said  that
    he does not venture out of his house except to go to temple.   And  yet
    it transpired he did go out.  He had said that he did not know  how  to
    ride a bicycle, and that the journey to the brother's wife  was  almost
    25 to 30 minutes' bicycle ride, and yet it transpired that he did go to
    his brother's market stall with some  food  alone,  when  he  was  then
    attacked for the first time in 2005.  Indeed,  the  Appellant  and  his
    brothers, who are also Sikh, left on a daily basis to go to the  market
    stall (see paragraph 23(iii)).  Moreover, in his  screening  interview,
    the Appellant did not mention having been subject  to  any  attacks  in
    Afghanistan (paragraph 23(iv)).  Furthermore, the  Appellant  mentioned
    for the first time in oral  evidence  before  Judge  Garbeet  that  his
    brother had been attacked by the Taliban in Afghanistan on his  way  to
    the market stall, and when he had asked why  this  had  not  been  done
    before, he had said that he had not been  asked  previously  (paragraph
    23(v)).

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

17. First, this is a case where the fact that a previous judge had  reached
    the wrong conclusion with respect to the Appellant's nationality  meant
    that the credibility assessment made  by  the  judge  had  to  be  very
    carefully evaluated before it could  be  adopted.   Instead,  what  the
    judge actually had done, against the background where  it  is  accepted
    that documentation has been forthcoming from the  Afghan  Embassy  that
    the Appellant is an Afghan national, is to proceed on  the  basis  that
    Judge Garbeet had come  to  clear  conclusions  about  the  Appellant's
    credibility.  This is clear from  what  is  said  by  Judge  Pacey  (at
    paragraph 34) that the Appellant "has reasserted points he made but  no
    more" (paragraph 34).  Judge Pacey has gone on to say that, "that  does
    not address the credibility issues  particularly  put  forward  in  the
    previous determination at paragraph 23, which do not rely on the extent
    of his knowledge about  Afghanistan  generally  or  his  home  area  in
    particular" (paragraph 34).  This is because it is not  the  case  that
    the expression that, "I am not satisfied even to the lower standard  of
    proof that the Appellant is from Afghanistan or that the attacks by the
    Taliban he described took place" can be mutely  compartmentalised  into
    two discrete limbs.  It is not the case that the use of the  word  "or"
    means that there are two "discrete and separate findings"  here.   This
    is because plainly the reference to "the attacks by the Taliban"  is  a
    reference to attacks by the Taliban in  Afghanistan.   Given  that  the
    Appellant's nationality by the previous judge had not been accepted, as
    his being from Afghanistan, this very  question  needs  to  be  visited
    again in terms of his credibility by the freshly convened Tribunal.

18. Second, Judge  Garbeet  did  draw  attention  to  the  fact  that,  "he
    confirmed that his brothers, who are also Sikh, left  the  house  on  a
    daily basis to go to the market stall" (paragraph 23(iii)).  This shows
    that the situation of his brothers was relevant to his  own  situation.
    These two brothers have now been granted refugee asylum status  in  the
    UK.  The basis of why that has been the case is  directly  relevant  to
    the Appellant's own claim, not only with respect to the evidence before
    Judge Pacey, but  also  with  respect  to  the  evidence  before  Judge
    Garbeet, insofar as it remained relevant on the Devaseelan  principles.
    With respect to other findings at paragraph 23, these are  all  matters
    that should have been considered again by Judge  Pacey  because  it  is
    entirely arguable that the findings arose directly  from  a  conclusion
    that the Appellant was not from Afghanistan made by  Judge  Garbeet  on
    the previous occasion.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge Pacey,  pursuant
    to Practice Statement 7.2(b)  because  the  nature  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact-finding, which is necessary in order for the decision  in
    the appeal to be remade is such that, having regard to  the  overriding
    objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

20. No anonymity direction is made.

21. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018
