
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09118/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reason Promulgated  |
|On 12th December 2017                      |On 14th December 2017          |


                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     RR
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna, instructed by Gurney Harden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1984. He arrived  in
       the UK on 12th March 2015 with a  joining  ship  visa,  and  claimed
       asylum on 23rd March 2016. His claim  was  refused  on  11th  August
       2016. His appeal against the decision was dismissed on  all  grounds
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Goodrich in a determination promulgated
       on the 11th January 2017

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rimington
       on 23rd August 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that the First-
       tier judge had erred in law in failing to make it clear what  weight
       was to be given to the evidence of Mr  T  Karkalan,  attorney,  with
       respect to the arrest warrant. In turn that evidence was relevant to
       the merit of the underlying claim of the appellant  to  be  at  real
       risk of serious harm if returned to Sri Lanka, and so this matter is
       arguably material to the outcome of the appeal and the determination
       of Article 3 ECHR. Ground three  relating  to  the  Article  3  ECHR
       medical claim was not admitted as the European Court of Human Rights
       decision in Paposhvili does not undermine domestic law.

    3. The matter came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In the grounds of appeal and oral submissions by Ms  Patyna  it  was
       contended, firstly, that the appellant submitted evidence from Mr  T
       Karkalan, attorney-at-law in Sri Lanka, which  was  a  letter  which
       stated that as a result of his own independent enquiries Mr Karkalan
       had been informed that there was a case against the  appellant  with
       the Terrorism Investigation Department (TID) under the Prevention of
       Terrorism Act, and that there was  a  warrant  for  the  appellant's
       arrest. The First-tier Tribunal examines this evidence at paragraphs
       61 to 63, and accepts that Mr Karkalan is an attorney as claimed and
       that the evidence supports the appellant's account.

    5. However, the First-tier Tribunal then find for a number  of  reasons
       that the appellant is not wanted in  this  way  by  the  Sri  Lankan
       authorities without addressing  the  weight  to  be  given  to  this
       evidence which was on the face of it  determinative  of  the  appeal
       under GJ and others (post civil war returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]
       UKUT 319. The case of PJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1011  at
       paragraph 41 emphasises that independent legal advice should be seen
       as being of significance. This letter was obtained  by  UK  lawyers,
       and the surrounding email correspondence had been provided, and  was
       not therefore dependent on the appellant or potentially infected  by
       any contended lack of credibility on his part.  Some of the  further
       reasoning for why the appellant  is  not  believed  is  contrary  to
       findings in the country guidance case  of  GJ  -  for  instance  the
       finding that it was not likely he would be  released  by  way  of  a
       bribe, see paragraph 275 of GJ.

    6. Secondly it was argued in the grounds that as the appellant  had  an
       independent Article 3 ECHR claim which was  not  determined  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal. This was because he was accepted by the  First-
       tier Tribunal to be suffering from PTSD  caused  by  events  in  Sri
       Lanka and to be unable to give evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  and
       further it was accepted that he had been detained and  assaulted  by
       police in Sri Lanka in 2006. The appellant is therefore said  to  be
       likely to be detained in these circumstances for further questioning
       on arrival in Sri Lanka, and this might be extended and involve ill-
       treatment due to his mental state and inability to give  a  coherent
       account.

    7. In the Rule 24 letter and in oral  submissions  from  Mr  Kotas  the
       respondent accepts that the attorney's letter was  potentially  seen
       as support of the appellant's claim. However, when all  matters  are
       considered in the round the appellant is unsuccessful. This was  the
       correct approach to documentary  evidence,  following  the  case  of
       Tanveer Ahmed. With respect to the second ground it is  argued  that
       if the appellant did not fall within a GJ risk category then he  was
       not at risk of detention and therefore was  not  at  risk  of  being
       subjected to detention conditions  or  other  ill-treatment  in  Sri
       Lanka.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. We find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in making findings
       that the letter was  written  by  an  attorney,  and  provides  some
       support that there is a terrorism related warrant for his arrest and
       not finding  that  the  appellant  had  satisfied  the  lower  civil
       standard of proof to show that he was at real risk of persecution on
       return to Sri Lanka given the risk category at 7(d) in  GJ.  If  the
       document was to be given weight, as is  indicated  by  the  apparent
       initial findings about its provenance,  then  the  appellant  should
       rationally have been found to have shown he would be at real risk of
       serious harm on return even if his own account of  past  persecution
       was not coherent or convincing.

    9. Further some of the  points  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
       paragraphs 62 and 63 are not rational reasons  why  the  appellant's
       history should not be  believed.  As  the  appellant  has  correctly
       argued release via a bribe is not indicative of a person  not  being
       wanted for a terrorist offence and it was not rational of the First-
       tier Tribunal to speculate why  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  might
       erroneously (on the  appellant's  unbelieved  history)  believe  the
       appellant posed such a risk or why they took time to make  enquiries
       with his parents or did not know he had left Sri Lanka, particularly
       as in paragraph 64 of the decision it is accepted  that  exits  from
       Sri Lanka are not routinely monitored.

   10. The s.8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Offenders  etc.)  Act
       2004 points were lawfully made by the First-tier Tribunal. The First-
       tier Tribunal accepts that  detention  in  2006  for  LTTE  relating
       activities.  The reasons for not accepting the  credibility  of  the
       further LTTE involvement from 2008 and the detention and torture  in
       2014 are detailed and do not, in isolation, err in law, however  the
       errors identified above mean that the decision that the appellant is
       not at real risk of serious harm is clearly unsafe.

   11. In these circumstances, given the errors of law identified,  we  set
       aside the decision dismissing the appeal and all of the findings  of
       the First-tier Tribunal, and given the extent of fact finding  which
       would be needed to remake this appeal we remitted it to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal for remaking de novo.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. We set aside the decision and all of the findings.

   3. We remit the remaking of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
    of his protection claim.




Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   13th  December
2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







