

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09525/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice Centre    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|(remote)                                     |                              |
|On: 5th March 2021                           |On: 11th March 2021           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     SKH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Lexadeen Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq  born  in  1991.  He  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Handler)  to
    dismiss his protection appeal.


 2. Judge Handler's decision was promulgated on  the  18th  December  2019.
    Permission was granted on the 28th January 2020. The Covid-19  pandemic
    intervened, and this has led to a regrettable  delay  in  listing.  The
    hearing before me was convened, with the consent  of  the  parties,  by
    remote means.



    Background and Matters in Issue

 3. For the purpose of this appeal the facts asserted by the Appellant  may
    be shortly stated. He claims to  be  a  Kurd  from  Kirkuk  who  is  in
    possession of neither a CSID card nor, he says,   contact  details  for
    his family


 4. Before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant successfully  argued  that
    applying the guidance in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  (IAC)  Kirkuk  was  classified   as
    "contested" territory such that return there would expose the Appellant
    to a real risk  of  indiscriminate  violence  contrary  to  the  United
    Kingdom's  obligations  under  Article  15(c)  of   the   Qualification
    Directive.   The  question  remained  whether   the   Appellant   could
    reasonably be expected to internally relocate to avoid the conflict  in
    Kirkuk. The Secretary of State accepted that as a Kurd he could not  be
    expected to go to Baghdad, but submitted that the  Appellant  would  be
    able to enter and live in the Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  (the  IKR).   The
    First-tier Tribunal agreed, and the appeal  was  dismissed  on  Article
    15(c) grounds.   In particular it found:

              i) That no risk arises from the Appellant's  stated  political
                 activity (Facebook posts);
             ii) As a Kurd he could enter the IKR without difficulty;
            iii) He is a young, healthy male who has previously "worked as a
                 peshmerga";
             iv) He has family"near" the IKR who could  financially  support
                 him;
              v) In possession of  a  CSID  -  supplied  by  his  family  or
                 obtained prior to departure - he could fly direct to  Erbil
                 from Baghdad;
             vi) He is literate  and  could  use  his  former  status  as  a
                 peshmerga to find work and support himself.


 5. In the alternative the Appellant submitted that returning him  to  Iraq
    today would expose him to a real risk of destitution/living in  inhuman
    and degrading conditions so as to amount  to  a  violation  of  Article
    15(b). The Appellant relied in this regard on the Secretary of  State's
    concession on that issue, endorsed by the Tribunal in  AA  (Iraq),  and
    reaffirmed in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 00212 (IAC).   The effect of  this  concession  was  that  if  the
    Appellant was, and was to remain, undocumented, and had  no  family  to
    whom he could turn for support on arrival, his appeal should be allowed
    on  those  limited  grounds.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  the
    Appellant's claims as to his  family,  in  particular  his  mother  and
    younger siblings. It found  that  he  had  been  untruthful  about  his
    attempts to contact them, and found as fact that they were in  fact  in
    touch. They could send him his CSID, or supply him with the information
    necessary to obtain a new one from the Iraqi  embassy  in  London.  The
    appeal was thereby also dismissed on this alternative ground.

 6. The Appellant's grounds of appeal allege that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in several respects, but as  Mr  Hussain  realistically  accepted
    before me,  matters have now moved on, in that a matter of weeks  after
    the decision of Judge  Handler  the  Upper  Tribunal  handed  down  the
    decision in SMO and Others (Article 15(c) identity documents)  Iraq  CG
    [2019] UKUT 400.  Applying common law principles that country  guidance
    decision is binding upon me in my analysis of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision. Mr Hussain further accepted that for  that  reason  he  would
    have  to  concede  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  'cross   appeal',
    articulated by way of a Rule 24 response on the 5th February 2020,  was
    made out: in that letter  Senior  Presenting  Officer  Mr  S.  Whitwell
    indicated that  the Secretary of State sought to rely on  the  decision
    in  SMO  to  challenge  the  Tribunal's  finding  that  Kirkuk  remains
    contested territory  such  that  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive was engaged.

 7. That being the case I  accept  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside. In my explanation as to why, I will make  a
    distinction between the grounds as originally pleaded and the reasoning
    only shown to be incorrect ex post facto by SMO.



    'Original' Errors

 8. I am satisfied that at the date of its decision in  November  2019  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in the following material respects:


              i) Failing to have regard to the material country guidance  in
                 AAH (Iraq)  about  which  family  members  can  assist  the
                 undocumented returnee in these circumstances. The  evidence
                 given in that case was that the family records operate on a
                 patrilineal   system,   so   that   contact   with    one's
                 mother/maternal family would in any  event  be  of  limited
                 assistance.


             ii) No consideration is given to the  fact  that  the  relevant
                 civil registry would be in Kirkuk and on the Tribunal's own
                 findings it could  be  difficult,  or  dangerous,  for  the
                 Appellant or his family to attend there in order to  obtain
                 a new CSID - the  finding  that  Article  15(c)  conditions
                 persisted there was also  relevant  to  whether  the  civil
                 registry was even still operational.

            iii) Failing to have regard to the extensive evidence set out  -
                 and accepted - in  both  AA  and  AAH  in  respect  of  the
                 likelihood of obtaining a new document in London. The Upper
                 Tribunal held that  whilst  it  is  possible  to  obtain  a
                 document from the embassy there are a number  of  obstacles
                 to this being accomplished. Those obstacles -  set  out  in
                 the detailed and persuasive evidence of country  expert  Dr
                 Fatah - include the rigorous documentary requirements,  the
                 fact  that  the  staff  in  the  embassy,  and  indeed  re-
                 documentation  centres  in  Iraq,  are   not   particularly
                 interested  in  helping  returnees,  and  that  the   civil
                 registry  offices  in  many  'contested'  areas  had   been
                 destroyed by ISIL.   The Tribunal does not appear  to  have
                 taken any of that into account.

             iv) The internal flight analysis  undertaken  by  the  Tribunal
                 does not comply with  the  guidance  in  AAH  in  that  the
                 Tribunal   has   failed   to   examine   the    Appellant's
                 circumstances on return to Baghdad (as a  citizen  of  Iraq
                 'proper' he could not be returned direct to Erbil), and has
                 not  given the careful consideration required as to whether
                 the Appellant would be able to support himself upon  return
                 having regard to the fact that 70% IDPs are unemployed, and
                 that he has no obvious connections in that territory.



    Findings inconsistent with the Country Guidance in SMO (Iraq)

 9. Applying, as the parties agree  I  must,  the  reasoning  in  SMO,  the
    decision below is further flawed for the following material error:

              v) Mistake of fact. The Secretary of State argued  before  the
                 First-tier Tribunal that there had been a  material  change
                 in circumstances since the decision in AA  (Iraq)  viz  the
                 military  defeat  of  ISIS.  The  Tribunal  rejected   that
                 contention but as the decision in SMO illustrates,  it  was
                 wrong to do so. There was cogent  evidence  to  demonstrate
                 that the guidance in AA should no longer be followed.




    The Re-Made Decision

10. Before me Mr Hussain indicated that the Appellant no longer  wished  to
    pursue any ground relating to Article 15(c) or the Refugee  Convention.
    It was his submission that applying SMO the appeal must be  allowed  on
    the grounds that there is a real risk that  the  Appellant  will  face,
    upon return to Iraq, conditions  amounting  to  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under Article  3
    ECHR/ Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive. For  the  following
    reasons, I agree.


11. There is no realistic possibility that the Appellant will  be  able  to
    obtain a document from the embassy in London before being  returned  to
    Iraq. The difficulties in doing so, articulated by Dr Fatah in previous
    country guidance cases, have now been  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State as making it "highly unlikely" that the embassy will assist:  see
    section 2.6.16 of the June 2020 CPIN Iraq: Internal  relocation,  civil
    documentation  and  returns.   The  alternative  route  to  sur   place
    redocumentation suggested in that  CPIN,  an  application  for  a  1957
    registration document, is not, I find, one open to this Appellant.  The
    relevant part of the CPIN reads as follows:

         2.6.15  Since  SMO  was  promulgated  in  December   2019   further
         information regarding the issuance of CSIDs  in  the  UK  has  been
         obtained by the Home Office in April 2020 [see Annex I]. When asked
         to describe the process of obtaining a CSID from the Iraqi  Embassy
         in London the Returns Logistics department stated:


         'CSID cards are  being  phased  out  and  replaced  by  INID  (Iraq
         National Identification) cards. It is  not  currently  possible  to
         apply for an INID card outside of Iraq.  As  a  result,  the  Iraqi
         embassy in London are advising their nationals in the UK  to  apply
         instead for a 'Registration Document (1957)' which they can use  to
         apply for other documents such as passports or an  INID  card  once
         they have returned to Iraq.


         The registration  document  (1957)  must  be  applied  for  on  the
         applicant's behalf by a nominated representative in Iraq. In  order
         to start the application, the  individual  requiring  documentation
         would normally provide at least one copy  of  a  national  identity
         document [see  paragraph  2.6.24  for  list  of  national  identity
         documents]  and  complete  a  power  of  attorney  (to  nominate  a
         representative in Iraq) at the Iraqi embassy along with the embassy
         issued application forms.  If  they  have  no  copies  of  identity
         documents they also would need  to  complete  a  British  power  of
         attorney validated by the FCO and provide parents names, place  and
         date of birth to their nominated representative in Iraq.


         'Once  issued  the   nominated   representative   will   send   the
         registration document (1957)  to  the  applicant  in  the  UK.  The
         process takes 1-2 months.


         ..


         2.6.16 Based on the above information, it is highly  unlikely  that
         an individual would be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy
         while in the UK. Instead  a  person  would  need  to  apply  for  a
         registration document (1957) and would then apply for an INID  upon
         return to their local CSA office in Iraq.

12. The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom for over  five  years.  In
    those circumstances it seems to me to be reasonably likely that he will
    have forgotten any relevant details of his family book etc which  might
    assist family members in Iraq in obtaining any kind of documentation: I
    note that on the 16th February 2021 the Court of Appeal  set  aside  by
    consent the reasoning to the contrary in SMO.  The Appellant is from  a
    Kurdish family from Kirkuk, and even on the findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it is a family now headed by his mother. As set out  in  AAH,
    women have  particular  difficulties  in  dealing  with,  or  obtaining
    assistance from, the authorities in Iraq about 'official' matters  such
    as documentation.   Taking all of that into account I am satisfied that
    it is reasonably likely that the Appellant will not be able to  acquire
    documentation of any assistance in the United Kingdom.   Even if  I  am
    wrong, and an 1957 registration document could be obtained, I find  the
    logic at 2.6.16 hard to follow, since nowhere is it suggested  that  it
    could be used once in Iraq in order  to  travel  internally:  its  sole
    function appears to be limited to enabling the issuance of  a  laissez-
    passer for international travel.


13. The Appellant will be returned to Baghdad. That is because, it  is  now
    accepted, that is  the  only  destination  for  enforced  returns.  The
    Appellant is in any event not  from  the  IKR  and  so  could  not  fly
    straight to Erbil, even if he was to do so voluntarily.

14. He would arrive without documentation. It is true that  if  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is correct, and the Appellant  is  in  contact  with  his
    mother, she could perhaps travel to the airport to meet him,  but  this
    is of no assistance to the Appellant whatsoever, since on the  findings
    in AAH and SMO, he is, without  documents,  effectively  stuck  at  the
    airport.  He cannot even get to Baghdad, requiring as that does passage
    through several checkpoints.  The only solution would be if his  mother
    were able to obtain for him a new identity document and bring it to the
    airport. Whether she is able to do that turns on whether the  Appellant
    is from an area where CSIDs are still being issued, or whether his home
    civil registry is now operating the 'INID' system which  would  require
    his attendance in person.

15. The Appellant is, it is accepted, from Kirkuk.   At  paragraph  431  of
    SMO the Tribunal found as follows:


         431. In any event, as we have noted, matters have moved on  as  the
         CSID is being phased out and replaced by the INID.  If, as  appears
         to be the case, the judge in the FtT concluded that  the  appellant
         would be able to use a proxy to obtain a replacement CSID from  the
         CSA office in Kirkuk, we cannot be sure that  this  represents  the
         position in 2019.  It is likely, to our mind, that the  CSA  office
         in Kirkuk has an INID terminal and that it would not be willing  to
         issue  a  CSID  to  the  appellant  through  a   proxy.    In   the
         circumstances, we consider that there must be further findings made
         regarding this appellant's access to or ability to  obtain  a  CSID
         card.  In the event that he does not have  access  to  an  existing
         CSID card and is unable to obtain a replacement whilst he is in the
         UK, we think it likely that his return to Iraq would be  in  breach
         of Article 3 ECHR.  As we have explained, we do not  consider  that
         he would be able to obtain either a CSID  or  an  INID  in  Baghdad
         because he is not from that city.

16. In light of that conclusion, and in the absence of any evidence to  the
    contrary, I am satisfied that the civil registry in Kirkuk is operating
    an INID terminal. This means that in order to  get  one  of  these  new
    biometric documents the Appellant will have to attend  that  office  in
    person. Stuck at Baghdad airport, this  he  cannot  do.  This  Catch-22
    means that the Appellant will find himself stranded with  no  means  of
    supporting himself, nor indeed in the environs of the airport,  leading
    any kind of normal life. It is reasonably likely that he  will  thereby
    fall into destitution: this is the factual underpinning of the  Article
    15(b) concession made by the Secretary of  State  in  three  successive
    country guidance decisions on Iraq.     The appeal is allowed  on  that
    limited basis.



    Anonymity


17. The Appellant continues to seek international protection. As such I  am
    satisfied,  having had regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No  1  of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders,  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to make an order in accordance with Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Decisions


18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside


19. The appeal is allowed on protection (Article 15(b))  and  human  rights
    (Article 3) grounds.


20. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                5th March
                                    2021
