
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09634/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2021                           |On 01 March 2021              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MYH
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr R Ahmed instructed by B Assured Law.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        tier  Tribunal  Judge  Myers  ('the  Judge')  who  in  a   decision
        promulgated on 10 March 2020 dismiss MYH's  appeal  on  asylum  and
        humanitarian protection grounds but allowed the appeal pursuant  to
        Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.
     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born in 1979  whose  immigration
        history is set out [1] of the decision under challenge.



Error of law


     3. The Judge sets out the core findings which led to the appeal  being
        allowed between [32 - 34] of the decision under challenge.
     4. The Judge accepted that even if MYH had known the  page  number  or
        volume of the entry  in  the  Family  Book  initially  he  had  now
        forgotten it after 18 years in the United Kingdom [32].
     5. The Judge accepted MYH had no living relatives in  Iraq  who  could
        help him to re-document himself and  that  without  being  able  to
        provide the information/details referred  to  in  relevant  country
        guidance caselaw accepted  MYH  would  not  be  able  to  obtain  a
        replacement CSID within the UK [33].
     6. The Judge finds in the alternative that even if MYH had  family  in
        Kirkuk, his home area, who could help, the Upper  Tribunal  in  SMO
        found it unlikely that the CSA office in Kirkuk will be willing  to
        issue a CSID to MYH through a proxy. The Judge  concludes  in  [34]
        "In conclusion, having found  that  the  Appellant  does  not  have
        access to an existing CSID and is unable to  obtain  a  replacement
        whilst in the UK, I find that his return to Iraq, will be in breach
        of Article 3 and allow the appeal on human rights grounds."
     7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was
        granted on  a  renewed  application  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
        operative part of the grant being in the following terms:


        The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially
        erred in law in (i) failing to have regard to the country  guidance
        in SMO, KSP, & IM (Article 15  (c);  identity  documents)  Iraq  CG
        [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) that it would only be exceptionally that  a
        person will not know the details of their  family  book  entry  and
        concluding that it was credible that the  Appellant  had  forgotten
        it; and (ii) allowing the appeal of Article 8 grounds, as expressed
        in paragraph 276 A.D. he of the Immigration Rules where this is not
        applicable as the Appellant is a foreign criminal who circumstances
        are governed by part 13 of the Immigration Rules and section 117  C
        of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


        It is arguable that the credibility finding that the Appellant  has
        forgotten the information required to obtain a new  CSID  fails  to
        take into account the detailed country guidance on this  (including
        how central this information is to a person and that it would  only
        be exceptionally that a person did not have or could not find  this
        information) and also fails to take into account the other  adverse
        credibility findings made against the  appellant,  including  about
        his claim that he never had a  CSID  because  he  was  Kurdish,  or
        provide reasons as to why one part of the claim was  credible  when
        the remainder was not.


        The second ground of appeal is also arguable and could be  material
        depending on the outcome of the first ground of appeal. The  First-
        tier Tribunal arguably applied at the wrong part of the Immigration
        Rules and failed to have  any  regard  to  section  117  C  of  the
        Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  applicable
        provisions in a deportation context. In any event, it  is  arguable
        that the First-tier Tribunal failed to make any proper analysis  of
        the Appellants are likely  circumstances  on  return  to  Iraq  and
        failed to give adequate reasons for allowing the appeal on  Article
        8 on European Convention on Human Rights.


     8. The Upper Tribunal is grateful to Mr McVeety for  bringing  to  the
        attention of all parties, in accordance with the duty  of  candour,
        the latest guidance produced by the  Home  Office  which  makes  it
        clear that on  the  facts  MYH  would  not  be  able  to  secure  a
        replacement CSID in the UK.
     9. It was also accepted that in light of the unchallenged finding that
        MYH has no relatives for family able to assist  him  in  Iraq,  the
        finding there is no one who could assist in acquiring the  required
        documents to enable an  application  to  be  made  to  acquire  the
        required documents in Iraq must stand.
    10. Mr McVeety was left, as he accepted, with the submission  that  the
        Judge had failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  in  support  of  the
        findings made.  In reply, by way  of  further  submissions  to  the
        directions of the Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson dated 30 June  2020,
        Mr Ahmed sets out a number of submissions drawing upon the findings
        in the determination under challenge. These clearly show  that  the
        Judge considered the evidence with the required degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny, referred to the relevant case law, and that  only  having
        done so sets out the findings which are subject to challenge.
    11. Although it is accepted the Judge erred in law in relation  to  the
        article 8 aspect  of  the  appeal  it  was  also  accepted  by  the
        advocates that if the finding pursuant  to  article  3  stands  any
        error made in respect of article 8 is not material.
    12. The Court of Appeal have reminded us recently that when considering
        an appeal an appellate court must not find legal error by virtue of
        making its own assessment of the facts: see  Lowe  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2021] EWCA Civ 62. In this case,  as
        in Lowe, the Judge  had  the  benefit  of  assessing  YHM  and  the
        credibility of his claim through both the written and oral evidence
        given from the witness box and to  decide,  in  light  of  all  the
        information before her what findings to be made in this appeal.  It
        was perfectly feasible for the Judge to accepts some aspects of the
        claim as credible but to dismiss others as lacking credibility, for
        which adequate reasons are given.
    13. A reader of the decision can clearly understand what those findings
        are and why the Judge has arrived at them. It is not made  out  the
        decision is affected by inadequacy of reasoning.   As  the  Judge's
        findings are adequately reasoned the weight  to  be  given  to  the
        evidence was a matter for the Judge.  It  is  not  made  out  those
        findings are outside the range of those reasonably available to the
        Judge on the evidence.
    14. Whilst it is appreciated that in a deportation appeal the Secretary
        of State will take issue with an appeal being allowed,  it  is  not
        made out on the findings made and/or grounds of  appeal,  that  the
        Judge has erred in law in a manner sufficient to warrant the  Upper
        Tribunal interfering any further in relation to this matter.
    15. As the finding pursuant to article 3 ECHR stands  the  clear  error
        made by the Judge in relation to the article 8  assessment  is  not
        material.

Decision

    16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 16 February 2021












