
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09319/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 May 2021                       |On 28 May 2021                       |
|(remote hearing)                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Woolfe & Co
Solicitors

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. However, for  convenience
      I will refer to the parties as they were designated in the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who has been  in  the  UK  since
      2005. She was born in 1974 and has a daughter born in 2015. She is HIV
      positive.

   3. In 2014 she applied for asylum, claiming that she had been  trafficked
      and was at risk of being re-trafficking if returned  to  Nigeria;  and
      that she faced a risk of FGM in  Nigeria.  She  was  referred  to  the
      National Referral Mechanism (NRM). A conclusive grounds  decision  was
      made in July 2015 concluding that she had not been trafficked.

   4. The appellant's asylum claim was refused by the respondent on 24  July
      2015. She appealed against that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      where  her  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Ferguson. In a decision promulgated on 12 October 2016, Judge Ferguson
      found the appellant to be a dishonest witness. He did not accept  that
      she had been trafficked as she claimed, or that she faced a real  risk
      of FGM. He also found that there is treatment  available  for  HIV  in
      Nigeria and that her removal would not amount to inhuman or  degrading
      treatment contrary to article 3 ECHR.

   5. In September 2018 the appellant applied  for  leave  on  compassionate
      grounds. This was refused in December 2018.

   6. In July 2019 she lodged further  submissions,  claiming,  inter  alia,
      that she is at risk of being re-trafficked if returned to Nigeria  and
      that her daughter is  at  risk  of  FGM.  On  9  September  2019,  her
      application was refused. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Her
      appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Andrew  ("the
      judge"). In a decision promulgated  on  3  December  2020,  the  judge
      allowed the appeal. The  respondent  is  now  appealing  against  this
      decision.

Decision of the First tier Tribunal

   7. The judge did not accept that the appellant, or her daughter, faced  a
      risk from FGM, or that the appellant had been  trafficked.  The  judge
      found that, on these issues, there was no basis  to  depart  from  the
      findings of Judge Ferguson, who had found the appellant's  account  to
      not be credible.

   8. The judge also found that HIV treatment  would  be  available  to  the
      appellant in Nigeria and that she could not succeed  under  article  3
      ECHR on medical grounds.

   9. However, the judge found that there was a real risk of  the  appellant
      being trafficked if returned to Nigeria.

  10. In paragraph 25 the judge stated:


           "The appellant says that she has had no contact with her mother
           since she left Nigeria. Further she has had no contact with her
           siblings either and has no idea where they might be. It follows
           from this that I am prepared to accept that the appellant would
           be returned to Nigeria as a lone female with a young child of
           five years. I further accept that the appellant is vulnerable.
           She has a diagnosis of PTSD..."

  11. The judge found in paragraph 33 that:

           "[T]he appellant has a well-founded fear on return  to  Nigeria,
           in accordance  with  the  guidance  in  [HD  (Trafficked  women)
           Nigeria CG [2016] UKUT 00454 (IAC)] of being trafficked for  the
           following reasons. First the appellant does not have any  family
           members in Nigeria, nor any kind of social or support network to
           assist her on return. Secondly the appellant  has  very  limited
           educational or vocational skills and the  only  paid  employment
           the appellant has had is as  a  prostitute  and  as  a  cleaner.
           Thirdly the appellant has significant mental health problems for
           which treatment is recommended and planned for  when  the  covid
           pandemic allows. Fourthly, apart  from  the  possibility  of  an
           assisted return package the appellant has no financial resources
           either in the United Kingdom or in  Nigeria  to  assist  in  re-
           establishing herself. Finally, there are no factors to  indicate
           any lower risk of being trafficked for this appellant."

  12. In paragraph 36 the judge stated that she allowed the appeal on asylum
      and article 3 grounds.


   Grounds of Appeal


  13. The first ground argues that the judge failed to give adequate reasons
      for allowing the appeal on the basis of article 3 ECHR.

  14. The second ground argues that it was inconsistent with HD to find that
      the appellant would be at risk of trafficking  in Nigeria because  (a)
      she had not been the victim of trafficking in the past, (b) there  was
      insufficient  evidence  to  find  that  she  would  be  perceived   as
      vulnerable, and (c) she has worked as a cleaner in the  UK  and  there
      was no finding that she could not find similar work in Nigeria.

  15. A further argument is made  in  the  grant  of  permission  (by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Gill), where it  is  stated  that  the  judge  arguably
      failed to engage with the credibility of the appellant's evidence that
      she has not had any contact with her mother and siblings and that  the
      judge arguably failed to reconcile  her  finding  that  the  appellant
      would be returning as a lone  female  with  a  young  child  with  her
      rejection of the appellant's evidence that she had been trafficked  in
      the past.


   Submissions

  16. Mr Tufan argued that the judge failed to give reasons to  explain  why
      she accepted the appellant's  claim  to  have  no  family  contact  in
      Nigeria when there were such huge credibility issues, as identified by
      Judge Ferguson. He  argued  that  the  judge  needed  to  assess,  for
      herself, the credibility of the appellant's account  before  accepting
      any of her evidence.

  17. He also argued that the judge did not have a rational  basis  to  find
      the appellant was at risk of trafficking given the  finding  that  she
      had not previously been a victim of trafficking. He submitted that  HD
      was not applicable to the appellant because it  only  concerned  women
      who had already been trafficked.

  18. Mr  Ahmed  submitted  that  circumstances  have  changed  since  Judge
      Ferguson's decision  in  2016  because  the  appellant  has  now  been
      diagnosed with PTSD. He argued  that  the  appellant's  mental  health
      explains apparent inconsistencies in her narrative.

  19. He also argued that it was a matter for the judge,  having  heard  the
      evidence, to decide whether or not she accepted the appellant's  claim
      to not have had contact with her  family;  and  that  the  judge  gave
      adequate reasons to support her conclusion on this.

  20. He submitted that it was consistent with  HD  to  find  the  appellant
      faced a risk of trafficking  even  if  she  had  not  previously  been
      trafficked. He argued that HD is applicable to all women  returned  to
      Nigeria.

Analysis

  21. Three errors in the decision have  been  identified.  I  am  satisfied
      that, taken together, they undermine the decision to  such  an  extent
      that it will need to be set aside and remade.

  22. The first error concerns the judge's finding at paragraph 25 that  the
      appellant has no contact with her mother  or  siblings  and  would  be
      returned to Nigeria as a lone female with  a  young  child.  The  only
      reason given by the judge for accepting this was  that  the  appellant
      said it was the case. Ordinarily that  would  be  sufficient.  As  the
      Court of Appeal has emphasised (see, for example, Lowe v The Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2021] EWCA Civ 62)) caution must  be
      exercised  before  interfering  with  evaluative  decisions  of  first
      instance judges, who need not give elaborate reasons. However, this is
      a case in which the appellant was found  to  have  been  dishonest  in
      respect of the central part of her claim about being trafficked. Given
      this context - of there being significant adverse credibility findings
      - it was necessary for the judge to give at least some explanation  as
      to why she believed the appellant's claim to not have contact with her
      family.

  23. The second error concerns the judge's reliance on  HD.  The  judge  in
      paragraph 33 identified several reasons the appellant would be at risk
      of trafficking in Nigeria. These,  broadly,  correspond  to  the  risk
      factors identified in paragraph 4 of  the  headnote  to  HD.  However,
      these risk factors - and HD in general - are concerned with women  who
      have previously been trafficked. The appellant, however, was found  to
      not have been previously trafficked. The only part of the headnote  to
      HD applicable to  women  who  have  not  previously  been  victims  of
      trafficking is paragraph 2 where it states that "it is not established
      by the evidence that for women in general in Nigeria there is  a  real
      risk of being trafficked". I therefore agree with Mr  Tufan  that  the
      judge mis-applied HD.

  24. The third error is the judge's finding that returning the appellant to
      Nigeria would breach article 3 ECHR. The judge found at  paragraph  35
      that the  article  3  threshold  was  not  satisfied  because  of  the
      appellant's HIV status; and at paragraph 21 that  the  appellant  (and
      her daughter) did not face a risk  of  forced  FGM.  It  is  therefore
      unclear why the judge, in paragraph 36, stated  that  the  appeal  was
      allowed on article 3 grounds.

  25. I have decided to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
      heard, without any findings preserved, by a different judge.  This  is
      because the nature of the error identified in paragraph  22  above  is
      such that the credibility of the appellant's account will need  to  be
      considered afresh. A further reason to remit the appeal is that  there
      are no findings in the decision about  the  appellant's  daughter  and
      fact-finding about her circumstances will be  necessary  so  that  her
      best interests can be taken into consideration.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.  The decision involved the making of a material
error of law and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal to be heard afresh before a different judge.
|                                 |            |                      |
|Signed                           |            |                      |
|                                 |            |                      |
|D. Sheridan                      |            |                      |
|                                 |            |                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |            |Dated:  14 May 2021   |
|                                 |            |                      |


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


