
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09023/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st June 2017                         |On 25th  July 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                 miss L. N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Barratt, Counsel for Wick & Co Solicitors,
Middlesex
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 17th December  1987.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 17th August  2016
    refusing her claims for asylum and humanitarian protection and also her
    human rights claim.  Her appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Miller and dismissed on all grounds in a decision  promulgated
    on 21st April 2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted on the following grounds

    It was found to be arguable that the Tribunal failed

      1) to assess the  risk  to  the  Appellant  on  return  to  Uganda  by
         reference to an article posted on the internet (pages 26 and 27  of
         the Appellant's bundle) in which she  is  named  and  photographed;



      2) to differentiate between the Appellant's motives in engaging in sur
         place activities and the possible consequences on return to  Uganda
         of having done so;

      3) to assess the medical evidence as part of the evidence as a  whole;
         and

      4) to have regard  to  the  independent  clinical  assessment  of  the
         Appellant in the psychological report.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file which states  that  the  judge  has
    considered all the evidence before him, including the medical  evidence
    and has  found  the  Appellant's  account  to  lack  credibility.   The
    response states that he has given proper  reasons  for  this  and  that
    there was not sufficient evidence  before  him  to  reach  a  different
    decision.

The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that if the Appellant is found  to  be
    credible then she will be in danger on return to  Uganda  and  that  is
    accepted by the Respondent.

 5. Counsel submitted that there has been no  challenge  to  the  documents
    provided.  There are photographs showing a demonstration in support  of
    LGBT which the Appellant attended and was photographed at, in  Croydon.
    There are also  photographs  in  a  United  Kingdom  newspaper  and  in
    "Saturday Paper", a Ugandan newspaper and evidence was provided to show
    that her picture and her name were put on a Ugandan website.   On  this
    website it is stated - "A mother abandons her three children and  flees
    to the United Kingdom to meet her lesbian lover".

 6. Counsel submitted that the decision lacks detail and he submitted  that
    as the  appellant  is  in  these  photographs  and  in  particular  the
    photographs on the website, she  must  be  in  danger  on  return.   He
    accepted that it is only the article on the website  in  which  she  is
    named.

 7. He submitted that this Appellant left her three children in Uganda  and
    on return will be perceived to be gay and that is all that is  required
    for her claim to succeed.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found the Appellant not to be credible.  He found that she is  not  gay
    and at paragraph 49 of the decision finds that  she  and  her  supposed
    partner Lydia are not immediately recognisable  from  the  photographs.
    The judge  also  finds  it  unlikely  that  the  Appellant  would  have
    consented to being in such photographs if she felt she would thereby be
    exposed to any danger.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that other judges might well have come
    to a different conclusion but the conclusions Judge Miller came to were
    open to him and paragraph 49 of the decision does not contain an  error
    of law.  The fact that the judge states that in the  photographs,  when
    he eventually recognises the Appellant, she appears to be  relaxed,  is
    not a perverse finding.

10. Counsel submitted that the judge did not look at the documents  in  the
    round.  His decision is based purely on  credibility  and  whether  the
    Appellant is gay or not.  At paragraph 49 he talks  about  one  protest
    march but he should have considered all the documents together and then
    assessed risk on return, in particular the risk of being perceived gay,
    on return.

11. He submitted that the judge should also  have  considered  the  medical
    report and he appears to have made his decision relating to the medical
    report after he found the appellant to lack credibility  and  after  he
    had decided to dismiss the appeal.  He submitted that the  judge  fails
    to engage with the fact that the appellant left her three  children  in
    Uganda and his comment, in paragraph  50  of  the  decision,  that  the
    Appellant is aware of other cases  which  have  been  successful  where
    reliance has been placed on sexuality, so she has considered  this  the
    best path to adopt in trying to secure status in the United Kingdom, is
    purely speculative and is not a justified comment.

12. I was asked to find that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and it should be set aside.

DECISION and REASONS

13. I have to decide if the Appellant is a  lesbian  or  if  she  would  be
    perceived as a lesbian on return to Uganda. The judge refers to this at
    paragraph 15 of his decision.  At paragraph 15 he also  refers  to  the
    Appellant's alleged partner Lydia failing her asylum claim  on  grounds
    of sexuality.

14. He refers to the photographs at paragraph 17  and  he  notes  that  the
    Appellant has explained the differences in her account  from  what  she
    stated at interview.  He goes through the evidence she has given  about
    her relationships in detail in his decision and it is clear  from  this
    that he is aware that she  left  her  children  in  Uganda  with  their
    grandmother.

15. The judge also points  out  that  the  only  witness,  apart  from  the
    Appellant, at the hearing, was Lydia.  The judge clearly  is  aware  of
    all the documentation and evidence before him and at  paragraph  46  he
    considers all this evidence with care.  He is aware of the low standard
    of proof but he mentions the Appellant's lack of  knowledge  about  the
    people she was in relationships with.  He finds  the  letter  from  her
    school not to be genuine (paragraph 46(1)) and  explains  why.   He  is
    puzzled by the fact that her husband has not taken  her  children  away
    from their grandmother based on the Appellant's evidence and he  refers
    in particular to the letter supposedly from the  Ugandan  police  which
    refers to the Penal Code Act of 1996 which is  an  Act  that  does  not
    exist in Uganda.  This is mentioned  in  the  refusal  letter  and  the
    Appellant's representative did not challenge this finding.

16. It is clear that Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 comes into play  as  the  Appellant  did  not
    claim asylum until she had been in the United Kingdom  for  ten  months
    and the judge finds that this affects the appellant's credibility.

17. The judge refers to the appellant living with Paul Buuka since February
    2016 but he did not appear at the hearing as a witness.  The only  item
    from him was a statement which was handed in at the hearing.   He  also
    refers to the other letters of support, all of  which  are  written  by
    people who did not attend  the  hearing.   He  refers  to  there  being
    significant similarities in these letters.   At  paragraph  46(xii)  he
    states that the people who have written statements  did  not  know  the
    Appellant before February 2016 when she met Paul  Buuka  and  commenced
    her claim based on her sexuality.

18. The judge goes on to refer to discrepancies in the  evidence  given  by
    Lydia and the evidence given by the Appellant.  It  is  clear  that  he
    does not  find  the  Appellant  to  be  a  lesbian.   He  gives  proper
    explanations for all his findings.  Before making his decision relating
    to the asylum claim he refers to the psychological report at  paragraph
    47.  The psychologist accepts the information given by  the  Appellant.
    It is not the psychologist's job to decide on credibility.  It  is  for
    the judge, the decision maker, to make a decision on this and the judge
    finds that she is not credible and at paragraph  48  considers  whether
    she would be perceived as being a lesbian on return.  He has taken into
    account the photographs, the online website and the newspaper  extracts
    from the UK newspaper and  Saturday  Paper.   He  refers  to  it  being
    difficult to identify the Appellant in the photographs and with  regard
    to the  website  he  finds  there  is  no  evidence  that  any  of  the
    authorities in Uganda would look or have looked at this.  He speculates
    by saying that it is unlikely that the Appellant would  have  consented
    to being in such photographs if she felt she would thereby  be  exposed
    to any danger.  Based on what  was  before  him  I  find  that  he  was
    entitled to make that comment.

19. At paragraph 50 the judge refers to the appellant's claim, based on her
    sexuality, not being made until her visa had expired.

20. Due to a lack of credibility the judge has dismissed the appeal on  all
    grounds and has dealt with her human rights at paragraph 51.

21. Everything has been properly explained in the decision and I find  that
    there is no error of law and certainly no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

22. There are no material errors of law in the judge's decision promulgated
    on 14th April 2017.  The judge's decision dismissing  the  appeal  must
    stand.

23. Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 24 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

