
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/09699/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                       |  Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2018                       |  On 15 February 2018             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     WM
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms S Walker, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hudson promulgated 22.6.17, dismissing  on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    6.9.16, to refuse his protection claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    27.9.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 9.2.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 4. In summary, the appellant's case was that he  was  born  in  Asmara  to
    Eritrean parents. His father was imprisoned due to  his  membership  of
    the Derg and in consequence his mother fled to Ethiopia, at which  time
    the appellant was 3 years of age. Five  years  later,  his  mother  was
    deported back to Eritrea. The appellant  was  raised  in  Ethiopia  and
    later lived in Sudan. At the age of 22 he returned  briefly  to  Asmara
    before leaving the country illegally. He feared return  to  Eritrea  on
    grounds  of  imputed  political  opinion,  arising  from  his  parents'
    affiliations with the Derg.

 5. Judge Hudson found the appellant's account not  credible  and  rejected
    the claim that he is Eritrean  or  that  his  mother  was  deported  as
    claimed. Neither did the judge accept the claimed political involvement
    of his parents.

 6. The appeal was dismissed all grounds.  The  appellant  sought  and  was
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Macdonald merely observed  that
    there may be merit in the grounds, but did not specify on what basis he
    considered these to be arguably material.

 8. I have given careful consideration to the somewhat lengthy grounds,  as
    well as the submissions of the two representatives before me. I am  not
    persuaded by all of the grounds of appeal.  However,  for  the  reasons
    summarised below, I found sufficient  material  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. I am not persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge applied the wrong
    burden and standard of proof, as pleaded in the first ground of appeal.
    This relates to the issue  of  the  appellant's  nationality.  The  RFR
    considered that it was doubtful that he is Eritrean, on the basis  that
    his nationality claim is doubted but the Secretary of State  cannot  be
    satisfied that he is a national of  another  country.  This  is  to  be
    distinguished from a case of disputed nationality, where the  Secretary
    of State does not accept that the appellant  is  Eritrean  and  instead
    believes that  he  the  national  of  another  country,  in  this  case
    Ethiopian. In the first case the burden remains on the appellant to the
    standard of reasonable  likelihood,  whereas  in  a  case  of  disputed
    nationality the burden is on the Secretary of State to  demonstrate  on
    the balance of probabilities that he is a national of another country.

10. for the reasons  carefully  set  out  in  the  decision,  Judge  Hudson
    rejected the claim that by producing a copy of the Eritrean Nationality
    Proclamation and  asserting  that  the  appellant's  parents  were  not
    Eritrean, the Secretary of State altered its case from one of  doubtful
    nationality to one of disputed nationality, thereby shifting the burden
    of proof, so that the judge applied the wrong burden  and  standard  of
    proof. This argument was raised and fully addressed in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing, and decision. She  considered  but  ultimately
    rejected the argument and on the evidence was entitled to conclude  the
    burden had not shifted. I am satisfied that the findings of  the  judge
    in this regard were fully open to her on the law and facts. In  effect,
    this ground is merely a disagreement with the conclusion reached and an
    attempt to reargue the point.

11. The second ground is that at [17] the judge made a fundamental error in
    misdirecting herself as to the contents of Human Rights  Watch  report.
    Ms Walker referred me to the statement of the judge within [17] :  "The
    Human Rights Watch report of January 2003  reports  in  detail  of  the
    interrogation of such people and the opportunity  they  were  given  to
    demonstrate loyalty to the Ethiopian regime and that they  were  not  a
    risk to security." The relevant part of the report  read,  "During  the
    interrogation, the detainees were not given a meaningful opportunity to
    refute the allegation that they were Eritrean  nationals  (or  security
    risks) and were denied access to the courts to challenge  the  legality
    of their detention or denationalisation." The grounds and  Ms  Walker's
    submissions  are  to  the  effect  that  the  judge  had   misread   or
    misunderstood the report and missed out the word "not" in  relation  to
    opportunity. Ms Walker had some difficulty understanding that  it  does
    not necessarily follow that  the  way  in  which  the  judge  expressed
    herself in this sentence was a misreading of the report. In one  sense,
    it is correct that the report dealt with the opportunity to demonstrate
    loyalty, even if in fact they were  not  given  such  opportunity.  Put
    another way, the issue of demonstrating loyalty  is  addressed  by  the
    report, but concludes that they were not given such opportunity.  I  am
    not satisfied that the judge was necessarily quoting or misquoting  the
    report.

12. However, what becomes clearer on a reading of the decision as  a  whole
    on this issue is that the judge did misunderstand  the  import  of  the
    report. It was the view of the judge that both  parents  having  worked
    for the Derg whilst in Eritrea,  she  had  demonstrated  opposition  to
    Eritrean and loyalty to the Derg, and as such there was no  reason  for
    the Ethiopian authorities to remove her back to Eritrea.

13. The report in question explains at p11 that the political  parties  now
    in government in Ethiopia and Eritrea share a joint  history  of  armed
    opposition  to  the  former  Ethiopian  regime,   a   brutal   military
    dictatorship known as the Derg. The  Ethiopian  People's  Revolutionary
    Democratic Front (EPRDF), an alliance of a number  of  ethnically-based
    liberation movements, fought the Derg for  greater  autonomy  in  their
    local regions. At the same time, and for decades, the Eritrean People's
    Liberation Front (EPLF)  was  in  armed  opposition  to  the  Ethiopian
    emperor and later the ruling Derg, in a movement  to  liberate  Eritrea
    from Ethiopian control. In 1962 the Ethiopian emperor had  annexed  the
    territory of Eritrea, making it a province of Ethiopia. This  triggered
    a long war of Eritrean independence, with  the  EPLF  emerging  as  the
    dominant liberation front amongst several competing rebel factions. The
    EPLF and the EPRDF formed an anti-Derg alliance. In 1991 this  alliance
    gained control, with the EPRDF gaining  control  of  Addis  Ababa  (now
    Ethiopia) and the  EPLF  took  control  of  Asmara  (now  in  Eritrea).
    Following the fall of the Derge, the EPRDF established  a  transitional
    government intended to work  towards  greater  democracy  in  Ethiopia.
    Meanwhile, the EPLF  established  a  provisional  Eritrean  government,
    which led two years later to independence.

14. It follows that if, as claimed, the appellant's parents had both worked
    for the Derg, his  mother  could  have  had  no  basis  for  hoping  to
    demonstrate loyalty to the present Ethiopian government which overthrew
    the Derg in 1991. In that light, the judge's summary of and  addressing
    the issues arising the  expert  report  at  [17]  of  the  decision  is
    entirely misleading. The judge proceeded mistakenly on the  basis  that
    the appellant's mother was a loyal Ethiopian, and states that she could
    not  see  why  the  Ethiopian  authorities  should  have  regarded  the
    appellant's mother as a risk to the national security of  Ethiopia,  as
    she ought to have been able to demonstrate her loyalty.

15. It follows that the  judge  has  seriously  misunderstood  the  country
    background information and that the basis for rejecting on  credibility
    grounds the appellant's factual claims on this aspect of his protection
    claim was  entirely  flawed.  The  judge  has  erroneously  effectively
    equated association with the Derg to loyalty to Ethiopia in  opposition
    to Eritrea. Whether or not the claim to have worked  for  the  Derg  is
    credible, the way in which the consequences  are  dealt  with  at  [17]
    involves a complete misreading of the history of the two countries.

16. I also find that there are errors of law in the  judge's  treatment  of
    the appellant's claimed recollection of events from his  childhood.  At
    [18] the judge purported to  find  it  "unlikely  that  he  would  have
    retained much of any information provided to him  prior  to  his  ninth
    birthday, because it simply would not  have  been  important  to  him."
    Similarly,  at  [24]  the  judge  doubted  that  an  individual  "would
    recognise a childhood friend some 16 years later  having  changed  from
    pre-pubescence to adulthood in the meantime."

17. The judge was  effectively  applying  her  own  subjective  opinion  on
    matters of the ability of adults to recall events or  cultural  details
    from  childhood  experiences  in  order  to  make  adverse  credibility
    findings about the appellant's account and  that  of  his  witness.  It
    would have been open  to  the  judge  to  rely  on  inconsistencies  or
    discrepancies, or to point out that  there  was  no  reference  to  the
    witness in the appellant's interview  or  witness  statement,  or  make
    findings as to the credibility of assertions for other cogent  reasons,
    but it is not open to the judge to find that the appellant  could  have
    no recollection of his mother in Eritrea, or  of  Eritrean  customs  or
    food, etc., simply because he was under the age of nine  at  the  time.
    Such memories from childhood may generally be less reliable and vaguer,
    but it cannot be said to be implausible that a person would have  clear
    memories of at least some events or experiences. In the  circumstances,
    these findings disclose unfairness and amount to an error of law.

18. It may be  that  a  different  judge  would  reach  the  same  ultimate
    conclusion on the evidence, but I cannot say that  is  necessarily  so.
    For all the reasons explained above, the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal cannot stand and must be set aside. In the  circumstances,  it
    is not necessary to address the remaining grounds of appeal.

Remittal

19. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.

20. In all the circumstances, I relist this appeal for a fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, I do so on the basis that this is a case which
    falls squarely within the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
    appellant of a fair hearing and  that  the  nature  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal
    to be re-made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
    in rule 2 to deal with cases fairly  and  justly,  including  with  the
    avoidance of delay, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh.

Decision

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside and remade.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Consequential Directions

22.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester;

23. The ELH is 4 hours;

24. The First-tier Tribunal will decide whether any findings of fact can be
    preserved;

25. The appellant is to ensure that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  at  the
    remitted appeal on is contained within a revised  consolidated  single,
    indexed and paginated, bundle of all objective and subjective material,
    together with any skeleton argument and copies of all case  authorities
    to be relied on. The Tribunal will not accept  materials  submitted  on
    the day of the forthcoming hearing.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.  Breach  of  this
direction may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



