
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: pa/09351/2018
     pa/09367/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House UT                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th March 2019                            |On 28 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                Abdullah [K]
                                 Mohamed [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Chakmakjian, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, who are brothers, are citizens of Iraq (from IKR).  For
    ease of reference throughout this decision, I will refer to  the  first
    Appellant as "AK" and the second Appellant as "MK".

 2. AK was born on 6th February 1999 and MK was born on 7th  January  2000.
    They have been granted permission to appeal against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Juss) dismissing their appeals  against  the
    Respondent's decision of  13th  July  2018  refusing  their  protection
    claims.  Although both Appellants were minors at their date of entry to
    the UK, by  the  time  of  the  Respondent's  decision  refusing  their
    protection claims, they were 19 years and 18 years respectively.

 3. The FtTJ's decision at [3]  is  incorrect  in  saying  both  Appellants
    arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2016  and  claimed  asylum  on
    13th December 2016.  In fact the younger brother MK arrived in  the  UK
    on 13th July 2016 and claimed asylum immediately.  AK did not enter the
    UK until November 2016. This distinction is relevant since the  factual
    matrix of their claims relies in part on events experienced by AK which
    occurred after MK left Iraq.

Background

 4. In summary their claims to protection is as follows.  On 25th June 2015
    both AK and MK were working on their father's  farm.   MK  accidentally
    injured a friend Bejin who was working alongside them.  The  Appellants
    immediately drove Bejin to hospital about 20 minutes  drive  away.  The
    injury, which was caused  by  a  pitchfork,  resulted  in  Bejin  being
    blinded in  one  eye.   His  injury  necessitated  a  month's  stay  in
    hospital.

 5. MK, having brought Bejin to the hospital, was arrested  by  the  police
    and detained pending enquiries. He was released four days later with no
    charges being made.  The  Appellants'  family  were  advised  by  local
    people to move away from the area  and  the  family  relocated  to  the
    nearest city which is about twenty minutes' drive away.  Two  or  three
    months later, following Bejin's release from hospital, he came  to  the
    school where MK was studying and tried to attack  him  seeking  revenge
    for the injury caused.  Bejin  was  arrested  by  the  authorities  but
    released following an intervention by MK's father.

 6. In October 2015 MK left Iraq. His father paid for him to leave  on  the
    basis that Bejin's threats and actions would result in harm to MK.   MK
    travelled to Turkey on his own  legally  obtained  passport,  and  then
    travelled via Greece, Austria and Germany  to  France.   He  stayed  in
    France for five or six months before entering the UK in July 2016.

 7. Meanwhile in January 2016, AK was  attacked  by  Bejin  in  the  market
    place.  The police arrived following this altercation and both  AK  and
    Bejin were arrested.  In February 2016 a Tribal  Peace  settlement  was
    entered into. However AK's claim is that Bejin broke the terms of  this
    attacking AK in April 2016.  As a result AK left Iraq in  October  2016
    travelling by plane to Turkey and then travelling via  Greece,  Austria
    and France, where he stayed for five days, before arriving in the UK in
    a lorry on 23rd November 2016. He claimed asylum in December 2016.

 8. The Respondent  refused  both  applications  for  protection.   It  was
    accepted that both Appellants are of Kurdish ethnicity originating from
    the IKR, but their claims were  rejected  because  they  did  not  fall
    within the Refugee Convention. Their claims for humanitarian protection
    also failed as they had not established that the  authorities  in  Iraq
    were unable to adequately protect them.  Further the Respondent  having
    considered that there was  no  risk  on  return  to  either  Appellant,
    decided that return to Iraq was feasible in both cases.

 9. The Appellants appealed the Respondent's  decision  to  the  FtT.   The
    FtTJ, having heard evidence from both Appellants and having  considered
    documentary  evidence  which  included  the  Tribal  Peace   Agreement,
    dismissed both  appeals.   Both  Appellants  sought  and  were  granted
    permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.  Thus  the  matter  comes
    before me.

Onward Appeal

10. The Grounds of Appeal are  set  out  under  five  headings,  but  I  am
    satisfied that they can be distilled into two strands:

       . Failure to assess risk on return in the light of the  ongoing  risk
         to the Appellants, on  account  of  the  ineffectiveness  of  state
         protection  in  that  Bejin  is  not  honouring  the  Tribal  Peace
         Agreement

       . Failure to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the  feasibility  of
         returns to the IKR in the light of the country guidance case of AAH
         (Iraq Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212.

Error of Law Hearing

11. Before me Mr Chakmakjian appeared for both Appellants and Ms Cunha  for
    the  Respondent.   Mr  Chakmakjian  relied  on  the   grounds   seeking
    permission.  He invited  me  to  have  regard  to  [30]  of  the  FtT's
    decision.  He submitted that the FtTJ had found the Appellants' account
    relating to the  incident  which  caused  Bejin  to  lose  an  eye,  as
    credible.  Nevertheless having found the Appellants' claim credible  on
    this point, the FtTJ misapprehended the central  part  of  their  claim
    which relates to risk on return.

12. The risk on return is that Bejin is not  honouring  the  terms  of  the
    Peace Agreement  and  therefore  the  agreement  is  ineffective.   The
    judge's findings at [31] are unclear because he appears to accept  that
    the Tribal Peace Agreement is ineffective but does not go  on  to  make
    clear findings as to why the Appellants would not be at risk.  In other
    words he gives no proper consideration to what protection is  available
    to the Appellants.

13. The second strand to Mr Chakmakjian's centred on the judge's  findings,
    or rather lack of them, concerning the feasibility of return  for  both
    Appellants to the IKR.  He asked me to look at [35]  of  the  decision.
    He submitted that the FtTJ had simply not made a  proper  enquiry  into
    the Appellants' particular  circumstances.   Neither  Appellant  had  a
    CSID.  It was correct that both had had passports issued in  their  own
    name but the evidence before the judge was that they were no longer  in
    possession of those passports.  MK's birth certificate  had  also  been
    lost in transit whilst he was in Greece.  The judge's findings  on  the
    method of return of both Appellants were equivocal.   Whilst  referring
    to AAH, the judge  indicated  that  the  presence  of  the  Appellant's
    documents in Iraq is something that makes  their  case  quite  distinct
    from others.  The judge however  does  not  say  what  those  documents
    consist of.

14. The FtTJ then said:

         "I have taken judicial notice of the fact that on 12th July 2018, a
         large number of flights to the IKR did actually land and these were
         by Royal Jordanian, Iraqi Airways, Turkish Airways, Qatar  Airways,
         and Flynas, and this suggests return is feasible  to  the  IKR  for
         these two appellants." [35]

    This  finding  is  inconsistent  with  the  headnote  of   AAH,   which
    unequivocally states that there are no  flights  to  the  IKR  and  all
    returns from the UK are to Baghdad.  The FtTJ appears to have  departed
    from the CG by making a finding that the Appellants can return  to  the
    IKR by direct flight.  There is a failure  to  identify  the  basis  on
    which this conclusion is drawn.  It  appears  that  a  flight  schedule
    document was handed  up  during  the  course  of  the  hearing  by  the
    Presenting Officer.   What  was  not  handed  up  was  a  copy  of  the
    Respondent's own guidance CPIN V8 October 2018  which  identified  that
    only those who return voluntarily will be sent to the IKR directly, the
    rest as per the country guidance case are sent via Baghdad.

15. Mr Chakmakjian asked that in view of these errors, which are  material,
    the decision should be set aside and remade.

16. Ms Cunha in response indicated that from a reading of the  decision  it
    could not be said that the judge accepted that the core claim was  made
    out.  What the judge accepted as credible  was  the  evidence  of  both
    Appellants that one of the two brothers accidently injured a  friend  -
    Bejin - with a tool.  The judge therefore only accepted that there  was
    an accident.

17. She submitted that [31] and [32] showed that the judge  had  discounted
    there being a risk on return to the Appellant because  a  Tribal  Peace
    Agreement  had  been  entered  into.   This  amounted   to   sufficient
    protection.

18. So far as the feasibility of return to the IKR was concerned, she  said
    that a reading of [35] showed that the judge had turned his mind to the
    feasibility of return.  He had said that he had taken into account  AAH
    and had made a finding that the Appellants had documents  in  Iraq  and
    male members  of  their  family  were  present  and  had  provided  the
    Appellants with support in the past.

19. Ms Cunha was unable to assist on whether a copy of CPIN V8 October 2018
    had been handed up to  the  judge  at  the  same  time  as  the  flight
    schedule.

20. At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    reasons.

Consideration

21. I find force in Mr Chakmakjian's submissions.   The  Appellants'  cases
    have always been predicated on a claim that they are at risk on  return
    because, despite the signing of the Tribal Peace Agreement, Bejin  (and
    his family) remain a threat of serious harm to the Appellants,  against
    which there is no effective protection anywhere  within  the  IKR.   In
    other words the threat of revenge against  the  Appellants  means  that
    there is a real risk of serious harm to them and the authorities cannot
    offer protection.  This is because it has escalated into  a  matter  of
    honour.

22. On a reading of the FtTJ's decision, I find, that the judge has  failed
    to appreciate this concept,  in  that  he  has  failed  to  make  clear
    findings on the credibility or otherwise of the evidence  presented  to
    him.

23. MK's evidence was that he was threatened by Bejin at school.   This  is
    what prompted him to leave Iraq.  His father then went down the road of
    entering into the Tribal Peace Agreement but following that  agreement,
    and in contravention of it, the claim is that Bejin attacked AK.   This
    prompted AK to leave.  These are central issues going to  the  core  of
    the claims.  It is necessary therefore that this evidence is  evaluated
    and findings made on whether this evidence is credible  or  not.   Such
    evaluation will then lead in turn to an assessment of  whether  or  not
    there is an objective risk on return for both Appellants.

24. I find it is unclear from a reading of [30] and [31] that this  process
    has taken place.  In [30] the judge appears to accept "... the claim as
    stated is credible on the lower standard, that is to say, that  one  of
    the two brothers 'accidentally injured one of [their]  friend  (sic)  -
    Bejin - with a tool."  That of course is only part of the  claim.   The
    judge fails to set out proper findings  on  whether  or  not  he  finds
    credible the claim made of attacks and threats on AK  by  Bejin,  which
    are said to have occurred subsequent to  the  making  of  the  Tribunal
    Peace Agreement.  This is evidence which forms the cornerstone  of  the
    Appellants' claims and it should have been evaluated.

25. The judge seems to have become sidetracked into  setting  out  his  own
    opinion of the terms of the Tribunal Peace Agreement.  In [31] he says,
    "If Bejin is acting outside the  terms  of  this  agreement,  then  the
    proper recourse for the Appellants and their family members  lies  with
    their taking this up with  the  other  family,  on  the  basis  of  the
    Agreement which tribal law and  custom  has  decreed  should  hold  for
    good." Nowhere do I see that the  judge  has  made  a  finding  on  the
    contents of the Council of Chwarqurna Letter of October 2016 supporting
    the contention that the Tribal Peace Agreement was not working. I  find
    that this means that a proper evaluation of the  evidence  relating  to
    risk on return has not been made, and this is a material error.

26. So far as the second challenge to  the  decision  is  concerned,  I  am
    satisfied that the FtTJ has not made sufficient findings to demonstrate
    that he has properly turned his mind to the feasibility  of  return  to
    the IKR for both Appellants.  At [35] he says,  "The  presence  of  the
    Appellants' documents in Iraq is something that makes their case  quite
    distinct from others that are often heard in this jurisdiction, and  it
    may very well be the case that the Originals do still exist."  It would
    have been helpful if the judge had said precisely what documents he had
    in mind when saying this.  The evidence of  both  Appellants  was  that
    they had lost their passports en route,  there  was  no  evidence  that
    either had had a CSID to assist their passage, and MK  lost  his  birth
    certificate en route.  AK said in evidence that  he  has  no  Iraqi  ID
    card.

27. Whilst it may be reasonable to suppose that some ID  documents  may  be
    obtained from the IKR since their families remain there and they are in
    contact with their father, the judge does not  say  that.   Instead  he
    appeared to go down the route of finding that  the  Appellants  can  be
    returned to IKR by a direct flight.  This is a departure  from  the  CG
    headnote in AAH.  As the Grounds of Appeal point out, the current  Home
    Office guidance on returns to Iraq CPIN (October 2018) identifies  that
    only those that are  voluntary  returnees  will  be  sent  to  the  IKR
    directly whereas the  rest  will  be  sent  to  Baghdad.   The  judge's
    findings at [31] are in error therefore since he does not identify  the
    basis of his conclusion that the Appellants are  able  to  be  returned
    directly to the IKR.  That error is material.

28. For the above reasons I find that the decision  of  the  FtTJ  contains
    material errors and the decision is hereby set aside.

29. I canvassed with the parties the proper disposal of this matter in  the
    event that I set aside the decision for error  of  law.   Both  parties
    were of the view that the appropriate venue for  the  remaking  of  the
    decision would be to remit the matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    view of the amount of judicial fact finding necessary  to  re-make  the
    decision.

30. Mr Chakmakjian asked that in the event the decision was  set  aside,  I
    preserve the finding made in [30]  that  the  Appellants  had  given  a
    credible account  of  their  reasons  for  departing  Iraq.   Ms  Cunha
    objected  to  this  saying  that,  as  she  had  pointed  out  in   her
    submissions, the judge at [30] only went as far as saying that  he  was
    prepared to accept that one of the two  brothers  accidentally  injured
    Bejin with a tool.  In the circumstances I am not  satisfied  that  any
    findings should be preserved.  In any event the findings made  at  [30]
    are made without proper regard to the whole of the  evidence.   I  take
    the view that this is a  case  where  a  fresh  hearing  altogether  is
    required.  The decision will therefore be set aside in its entirety.

31. The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Juss)
    for a fresh hearing to take place and for fresh findings of fact to  be
    made.

32. I would add that in terms of evidence for the re-hearing, the situation
    covering returnees  to  IKR  is  fluid.  Evidence  becomes  dated  very
    quickly. The Respondent should be prepared therefore to produce any  up
    to date evidence relating to the issue of returns to the  IKR  in  good
    time before the resumed hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 15th January 2019  is
set aside for material error.  These appeals will be remitted to the  First-
tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.  Nothing is preserved from the  original
decision.  The hearing should take place before a  Judge  other  than  Judge
Juss.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date 23 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

