
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/09547/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6 February 2018                         | On 13 March 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MARTIN SPENCER
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                                     VJW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Lanlehin
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. Pursuant to permission to appeal granted by Judge Alis on  25  December
    2017 the appellant, VJW, appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shiner, to whom we shall refer as the judge,  dismissing
    her appeal against the decision of the respondent of 15 September  2017
    refusing her claim for asylum.

 2. The grounds of this appeal are that there has been, it is submitted, an
    arguable error of law in that there was an inadequacy of the  reasoning
    by the judge when taking into account the circumstances  and  situation
    of the appellant's case.  In  particular,  it  is  submitted  that  the
    judge's findings at paragraph 57  of  the  decision,  namely  that  the
    appellant had been subject to an assault, probably by knives, resulting
    in cuts to both her forearms, and the judge's finding at  paragraph  58
    that the appellant had  suffered  serious  harm,  which  is  a  serious
    indication that she had a well-founded fear of return and further  real
    risk of harm, is inconsistent with his  rejection  of  the  appellant's
    protection claim.

 3. It is further submitted that the judge  failed  to  address  issues  in
    respect of the lapse of time between the assaults by criminal gangs and
    the  appellant's  asylum  claim  and  the  hearing,  failing  to   give
    sufficient allowance in the light of the decision in Chiver [1997] INLR
    212.

The Facts

 4. The facts of this matter are the applicant was born on 28 July 1961  in
    Jamaica and she arrived in the United Kingdom either in  November  2002
    when she would have been aged 41 or in February 2005 when aged 44.   In
    this respect the evidence is inconsistent.   On  14  January  2006  she
    married Mr RM, a French national,  but  that  marriage  failed  and  we
    understand that divorce proceedings are anticipated.

 5. The applicant had entered the United Kingdom  using  forged  documents,
    namely the passport of a friend with her  own  photograph  substituted.
    In September 2009  the  applicant  was  encountered  when  arrested  in
    connection  with  offences  of  obtaining  a  pecuniary  advantage   by
    deception and possessing a listed false instrument.  On 26 October 2009
    she was convicted at the Croydon Crown Court of those two offences  and
    sentenced to a term of ten months' imprisonment.

 6. In the meantime, on 25 September 2009 the appellant  had  submitted  an
    application for an EEA residence card  and  on  5  July  2011  she  was
    granted leave to remain until 21 September 2015.  On 23 September  2015
    the appellant made a further application for an EEA residence card  but
    this was refused on 1 March 2016.  On 8 July  2016  the  appellant  was
    encountered working illegally.

 7. On 11 July 2016 her appeal to First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ghani  against
    the refusal to grant her a further EEA residence card was unsuccessful.
     She applied for leave to remain under Articles 3 and 8  ECHR  and  her
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 27 July  2016  and
    was certified as clearly unfounded.  On 29  July  2016  the  respondent
    sent  to  the  appellant  a  letter  informing  her  that   a   medical
    practitioner was of the opinion that her claim to have  been  assaulted
    was consistent with the clinical findings that had been made  and  that
    the appellant may be a victim of torture.

The Claim for Asylum and the SSHD's Decision

 8. On 25  August  2017  the  appellant  made  her  claim  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.  The screening  interview  took  place  on  29
    August and the full interview took place on 7 September 2017.  In  that
    interview the appellant claimed that before she came to the UK,  whilst
    still in Jamaica, she had been raped and beaten by  four  men  who  had
    dragged her out of a house where she had gone to seek refuge  and  that
    this was a revenge attack for the activities of her  brother  nicknamed
    SS, who was a member of a rival gang to the  gang  of  her  assailants.
    She said that she had recovered in hospital, the  police  had  attended
    and asked her questions but she had told them nothing because she had a
    small daughter whom she wished  to  protect.   This  was  in  2002  and
    resulted in her fleeing Jamaica and coming to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    November 2002, leaving her daughter behind.

 9. The appellant had another brother, DW, and  she  told  the  interviewer
    that DW had been killed in October 2005,  again,  as  part  of  a  gang
    vendetta.  It was further the appellant's account  that  her  daughter,
    having stayed  in  Jamaica,  gave  birth  to  a  son,  the  appellant's
    grandson, but in 2012 her daughter, her nephew, her  brother  nicknamed
    SS and her grandson had all been killed, apparently  gunned  down.   On
    that basis she claimed that were she to  be  returned  to  Jamaica  she
    would be in danger of being spotted and suffering the same fate as  the
    rest of her family.

10. On 15 September 2015 the appellant's claim for asylum and  humanitarian
    protection was rejected by the respondent.  It  was  decided  that  the
    appellant had failed to establish a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    nor were there substantial grounds for  believing  that  the  appellant
    faced a real risk of suffering serious harm on return from  the  United
    Kingdom.  In reaching this decision it was noted  that  the  claim  for
    asylum had only been made after the appellant's  arrest  on  21  August
    2017 under an immigration provision and only after  being  notified  of
    the decision that she was to be removed from the United Kingdom by  way
    of directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.
    That decision had been made on  22  August  2017  and  was  immediately
    followed  by  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum   and   humanitarian
    protection on 25 August 2017.

11. The respondent's decision resulted from the conclusion that the  reason
    for the appellant's claim to asylum was in fact an attempt to frustrate
    the removal rather than a genuine need  for  international  protection.
    Thus, in the initial refusal letter dated 27 July  2016  the  appellant
    had been asked to state any further reasons why she could not leave the
    United Kingdom and had failed  to  provide  information  regarding  her
    fears as now relied on despite being given every opportunity to do  so.
    The credibility of her claim to asylum was therefore doubted.

12. In addition, it  was  considered  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    demonstrate  that  the  authorities  of  Jamaica  would  be  unable  or
    unwilling to offer her protection  if  she  sought  it.   Reliance  was
    placed on the Home Office Country Information and  Guidance  -  Jamaica
    and the consideration of that guidance in the case of JS  [2006]  UKAIT
    00057, which found:

         "There is clear evidence that in general the government of  Jamaica
         is not only willing, but also able to  provide  through  its  legal
         system a reasonable level of protection from ill-treatment  to  its
         citizens who fear criminal acts in Jamaica and to  those  who  fear
         retribution for testifying against criminals."

13. It was  determined  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  establish  a
    sustained and systemic failure of state protection on the part  of  the
    authorities in Jamaica.  It was  concluded  that  the  appellant  could
    relocate in  Jamaica  and  claims  for  consideration  of  humanitarian
    protection under Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR were rejected.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

14. The appellant's appeal was heard by the judge on 1 November 2017 and he
    too found that  the  claim  to  asylum/humanitarian  protection  lacked
    credibility.  At paragraph 48 of the decision the judge refers  to  the
    respondent's letter of 29 July 2016, to which we have already referred,
    and  the  opinion  of  the  medical  practitioner   following   medical
    examination of the appellant that her claim to have been assaulted  was
    consistent with the clinical findings.  The judge said:

         "49. I find to the lower standard that the appellant has  marks  to
             her arms that are consistent with having been  assaulted  with
             blades.  I find the mark to the head to have been caused by an
             assault which has resulted in alopecia."

    Those findings were repeated at paragraph 57 and at  paragraph  58  the
    judge continued:

         "I have had regard to Rule 339K of the  Immigration  Rules  and  as
         such, in light of my findings,  that  the  appellant  has  suffered
         serious harm, I conclude such harm is a serious indication that the
         appellant has a well-founded fear of return and further  real  risk
         of harm."

15. We interpose to cite Rule 339K of the Immigration Rules, which reads as
    follows:

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated."

16. Consistently with the final sentence of Rule 339K, the judge went on to
    consider  the  rest  of  the  evidence  and  rejected  the  appellant's
    protection claim.  He found that the appellant's  various  accounts  of
    the gang and the gang's violence to her and her family members were not
    credible.   He   considered   that   there   were   "very   significant
    inconsistencies as to who told her of  her  daughter's  and  grandson's
    death."  He  pointed  to  the  appellant's  failure  to  provide  death
    certificates for the, we think, five family members who  were  said  to
    have died despite the fact that she would have been able to obtain such
    documentation to support her claim given that she was in contact  with,
    on her own account, her grandson's paternal grandmother and friends  in
    Jamaica.

17. Having heard the evidence, the judge also concluded that the motivation
    behind the asylum claim was to remain in the United Kingdom rather than
    the risk of return to Jamaica.  Although he accepted that the appellant
    had been assaulted he did not on the evidence he had heard accept, even
    to the lower standard, that the appellant had been raped and beaten  in
    the manner in which she described.  He did not accept  the  appellant's
    account of having a brother SS at all, pointing to the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been unable even  to  provide  a  forename  in  the  full
    interview for this brother and her account was rejected totally.   Thus
    he rejected the account of SS or any other members of the family  being
    involved with violence or  gangs.   He  rejected  the  account  of  the
    appellant being attacked except for the  assault  of  which  there  was
    medical evidence and he rejected the account of  a  daughter,  grandson
    and brother DW being killed.

Decision

18. In our judgment, the judge was entitled on the  evidence  to  make  the
    findings of fact which he did and we consider that there is no error of
    law disclosed in the reasons.  Despite the  evidence  of  assault,  the
    appellant's account of her brother's involvement with gangs,  of  being
    sent out to the country to stay with an uncle and  then  returning  and
    the way that she found out about the death of her brother  DW  and  the
    deaths of her daughter, grandson and her brother and  nephew  were  all
    confused and lacked credibility.  In relation to an appellant  who  had
    been convicted of an offence of dishonesty in October 2009 and who  had
    come to the United Kingdom using false documentation we  consider  that
    it was reasonable for the judge and for the  respondent  prior  to  the
    judge  to  expect  at  least  some  supportive  documentary   evidence,
    particularly where such evidence could be expected to be available.

19. It cannot be said that the judge failed to take the medical evidence of
    the assault on the appellant into account.  This evidence  was  clearly
    set out and accepted.  However, in our judgment, it  cannot  be  argued
    that this meant that the judge was obliged to accept the total  account
    of the appellant and, in our judgment, he  sufficiently  explained  his
    reasons for the decision and that decision was  one  to  which  he  was
    entitled to come on the evidence.

20. In all the circumstances, we find there was no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the judge and we dismiss this appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 2 March 2018

Mr Justice Martin Spencer

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 2 March 2018

Mr Justice Martin Spencer

