
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: PA/09756/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at North Shields     Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 19th September 2018                                                On
24th October 2018


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR. A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr Boyle of Iris Law Firm(Middlesbrough)
For the respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. This is a resumed hearing from 23 April 2018 when I concluded that the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hands materially erred in
      concluding that the appellant was from the IKR. In fact he is from a
      border area in Mosul, Bashiqa, a contested zone close to but not in
      the IKR. Where he was from in turn affected consideration of return.
      The matter was to be relisted for argument on this point. His
      underlying claim for protection based upon being Gay; selling alcohol
      and abandoning Islam had been rejected by the First-tier Judge on
      credibility grounds and that finding was not challenged.


   2.  Mr Boyle has provided me with an updated appeal bundle. I have also
      received a skeleton argument which refers to the country guidance case
      of AAH (Iraqi Kurds -internal relocation) Iraq CG 00212. It was
      submitted he could not reasonably relocate the Baghdad because he is
      Kurdish and has no connection with the city and is of the Sunni
      religion. Regarding relocation to the IKR, it is accepted he can
      obtain a CSID and transit through Baghdad. However, it is argued he
      could not reasonably sustain himself once there given that he has no
      skills or family support. It said his brothers are now living in
      Germany and his father, from whom he is estranged, remains in Mosul.

Consideration

   3. I am obliged to both representatives for helping me identify the
      issues arising. Mr Duffy has advised me that Bashiqa is an area
      claimed by the IKR from 2003. In the hearing put forward before First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Hands the appellant's representative had presented
      the appeal on the basis the appellant was from the IKR. At the leave
      stage there was more focus upon who in fact controls this area and
      maps were produced. On the basis it is at least arguable that the area
      is not in the IKR and this in turn impacted upon return leave was
      granted. I had found material error of law at the original hearing on
      the basis the area is not in the IKR- hence today's proceedings.


   4. It has been accepted that the appellant can obtain a CS ID. On current
      arrangements he would be returned to Baghdad. It is not suggested on
      behalf of the respondent that he could then returned to his home area.
      The travel overland could present difficulties. His home area is a
      contested area though there are signs of changes in the country. In
      the appellant's bundle is a document dated January 2018 from the
      Catholic relief services which states that in the past 6 to 9 months
      between 70 to 80% of the population of Bashiqa have returned. The
      question of security impacted upon citizens confidence in returning
      and concerns about the durability of the peace. The article refers to
      families being displaced for 3 years and the statistics indicate that
      most families suffered property damage varying from minor to total
      destruction. It also states that on return livelihood opportunities
      are limited, with the government being the main source of employment.
      Consequently, there are signs of improvement but it is not be
      suggested I depart from the country guidance in relation to return to
      the appellant's home area.


   5. Mr Duffy has not canvassed Baghdad as an area for the appellant's
      permanent residence. He did not however seek to exclude this as an
      option and this has been considered in the country guidance decision
      of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018.However, the
      thrust of the respondent's case is that the appellant could reasonably
      relocate to the IKR. He can obtain entry by transiting via Baghdad
      airport to Erbil or possibly Sulaimaniyah. The country information
      indicates that he will be granted entry initially for 2 weeks as a
      visitor. Thereafter the country information would suggest he needs to
      satisfy the authorities that he can sustain himself and there is
      reference to having a sponsor. Against this, there is an absence of
      evidence that the authorities in the IKR removed Kurds who have been
      admitted on this temporary basis.

   6. The negative credibility findings in the First-tier Tribunal have been
      preserved. In particular is claimed to be Gay was rejected. He also
      claimed to have made a living by selling alcohol. The judge gave
      numerous reasons at paragraph 29 and 30 of the decision. The appellant
      had also said he did not follow the practices of Islam. The
      information provided in the respondent's bundle indicates that the
      Iraqi people, does not cover atheism but is more focus upon those who
      insult Islam.

   7. In terms of the viability of relocation to the IKR Mr Boyle referred
      to the high levels of rent charge for accommodation and the issue of
      employment. There was nothing to suggest the appellant had specific
      skills in demand or that he had family members who can help him secure
      employment. I was referred to AAH (Iraqi Kurds -internal relocation)
      Iraq CG 00212 at or around paragraph 126 and the expert evidence of Dr
      Fatah. Rents of 300 and $400 per month are referred to with 26% of
      ADB's living in abandoned or unfurnished buildings or makeshift
      shelters. There was reference to 70% of the IDP population being
      unemployed. He also suggested the appellant could be viewed with
      suspicion coming from an area that had been occupied.

   8. In response to the last point Mr Duffy said that the appellant came
      from an area which had a significant Yazidi population who had
      suffered under ICIS and the fact he was of Kurdish ethnicity would go
      to dispel him being viewed with suspicion. In relation to the
      reasonableness of his relocation, it was pointed out he could avail of
      the returns package. He had learnt skills whilst in the United Kingdom
      and could speak English. He enjoyed good health. Mr Duffy also made
      the point that the unduly harsh test has to be taken in relation to
      conditions in the country and not compared with the appellant's
      lifestyle in the United Kingdom.

Conclusion

   9. The determinative issue is the reasonableness of the appellant's
      relocation to the IKR. Conditions in his home area have improved but
      as stated earlier I am not considering whether things have now so
      changed that he could return there.


  10. He can gain entry to the IKR and has documentation. It is a stable
      area. There is no evidence of any family support albeit I bear in mind
      the appellant has generally not been found credible.

  11. The reasonableness of relocation will depend on the individual
      circumstances. In his statement he indicates that he formerly worked
      as a waiter. He studied to the 9th grade of school. In the First-tier
      Tribunal he was described as having retail experience, being
      associated with the sale of alcohol. He has some English and can speak
      Arabic. There is no evidence of any significant health issue. He is a
      single man.


  12. It is my conclusion, having regard to what is known about the IKR and
      the appellant, that it would be reasonable to expect him to relocate.
      I can envisage a situation of an individual who elderly or infirm when
      it would be unreasonable to expect them to start afresh. Such a person
      is most likely to be faced with the hardships of an IDP camp rather
      than being able to re-establish themselves. However, I see no such
      restrictions in the appellant's case. The evidence would suggest he is
      capable of self-sufficiency and can adjust to a new environment.
      Whilst he may not have specialised skills he nevertheless is fit and
      healthy and has some English and Arabic. His Kurdish ethnicity will
      help his assimilation. The transition will be eased by the package
      available for him.

Decision.

The appeal is dismissed.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.
Date: 20th October 2018






