
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/09885/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th February 2018                        |On 7th March 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                     ga
                           (anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Oshunrinade, Samuel & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni


                            DECISION AND REASONS

                             EXTEMPORE JUDGEMENT

   1. Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008

   2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant
      is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
      or indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  order
      applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   contempt   of   court
      proceedings.

 3. The Appellant appeals a decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated
    on 9th November 2017 and given  by  Judge  Moore  in  which  the  judge
    dismissed his appeal against the refusal of asylum.  The Appellant  was
    granted permission to appeal by the First-tier Tribunal on 6th December
    2017 on the ground that  it  was  arguable  the  judge  had  failed  to
    properly apply the relevant country guidance.

 4. Before me Mr Oshunrinade submitted that the relevant  country  guidance
    was  that  which  was  put  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in   the
    Appellant's bundle  and  was  the  case  of  AA  (Non-Arab  Darfuris  -
    relocation).  The judge noting that case was some eight years  old  and
    that there had been a subsequent consideration of the position in Sudan
    in IM and AI (Risks - membership of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress and  JEM)
    Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 00188 (IAC) applied considerations set out in  the
    headnote of that case which are applicable to Sudanese  asylum  seekers
    who are not non-Arab Darfuris. That is clarified at paragraphs 216  and
    217 of the country guidance case.  In that case the first Appellant  IM
    although a member of a non-Arab tribe the Beja tribe was not a  Darfuri
    and in that context his  position  did  not  fall  within  the  earlier
    country guidance case of AA.  The second Appellant A1 did claim to be a
    non-Arab Darfuri from the Berti Tribe, but that claim was found not  to
    be made out, although it appears it was accepted he was from Darfur  he
    was unable to establish an  alternative  basis  of  risk  to  ethnicity
    through political activism, his claim also failed.

 5. Mrs Aboni submitted that given the date of the AA  case  which  was  in
    2009 and the changes that occurred in Sudan then  the  current  country
    information relied upon  by  the  Respondent  showed  that  there  were
    material country circumstances or factors  which  would  mean  that  AA
    should not apply.  However, Mrs Aboni was unable to take me to anything
    in the evidence which before the judge which would have justified  such
    a departure, and the judge his or herself does not rely on any specific
    country information that was put before her or him.  I understand  that
    the country information to which Mrs Aboni  refers  and  which  is  not
    before me, is in any event of a later period.

 6. I find  there  is  merit  in  the  appellant's  arguments.  Looking  at
    paragraphs 36 to 38 of the judge's decision it  is  apparent  that  the
    judge has mistakenly found that the case of IM has a material impact on
    the case of AA.  In those circumstances my conclusion is that the judge
    has fallen into legal error when applying the country guidance case  of
    IM and mistakenly found that it operated in order to reduce the case of
    AA when in fact the decision makes it clear that it does not  do  that.
    Ms Aboni's arguments go to materiality but  for  the  reasons  set  out
    above are arguments that might have been offered but were  not  and  do
    not operate to save the decision.

 7. Both of the representatives were in agreement that in the event that  I
    found an error on the grounds the right course of action would  be  for
    me to remake the decision and, there being no  other  possible  outcome
    applying the relevant country guidance on the unchallenged findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal that he is a member of the Berti Tribe and from
    Darfur, allow the Appellant's appeal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
is set aside. I remake the  decision  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on
international protection grounds



Signed                              Date 15 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


