
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/09601/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 April 2018                    |On 30 April 2018                  |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     A I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms F Shaw (counsel) instructed by Kilby Jones,
solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. The subject matter of this appeal merits  an  anonymity
direction. I  make  an  anonymity  order  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any
information regarding the proceedings which would be likely to lead  members
of the public to identify the appellant.



2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Chana promulgated on 16 November 2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 13 May 1987 and is a national of Albania. On  5
September 2017 the Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Chana ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  15  February  2018  Upper
Tribunal Judge Grubb gave permission to appeal stating

      "1. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chana)  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal against a decision  to  refuse  her  international  protection,
      humanitarian protection and human rights claims.


      2. It is arguable that, despite stating she would not "go behind"  the
      respondent's concession that the appellant's account was accepted, the
      Judge has done just that in  assessing  whether  the  appellant  could
      internally relocate in Albania at paragraphs 30  to  41.  Her  adverse
      finding on internal relocation is, as a  result,  arguably  flawed  in
      law.


      3. I see no merit in ground 3 which is merely a disagreement with  the
      Judge's findings not reaching the level of irrationality. Ground 2  is
      probably parasitic on Ground 1. Consequently, I  grant  permission  on
      Grounds 1 and 2 only."

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Ms Shaw moved the grounds of appeal. She  told  me
that the respondent made concessions at paragraphs 25, 32, 36 &  42  of  the
reasons  for  refusal  letter  &  accepted  that  paragraph  339L   of   the
Immigration Rules is satisfied. She took me to [23] of the  decision,  where
the Judge records  that  the  respondent  accepts  the  appellant's  factual
account. There were two issues for the Judge to  determine  and  those  were
(i)  sufficiency  of  protection  and  (ii)  the   viability   of   internal
relocation.

(b) Ms Shaw told  me  that  when  the  Judge  addressed  the  issues  to  be
considered she strayed from the clear path set out at [23],  [29]  and  [30]
of the decision and, from [32] onwards, analysed the factual  basis  of  the
appellant's claim and looked beyond the concessions made by the  respondent.
Ms Shaw relied on  Kalidas  (agreed  facts  -  best  practice)  [2012]  UKUT
00327(IAC).



(c) Ms Shaw told me that although the Judge correctly identifies the  issues
that she should be deciding, she only touches on sufficiency  of  protection
at [52] of the decision and briefly mentions internal relocation at [57]  of
the decision.

(d) Ms Shaw told me that the Judge's errors are material errors of law.  She
urged me to set the decision aside and to remit this case to the  First-tier
Tribunal because there may be up-to-date background evidence and  additional
medical evidence available.

6. For the respondent Mr Lindsay told me that the decision does not  contain
any errors, material or otherwise. He relied on  the  respondent's  rule  24
notice dated 13 March 2018. He took me to [29] where the Judge  specifically
says that she will not go behind the Secretary  of  State's  concession.  He
told me  that  the  Judge  was  correct  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
appellant's account of her relationship with her  family  was  credible.  He
told  me  that  the  Judge's  conclusions  are  well  within  the  range  of
reasonable conclusions available to the Judge. He urged me  to  dismiss  the
appeal and to allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. In Kalidas (agreed facts - best  practice)  [2012]  UKUT  00327(IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Parties should  assist  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
Case Management Review hearings (CMRs) to produce  written  confirmation  of
issues agreed and concessions made; (ii) If credibility is not in issue,  it
will often be unnecessary to submit a further statement by an appellant,  or
call her to give evidence. If this approach is taken, the  judge  should  be
told why; (iii) Any further statement should not be a  rehash  of  what  has
already been said.  It should be directed to  the  remaining  live  issues;
(iv) Any skeleton argument should contain not just general law.  It  should
be directed to the live issues; (v) A  judge  who  accepts  and  records  an
agreement is best placed  to  understand  its  scope,  and  should  consider
reserving  the  case  to  herself;  and  (vi)  Representatives  are  jointly
responsible for drawing attention of the  hearing  judge  to  the  agreement
reached, and the nature of the decision still required.

8. Between [31] and  [41]  the  Judge  analyses  the  appellant's  evidence.
Because of what is said at [29] and [30] it would be  reasonable  to  expect
that analysis to relate to the viability  of  internal  relocation  and  the
sufficiency of protection that is available to the appellant. In  the  first
sentence of [30] the Judge accepts that the  appellant  is  a  member  of  a
particular social group as an Albanian woman who has been trafficked.

9. The analysis of the appellant's evidence strays beyond the two  questions
which the Judge correctly identifies at [23] of the  decision.  Rather  than
take the appellant's accepted profile (as summarised in the  first  sentence
of [30]) and consider how a trafficked woman would be received  in  Albania,
the Judge analyses the nature and quality of  the  appellant's  relationship
with her father, and assesses the appellant's credibility.

10. The Judge relied on AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010]  UKUT
80 (IAC). The guidance  given  in  that  case  was  updated  by  TD  and  AD
(Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC)). The Judge refers to TD  and  AD
at [50] of the decision, but it is not clear that  the  Judge  has  followed
the updated guidance.

11. Despite correctly identifying the two  questions  to  be  resolved,  the
Judge does  not  reach  a  specific  conclusion  about  the  sufficiency  of
protection. At [52] the Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  has  not  sought
protection in Albania, and at [54] the Judge finds that  the  appellant  can
go to  a  government  shelter.  Despite  detailed  reference  to  background
materials between [53] and [55], the Judge makes no specific findings  about
the sufficiency of protection for the appellant, a  single  mother  who  has
been the victim of trafficking.

12. It is only at [57] that the Judge considers the  viability  of  internal
relocation. The findings there are not adequately  reasoned.  As  a  result,
despite writing a detailed decision the Judge has, in effect, taken a  wrong
turn and focused on issues  other  than  the  two  issues  which  the  Judge
correctly identified.

13. The  failure  to  properly  consider  risk  on  return,  sufficiency  of
protection and the viability of internal relocation are all material  errors
of law.   As the decision is tainted by material errors of law  I  must  set
it aside. I am asked to remit this case  to  the  First  -tier.  I  consider
whether or not I can substitute my own decision, but find that I  cannot  do
so because  of  the  extent  of  the  fact-finding  exercise  which  remains
necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it  is  appropriate
   to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new  fact-finding  exercise  is  required  to  address  the  questions  of
sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation.  The  finding  that  the
appellant is a member of a particular social group (as a woman from  Albania
who has been trafficked) is consistent  with  the  concession  made  by  the
respondent,  and stands.

16. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Chana.



Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

18. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 16  November  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so that  the  two  outstanding
questions of (i) sufficiency of protection and (ii) internal relocation  can
be addressed.



Signed                                      Paul                       Doyle
  Date 26 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




