
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09485/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2018                   |On 17 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     HMM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Hussain, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant in this decision identified as HMM.




Introduction

      1. In a decision dated 28 August 2018  I  found  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('the 2018 FTT') made  an  error  of  law,  and  that  the
         decision on the sole outstanding issue  in  dispute  i.e.  internal
         relocation, would be remade by me at an adjourned hearing.  It  was
         agreed that there was no error of law in the FTT's finding that  it
         did not regard the appellant's denial of any  contact  with  family
         members in Iraq to be  credible,  but  that  updated  evidence  was
         necessary and fresh findings would need to be made in the light  of
         this.

Hearing

Issues

      2. At the beginning of the hearing there was a preliminary  discussion
         regarding  the  developments  in  Iraq  and  the  likely   position
         regarding the appellant's ability to obtain a CSID, given that  his
         home area is Kirkuk and he has never claimed  to  have  any  family
         members elsewhere in Baghdad, albeit that his family had  moved  to
         Ramadi fleeing harm as a result of his  father's  activities  under
         Sadaam Hussain.

      3. Both representatives agreed with the following:

          i) The 2018 FTT rejected the appellant's evidence that he was not
             in contact with family members in Kirkuk or Ramadi.  There  is
             no indication that  the  appellant  ever  had  family  members
             outside of Kirkuk and Ramadi, save for his indication that his
             father was at one stage in Syria with his brother.

         ii) This is relevant  for  two  reasons:  (a)  any  assessment  of
             internal relocation to Baghdad must necessarily involve  as  a
             relevant risk factor, the absence of family or other  contacts
             in the city; (b) the process of family members  assisting  the
             appellant to obtain a CSID in Kirkuk is severely  hampered  as
             at the least it has been a contested area for a lengthy period
             - see paragraph 2.6.8 of the Home Office's Country Policy  and
             Information   Note,   Iraq:   Internal    relocation,    civil
             documentation and returns, October  2018  ('the  2018  CPIN').
             This process is likely to have been made even  more  difficult
             by reason of the family having moved to Ramadi in the face  of
             serious threats and violence in their home area  of  Kirkuk  -
             see the FTT decision dated 28 February 2012 ('the  2012  FTT')
             at [57] to [62].  In addition to this, it is well  known  that
             Ramadi was a contested area.

        iii) The appellant left Iraq as a child, with the assistance of  an
             agent, many years ago.  He came to the UK when he was 16, on 6
             September 2007.  The 2012 FTT accepted the credibility of  the
             appellant's account of events leading to  his  departure  from
             Kirkuk and accepted he could not return  there,  but  that  he
             could internally relocate - see [8] and [9] the Upper Tribunal
             decision  dated  17  July  2012  upholding  the   2012   FTT's
             conclusion.  The  renders  the  likelihood  of  the  appellant
             holding or being able to access any documentation in  Iraq  to
             support an application for a CSID very low.   Indeed,  Mr  Tan
             acknowledged that the only viable option for  applying  for  a
             CSID in the light of the appellant's circumstances, is limited
             to making an application to the Iraqi Consulate in the UK.

         iv) In a 2016  witness  statement  the  appellant  referred  to  a
             hospital identity card his family were able to send from Iraq.
              The availability of that evidence would  be  explored  during
             cross-examination.

          v) Following the country guidance decisions  on  Iraq,  including
             more recently AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq  CG
             [2018]  UKUT  212,  when  assessing  the  issue  of   internal
             relocation to Baghdad for this appellant, it  is  critical  to
             first determine whether the  appellant  will  return  with  or
             without a CSID.

         vi) The only viable route for this appellant to obtain a CSID,  in
             the  light  of  the   accepted   aspects   of   his   family's
             circumstances in Iraq is to make an application to  the  Iraqi
             Consulate in the UK.

        vii) If I find that the appellant would not be  able  to  obtain  a
             CSID, it  would  not  be  reasonable  for  him  to  internally
             relocate to Iraq and the appeal should be  allowed  on  asylum
             grounds.  If I find that he can obtain a CSID  I  must  assess
             the reasonableness of internal relocation by reference to  the
             risk factors identified in the country guidance decisions.

Evidence

      4. Having agreed the ambit  of  the  appeal,  Mr  Hussain  called  the
         appellant to give  evidence.   He  relied  upon  a  recent  witness
         statement summarising his attempts to trace his family and obtain a
         CSID.  This included approaching the Iraqi Consulate in  Manchester
         and the British Red Cross.

      5. Mr Tan cross-examined the appellant briefly.  This focused  on  the
         hospital identity card the appellant referred to in a 2016  witness
         statement.  The appellant explained that about  three  years  after
         his arrival in the UK in 2010, his family  obtained  this  document
         from Kirkuk.  He submitted it to the SSHD and does not have a copy.
          He explained that he understood from the Consulate that even if he
         held a copy it would not be deemed sufficient to be provided with a
         CSID.

      6. The  appellant  also  submitted  an  amended  supplementary  bundle
         running  to  135  pages.   I  have  read  this  together  with  the
         respondent's bundle in full.

Submissions

      7. I then heard brief submissions from each  representative.   Mr  Tan
         acknowledged that the only viable  method  for  this  appellant  to
         obtain a CSID was through  the  Iraqi  Consulate  in  the  UK.   He
         initially submitted that the appellant should have taken a copy  of
         the hospital identification card with him and this course was  open
         to him in the future.  I pointed out that the SSHD had not made the
         point in advance of  the  hearing  and  had  failed  to  provide  a
         position statement, in breach of my directions.   Mr  Tan  at  that
         stage acknowledged that he had checked the full file and could  not
         find a copy of the hospital  identification  card.   Mr  Tan  again
         clarified that if I found, contrary to his  submissions,  that  the
         appellant was unable to obtain a CSID, the country guidance is such
         that the appeal should be allowed on asylum grounds.

      8. Mr Hussain relied upon his skeleton argument and invited me to find
         that the appellant will be returned to Baghdad without  a  CSID  or
         the ability to obtain one, and for that  reason  alone  the  appeal
         should be allowed.

      9. After hearing submissions from both representatives, I reserved  my
         decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Re-making the decision

CSID

     10. Mr Tan was realistic in accepting  that  although  the  appellant's
         family members were able to make arrangements  to  obtain  hospital
         identity card from Kirkuk many years ago in around 2010, this would
         be much more difficult at present (given the length  of  time  that
         Kirkuk was a clear 'contested area' and the  impact  upon  this  on
         ability to obtain documentation).  In any event, Mr Tan was  unable
         to take me to any country background to contravene the  appellant's
         evidence  that  a  hospital  identity  card  would  be   considered
         adequate.

     11. I am satisfied Kirkuk, is in an area that  should  continue  to  be
         treated  as  contested.  This   is   primarily   because   I   have
         insufficiently cogent evidence to depart from existing and  binding
         country guidance.  The Upper Tribunal gave country guidance  in  AA
         (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 that the Province of Kirkuk
         was a contested area. I  am  aware  that  the  respondent's  policy
         position is that Kirkuk is no longer in a contested  area.  Despite
         this policy, the Upper Tribunal in AAH commented at  [2]  that  the
         guidance in AA in respect of the contested areas and article  15(c)
         remained appropriate. It is  noted  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
         examining the situation in Iraq in February 2018. At the time,  the
         respondent did not seek to challenge the country guidance regarding
         contested areas. Mr Tan did not submit otherwise or take me to  any
         evidence to undermine the country  guidance.  As  a  result,  I  am
         satisfied the guidance in AA remains applicable for these purposes.

     12. It is important to note that  the  2018  FTT  did  not  accept  the
         appellant's  evidence  that  he  lost  contact  with  his   family.
         However, the 2012 FTT made some positive findings and accepted many
         aspects of the appellant's claim.  The appellant's evidence  before
         me that he has done all that he can to obtain a CSID  but  has  not
         been successful must be seem in the light of these mixed  findings.
         I am satisfied that even on the assumption that the  appellant  has
         some contact with his mother and sister in Ramadi, he  is  unlikely
         to be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi  Consulate  in  the  UK.
         The appellant does not have and has never had a passport  or  CSID.
         That is understandable as he left Iraq illegally when  he  was  16.
         His family fled their home area many years ago.   When  the  family
         were asked to provide some form of identification for the appellant
         the best they could do was  provide  the  hospital  identity  card.
         That is no longer available.   The  prospects  of  this  being  re-
         obtained successfully from Kirkuk is low.  The situation in  Kirkuk
         for the general population and its infrastructure has  deteriorated
         since 2010. The CPIN October 2018 accepts at 2.6.8 and 2.6.12  that
         the process of obtaining a CSID in a contested area is likely to be
         severely hampered.  This must include the process of obtaining  any
         official documents.  The appellant's family have not been  able  to
         provide him with the relevant  family  registration  details  or  a
         national identity card.  This is plausible given that they are IDPs
         themselves who fled their home area in the  face  of  very  serious
         harm.

     13. Without a passport,  family  registration  details  or  a  national
         identity card, the appellant would not be able  to  obtain  a  CSID
         from the  Iraqi  Consulate  in  the  UK.   He  attended  the  Iraqi
         Consulate in Manchester and was unsuccessful.   Given  the  limited
         documentation  he  possesses  and  is  able  to  obtain,  that   is
         unsurprising.

     14. I therefore conclude that notwithstanding the adverse  findings  of
         fact made by the 2018 FTT, the  appellant  would  not  be  able  to
         obtain a CSID and would be returned to Iraq without one.   This  is
         sufficient, as Mr Tan acknowledged, following AAH for the appeal to
         be allowed on asylum grounds.

Other risk factors

     15. I have gone on to assess risk on return on  the  basis  that  I  am
         wrong in my conclusions that the appellant will be unable to obtain
         a CSID.  I address the  risk  factors  in  AAH  discretely  and  by
         reference to the enumeration provided at 15 of the headnote.

          a) I have assumed the appellant is able to obtain a CSID.

          b) I accept the appellant's evidence that he only speaks  limited
             Arabic. That would not be implausible for an Iraqi  Kurd  from
             Kirkuk, who  left  the  area  when  he  was  16.  He  was  not
             challenged on that point before me. I accept that  he  is  not
             generally able to  converse  or  carry  out  business  to  any
             acceptable level in Arabic and that  his  limited  command  of
             that language is not likely to be useful to  him.   His  first
             language is Sorani.  He  also  speaks  English  and  gave  his
             evidence to me in English.

          c) The appellant does not  have  family  members  or  friends  in
             Baghdad. He has never resided there.   There  is  no  evidence
             linking him to a single family contact to Baghdad.

          d) The appellant is not a lone female.   However,  the  appellant
             left Iraq at a young age and has resided in the UK for over 10
             years.  Although he is young, fit and healthy, he is likely to
             be at a disadvantage in terms of knowledge and  experience  of
             the  changes  in  Iraqi  society,  and  to  have  become  more
             Westernised than the majority of other IDPs.

          e) Given that the appellant is from Kirkuk and his family fled to
             Ramadi, there is no reason for me  to  conclude  that  he  has
             friends or will be able to find a sponsor who might be able to
             support or accommodate him in Baghdad.

          f) The appellant is, as a Kurd, from a minority community and  it
             may be  that  his  position  as  Sunni  Kurd  creates  further
             difficulties in that regard.

          g) The appellant will have access to  initial  support  given  to
             IDPs.

          h) The appellant will be most unlikely  to  receive  any  support
             from family members, when they are  all  IDPs  themselves  and
             will not be able to provide him with finance such as to  stave
             off destitution.

     16. I am satisfied that it would be unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  to
         expect the appellant to relocate in Baghdad given the risk  factors
         identified above. On the assumption that he will have a CSID, he is
         toward but not at the "other end of the scale" identified in AA  at
         [202], given the cumulative impact of the risk  factors  identified
         above.  AA emphasises that careful consideration must be  given  to
         the ability of family members to support the  appellant  at  [197].
         It is not disputed that his family do not reside in Baghdad.  Their
         ability to support him from Ramadi is most unlikely.  As set out in
         AA [202] those without  family  connections  in  Baghdad  are  more
         vulnerable.  I am satisfied on  the  evidence  currently  available
         that the appellant will  not  have  access  to  family  members  or
         resources to enable him to obtain  accommodation  in  Baghdad.   If
         returned to Baghdad, he would be going there as a Kurd and a Sunni.
          He will therefore be in a minority community, but with no contacts
         within that community and unlikely to be able to obtain  employment
         notwithstanding his limited Arabic.   The appellant will also be  a
         total newcomer to Baghdad with no adult experience of  ever  having
         lived in Iraq.

     17. These factors must be viewed alongside other  factors  placing  the
         appellant at increased risk and reasonably likely to render life in
         Baghdad to be precarious for him - see the BA (Returns to  Baghdad)
         Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC) headnote, which states:

             "(v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal  of
             US-led coalition forces in 2012 but is not at the levels  seen
             in 2006-2007. A Shia dominated government is supported by Shia
             militias in Baghdad. The evidence indicates that Sunni men are
             more likely to be targeted as suspected  supporters  of  Sunni
             extremist groups such as ISIL. However, Sunni  identity  alone
             is not sufficient to give rise to a real risk of serious harm.

             (vi) Individual characteristics, which do  not  in  themselves
             create a real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might
             amount  to  a  real  risk  for  the  purpose  of  the  Refugee
             Convention, Article 15(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  or
             Article 3 of the ECHR if assessed on a cumulative  basis.  The
             assessment will depend on the facts of each case.

             (vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are  unable,  and
             in the case of Sunni complainants, are likely to be  unwilling
             to provide sufficient protection."

     18. Although the majority of Sunnis  are  able  to  lead  a  relatively
         normal life in Baghdad, it is not without risk. This  appellant,  a
         young Sunni man with  no  experience  of  Baghdad  at  all  and  no
         contacts there, is at increased risk of being perceived as an  ISIS
         supporter.  The pertinent AAH /AA risk factors must  be  considered
         alongside  the  constant  state  of  anxiety  and  insecurity   the
         appellant is likely to face in the current environment, as set  out
         in BA, because  of  his  particular  profile.   This  appellant  is
         reasonably likely to face many different serious  challenges  as  a
         result of his particular  profile,  and  for  this  combination  of
         reasons it is unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to Baghdad.

Conclusion

     19. After having considered all the circumstances I am  satisfied  that
         the appellant  will  not  be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID.   That  is
         sufficient  for  his  appeal  to  be  allowed  on  asylum  grounds.
         However, if I am wrong about this and assuming that  the  appellant
         will obtain a CSID, I still assess his internal relocation to  Iraq
         to be unduly harsh for the combination of reasons I have identified
         above.

Decision

     20. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal  and  find
         that his removal would breach the Refugee Convention and Article  3
         of the ECHR.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal  Date: 17 December 2018
