
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09765/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2019                           |On 16 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                 MUSTAFA [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Islam, Fountain solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born on 1 January 1993 and claims to be a citizen  of
    Sudan. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the
    Secretary of State dated 25  September  2017  refusing  his  claim  for
    international  protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 4 December 2017, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal had been granted as long ago
    as 14 March 2018. Thereafter, the appeal appears to  have  been  stayed
    behind the new country guidance case, AAR &  AA  (non-Arab  Darfuris  -
    return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 282 (IAC) which was  eventually  reported  in
    September 2019. On the basis of that decision, the appellant, if he  is
    a non-Arab Darfuri, may be entitled to international protection.

 3. However, the appeal remains deeply problematic. I am very  grateful  to
    Mr Mills, who appeared for the Secretary of State and who  provided  me
    with a copy of his letter under Rule 24 dated 15 November 2019. In this
    letter, Mr Mills draws attention to the fact  that  the  appellant  has
    never claimed to be a non-Arab Darfuri. Moreover, it appear  that  both
    the First-tier Tribunal and the parties to the appeal  have  throughout
    misunderstood the nature of the appellant's  ethnicity.  The  appellant
    has claimed throughout to be a Nubian, a tribe  which  originates  come
    from the north part of Sudan  and  which,  the  appellant  claims,  was
    'exiled' from Egypt in the 1960s during the construction of  the  Aswan
    High Dam. Contrary to assumptions made by the parties and the Tribunal,
    Nubians are not synonymous with the Nuba tribe who live in the hills of
    southern Sudan. To complicate  matters,  in  his  appeal  statement  of
    October 2017, the appellant claims that he is from the Nubi tribe.

 4. Mr Mills submits that, given the judge's findings  that  the  appellant
    had never been detained or ill treated, that the  Sudanese  authorities
    have no interest in him and that he is not a non-Arab Darfuri, there is
    no real risk to him upon return  to  Sudan.  Consequently,  he  submits
    that, if the Upper Tribunal remakes the decision,  the  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision should be dismissed.

 5. There is rational force behind Mr Mills's argument. However, my primary
    concern is to ensure that the appellant is given a fair hearing of  his
    appeal. For the reasons articulated by Mr Mills,  neither  the  parties
    nor the First-tier Tribunal have addressed the appeal on the  basis  of
    the appellant's  correct  tribal  identity.  To  that  extent,  he  has
    hitherto not enjoyed a fair hearing  or  proper  determination  of  his
    appeal. Given that the First-tier Tribunal decision  is  based  upon  a
    fundamental misunderstanding of the facts, I find that the only  proper
    course of action is for this appeal to be returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision on the basis  of  the
    correct facts. Mr Mills submitted  that  the  refusal  letter  at  [25]
    contains a typographical error where it refers to the  appellant  being
    from the 'Nuba tribe', a claim which he has never advanced. If one were
    to ignore that error, Mr Mills submitted that there was no need for the
    Secretary of State to  serve  a  supplemental  or  replacement  refusal
    letter. That is a matter for the Secretary of State. However, I  direct
    the Secretary of State to file with the First-tier Tribunal  and  serve
    on the appellant and his representatives a further copy of  Mr  Mills's
    letter of 15 November 2019 forthwith.  I  record  that  Mr  Islam,  who
    appeared for the appellant before the Upper  Tribunal  at  the  initial
    hearing, did not seek to dispute any of the contents of that letter. It
    is, therefore, vitally important that the  letter  is  brought  to  the
    attention of the next Tribunal.  Both  parties  may  adduce  additional
    evidence provided copies of any documentary evidence, including witness
    statements, are sent to the First-tier Tribunal and to the other  party
    no less than 10 days prior to the next hearing. For  the  avoidance  of
    doubt, the decision of the FTT is set aside in its entirety



    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 4 December  2017
    are set aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision at or following a  hearing  de  novo.  The  attention  of  the
    parties is drawn to the directions set out in paragraph [5] above.






Signed                              Date 31 December 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
