
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09713/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 August 2020                     |On 13 August 2020                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Mr K (Iraq)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of Mr K who is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and directions

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    decision to refuse  him  refugee  status  under  the  1951  Convention,
    humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    human rights grounds.  The claimant is an Iraqi  Kurd  who  is  now  27
    years old.

 2. The appeal was heard on 14 November 2019  but  the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision  was  not  promulgated  until  3  January  2020.   The   Upper
    Tribunal's latest Iraq country guidance case SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article
    15(c); identity documents) CG Iraq [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC)  (20  December
    2019) but the judge did not  invite  further  submissions  thereon  and
    disposed of the new country guidance in one line in her rather confused
    paragraph 38:

         "38. In conclusion, I find that the appellant  has  not  discharged
         the burden of proof to show with a reasonable degree of  likelihood
         that he has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  reason
         recognised by the Geneva Convention.  Accordingly, the  appellant's
         removal would not cause the United Kingdom to be in breach  of  its
         obligations under the Geneva Convention.  Therefore it follows that
         I must refuse his asylum appeal.  However, I am satisfied  that  it
         is unreasonable to expect the  appellant  to  return  to  Iraq  and
         attempt to relocate back to his home area or to the ikr or  Baghdad
         and other southern  governorates.   Given  the  guidance  contained
         within the recent country guidance case  of  [SMO  and  others],  I
         reach the conclusion that internal relocation is unduly harsh."

 3. The judge dismissed the  asylum  appeal,  but  allowed  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection and on Article 3 ECHR grounds.

 4. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal, arguing that the
    First-tier Judge had erred in  providing  inadequate  reasons  for  her
    decision, failing to take into account material facts, making  mistakes
    of fact and/or failing to resolve conflicts of evidence,  and that  the
    Upper Tribunal should substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.

 5. On 30 January 2020, Designated Judge Woodcraft granted the Secretary of
    State's application for permission to appeal on all grounds.

 6. On 18 March 2020, immediately after the COVID-19 pandemic  lockdown  at
    Field House, Vice-President Ockelton reviewed  the  file  and  directed
    that the Secretary of State could file further submissions  in  support
    of the error of law issue, with a right of reply to the  claimant,  and
    time limits.  The Secretary of State did nothing.  On  21  April  2020,
    the claimant's solicitors filed a Rule 24 Reply out of  time,  engaging
    with the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.

 7. On 13 May 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara reached a provisional  view
    that the appeal could be determined without a hearing and directed that
    the Secretary  of  State  must  file  submissions  in  support  of  her
    assertions of an error of law.   Again,  the  Secretary  of  State  did
    nothing.

 8. That is the somewhat unsatisfactory  situation  in  which  this  appeal
    comes to me for directions.  I  am  satisfied,  having  regard  to  the
    submissions received from the appellant and  the  grounds  for  review,
    that the First-tier Judge ought to have asked for  further  submissions
    on SMO and  others  before  reaching  her  decision,  and  should  have
    explained in her decision why, if the  appellant  was  not  a  refugee,
    internal relocation was engaged.

 9. There is no alternative but to set this  decision  aside  for  remaking
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

10. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, with  no  findings
    of fact or credibility preserved.

11. The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing
    afresh before a different First-tier Judge.



Signed:  Judith  AJC  Gleeson                       Date:          9  August
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


