
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09674/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford IAC                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 September 2020                          |On 23 September 2020          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     I K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Ahmed, Counsel on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr. Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as the  appeal  concerns  a
    protection claim. Unless  and  until  a  court  directs  otherwise  the
    Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly refer to him.  This direction  applies  both  to
    the Appellant and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  panel  (Judge  Kelly  and  Lodato)   (hereinafter
    referred to as the "FtT panel") who, in a determination promulgated  on
    the 17 February 2020, dismissed his protection and human rights claim.

The factual background:

 3. The background to the appellant's protection claim is set  out  in  the
    determination of the FtT panel at paragraphs 3-15 and in  the  decision
    letter of the Secretary of State issued on 8 August 2019.

 4. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He entered the United  Kingdom
    on 14 February 2006, having applied to enter as a Tier  4  student.  He
    attended University and graduated in 2011. His leave  to  remain  as  a
    student ended upon his graduation and he then made an  application  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post study work) migrant which was refused
    in 2012, his appeal was dismissed in May  2013.  It  is  recorded  that
    between  November  2016  and  April  2018,  he   made   three   further
    applications for leave to remain which were refused. On 31 August  2018
    in reply to a one-stop notice, the appellant made  a  protection  claim
    (asylum).

 5. The factual basis of his  claim  related  to  a  property  dispute.  He
    believed his paternal uncles had poisoned his father in 1984 and  their
    motive for doing so was to secure ownership of his father's estate. His
    father had bequeathed most of his estate to his wife and their two sons
    (including the appellant) leaving only 1/3 to the paternal uncles. They
    therefore evicted the appellant and his mother from the family home and
    contested the bequest in the courts. Following  the  litigation,  which
    was resolved in 2004, the court found in favour of  the  appellant  and
    his family relatives. The appellant then sold  his  share  to  a  third
    party in 2005 as did his mother.  It  was  claimed  that  the  paternal
    uncles held the appellant responsible for them losing  the  court  case
    and that in 1999, at a stage in the  proceedings  where  judgement  had
    been recently delivered in his favour, his maternal uncles attempted to
    run him over. This led to the lodging of a FIR. In 2005, the  appellant
    and his  mother,  after  succeeding  in  regaining  possession  of  the
    property for the courts, the police took him from his home whereupon it
    is said his two uncles  committed  a  serious  assault  upon  him.  The
    appellant did not report the incident to the police. In 2006,  the  two
    uncles attended at his house and  began  firing.  A  FIR  was  made  in
    relation to this incident and he left for the UK  the following month.

 6. On 8 August 2019 the respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  and
    protection claim under paragraphs 336 & 339F of the  Immigration  Rules
    and also reached the decision that the appellant did  not  qualify  for
    leave on the  basis  of  his  family  or  private  life  in  the  UK  (
    hereinafter referred to as " the decision letter").

 7. The FtT panel summarised the decision letter  at  paragraphs  16-25  as
    follows. The respondent accepted the appellant's identity and  that  he
    was a Pakistani national.  However, the respondent did not  accept  the
    appellant's account of a land dispute or subsequent problems  with  his
    father's family. Little weight was attached to  the  police  and  court
    documentation because it could not be independently verified, and  this
    included the FIR dated 12 October 1999. It was considered  unreasonable
    for the appellant not have reported his supposed abduction and  torture
    by his uncles to the police and that in interview, the appellant  named
    an individual as purchasing the property for seven or eight Lakh rupees
    whereas another individual had been identified as the purchaser in  the
    he sale agreement and another document listed the sale price as 4  lakh
    rupees. The respondent also took into account that his failure to claim
    asylum promptly upon entry to the UK and for several years  thereafter,
    undermined his general credibility and  also  on  the  basis  that  his
    student visa application was rejected in 2011 on  the  grounds  that  a
    false bank statement had been  submitted  in  support  of  it.  It  was
    further considered that there was sufficiency of protection (paragraphs
    86 - 91) and in the alternative the appellant could internally relocate
    to a different part of Pakistan (paragraphs 124 - 126). The  respondent
    considered that the appellant had failed to  demonstrate  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that he would be persecuted on return to  Pakistan
    and concluded that the appellant would not be in need of  international
    protection.


 8. As to the appellant's human rights claim, the respondent noted that the
    appellant had not lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  twenty
    years and did not accept that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    his integration into Pakistan. As such  the  respondent  was  satisfied
    that the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of
    the Immigration Rules.


 9. Finally, the Respondent concluded that the appellant had not raised any
    exceptional circumstances, which might justify  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain in the UK outside the requirements of the immigration rules.

10. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal against that decision.

11. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal panel on the 11 February
    2020. In a decision promulgated on 17  February  2020,  the  FtT  panel
    dismissed  his  appeal.  Having  considered  the  evidence,  the  panel
    attached "very substantial adverse  weight"  to  his  failure  to  seek
    protection in the UK until 12 years after  he  had  arrived  and  after
    having made failed applications for leave to remain on  other  grounds.
    The panel rejected  his  explanation  for  the  delay  as  "exceedingly
    vague". The panel also attached "significant  adverse  weight"  to  the
    fact that he was found to have submitted a false bank statement. As  to
    the documents, the panel attached little weight to  them  as  they  had
    been provided 12 years after the events and identified in one  document
    inconsistent evidence had been given by the appellant  (at  [37]).  The
    panel did not accept that there were specific incidents of  threats  to
    the appellant from his maternal uncles exhibited in the  affidavits  of
    support (paragraph [38]) and reached the conclusion at [39] that he had
    failed to substantiate the factual basis of his claim and  this  was  a
    "recently invented" factual account.

12. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and was refused  by  FtTJ
    Foudy but on renewal to the Upper Tribunal and  on  different  grounds,
    permission was granted by UTJ Finch on 20 June 2020.

13. Following that grant of permission,  it  was  considered  by  an  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  that  a  face  to  face  hearing  should  take  place.
    Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to enable  oral  submissions
    to be given by each of the parties.

14. The appeal was therefore listed as a face  to  face  hearing  with  his
    Counsel and solicitor and the Senior  Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Diwnycz
    present at court. The appellant was not present.

15.  I  am  grateful  for   their   assistance   and   their   clear   oral
    representations.

16. I heard submissions from each of the advocates. Mr  Ahmed  relied  upon
    the grounds. In relation to  paragraph  6  of  the  grounds,  Mr  Ahmed
    submitted that at paragraphs 10 and 25 of the decision the panel  noted
    the appellant's factual account that he had been tortured and abused in
    2005 (paragraph 10) and that he had suffered from depression (paragraph
    25). He submitted that it was apparent from  the  evidence  before  the
    panel that the appellant had raised that he had been the subject  of  a
    serious sexual  assault  and  that  he  had  underlying  mental  health
    problems. It was submitted that the panel erred in law by not  treating
    the appellant as a vulnerable witness  and  that  in  the  case  of  AM
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, it was  held  that  such  an
    error will most likely be a material error of law.

17. In his oral submissions, Mr Ahmed stated that it had not been  disputed
    that he suffered from depression, but no findings  of  fact  were  made
    relating to his torture.  He  accepted  that  neither  of  the  parties
    directed the panel to issues of vulnerability but as  it  was  accepted
    that he suffered from depression and had made an allegation of a severe
    attack upon him, there were no clear findings made by the panel  as  to
    whether or not that  was  accepted.  He  therefore  submitted  that  if
    someone made such an allegation they would be  a  "vulnerable  witness"
    but the panel did not treat him  as  such  and  therefore  the  adverse
    credibly findings made by the FtT panel were unsound.

18. As to paragraphs 13 - 14 of the grounds, Mr Ahmed  submitted  that  the
    judge accepted the expert evidence at paragraph [34] but it was unclear
    whether the panel accepted that he had been ill treated as a result  of
    the family land dispute. He submitted that the panel erred  in  law  in
    their approach to the documentary evidence provided by the appellant at
    [37] given that the documents had said to be genuine by WA whose report
    the panel found to be credible at [34]. Mr Ahmed relied upon section  4
    of the report. In the alternative  it  was  submitted  that  the  panel
    failed to address this  aspect  of  the  evidence  upon  which  it  was
    necessary to make clear findings.

19. It is further submitted that the panel  erred  in  law  by  applying  a
    higher burden of proof at [29].

20. In respect of the article 8  assessment  (paragraph  16  -  18  of  the
    grounds), Mr Ahmed in his oral submissions submitted that the appellant
    had been resident in the United Kingdom in excess of 14 years  and  the
    panel should have made a  finding  about  his  ability  to  reintegrate
    Pakistan in the light of having been subjected  to  torture.  Mr  Ahmed
    therefore invited the Tribunal to set aside the decision of the FtT.

21. There was no Rule 24 response on behalf of the respondent.  Mr  Diwnycz
    submitted that the issue of vulnerability was not advanced  before  the
    FtT panel and the record of the presenting  officer  present  supported
    that submission and the appellant's vulnerability was not  put  forward
    as an issue before the panel. There was no reference to it in the reply
    to the IAC as an issue either.

22. He submitted that whilst it had  been  had  raised  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the evidence of WA was accepted, paragraph [34]  of  the
    decision referred to the plausibility  of   family  disputes  involving
    landownership in the general sense and it was not a  finding  that  the
    panel accepted the entirety of the appellant's  account.  He  submitted
    that the panel went on to substantially reject the appellant's claim.

23. He submitted that contrary to the  grounds,  the  panel  could  not  be
    criticised for reaching their conclusions in any particular  order.  As
    to the section 8 issues, the delay here was not an insignificant  delay
    and as an educated man he had not provided a reasonable explanation for
    the delay. He therefore submitted that the decision should stand.

24. The conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision

Discussion:

25. I remind myself that I can only interfere with the decision of  a  FtTJ
    if it is demonstrated that the FtTJ made a decision which involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

26. Mr Ahmed relied principally upon the matters set  out  in  the  renewed
    grounds before the Upper Tribunal.

27. I have considered with care the  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and the competing submissions made by Mr Diwnycz on behalf of
    the respondent.

28. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the panel erred in  law
    by not treating the  appellant  as  a  "vulnerable  witness"  and  thus
    failing to follow the relevant practice direction. Mr  Ahmed  submitted
    that it had been accepted in the decision  letter  that  the  appellant
    suffered from depression  and  it  had  been  the  appellant's  factual
    account that he had been subjected to torture and sexual  violence  and
    therefore it was apparent that he was a vulnerable witness (see written
    grounds).

29. In his oral submissions, Mr Ahmed submitted that at paragraph 25 of the
    panel decision,  reference had been made to the appellant's  depression
    but no findings made by the panel as to whether the appellant had  been
    tortured or had been subjected to sexual  violence.  He  conceded  that
    none of the parties  present  before  the  panel  sought  to  make  any
    submissions concerning the appellant's vulnerability but that as it was
    accepted that the appellant had depression, the panel erred in  law  as
    they failed to make it clear finding as to whether he had been a victim
    of any abuse. He submitted that if someone made such an  allegation  of
    abuse they would be a "vulnerable witness" and as  the  panel  did  not
    treat him as such, the adverse credibility findings were not sound.

30. In his response to the submission Mr Diwnycz properly  brought  to  the
    Tribunal's attention that the reply to  the  IAC  failed  to  make  any
    reference to any  vulnerability  on  the  part  of  the  appellant.  He
    submitted that no arguments were advanced  in  this  respect  and  thus
    there was no material error of law.

31. Having considered the submissions of the parties, and in the context of
    AM (Afghanistan [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 I am satisfied that the panel  did
    not err in law in the way either the grounds assert or on the basis  of
    the oral submissions advanced by Mr Ahmed.

32. As set out in that decision (and the guidance) there is no dispute that
    the Tribunal and the parties are required to ensure that  an  appellant
    is able to participate fully in the proceedings (see paragraph 27 of AM
    (Afghanistan)) and the decision makes reference to the Tribunal's  case
    management powers at paragraph 28. The  practice  of  waiting  for  the
    substantive  hearing  and  the  failure  to  identify  case  management
    directions leading to adjournment is deprecated (see paragraph 29).



33. At para [31], the Senior President set out, in agreement with
    submissions made on behalf of the Lord Chancellor in that case, five
    key features of the joint Presidential Guidance Note and the Practice
    Direction of the Senior President, "First-tier and Upper Tribunal:
    Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Witnesses (30 October 2008) as
    follows:


         "31. The PD and the Guidance Note [Guidance] provide detailed
         guidance on the approach to be adopted by the Tribunal to an
         incapacitated or vulnerable person. I agree with the Lord
         Chancellor's submission that there are five key features:
         a. the early identification of issues of vulnerability is
         encouraged, if at all possible, before any substantive hearing
         through the use of a CMRH or pre-hearing review (Guidance [4] and
         [5]);
         b. a person who is incapacitated or vulnerable will only need to
         attend as a witness to give oral evidence where the Tribunal
         determines that 'the evidence is necessary to enable the fair
         hearing of the case and their welfare would not be prejudiced by
         doing so' (PD [2] and Guidance [8] and [9]);
         c. where an incapacitated or vulnerable person does give oral
         evidence, detailed provision is to be made to ensure their welfare
         is protected before and during the hearing (PD [6] and [7] and
         Guidance [10]);
         d. it is necessary to give special consideration to all of the
         personal circumstances of an incapacitated or vulnerable person in
         assessing their evidence (Guidance [10.2] to [15]); and
         e. relevant additional sources of guidance are identified in the
         Guidance including from international bodies (Guidance Annex A [22]
         to [27])."


34. The PD and guidance refer to the early identification of issues of
    vulnerability before any substantive hearing (see the guidance at
    paragraphs 4 and 5). Furthermore, at paragraph 32 it was stated that
    the primary responsibility for identifying vulnerabilities must rest
    with the appellant's representatives because they are better placed
    than the Secretary of State to have access to medical and personal
    information. The appellant's representatives should draw the Tribunal's
    attention to the PD and the guidance, making submissions about the
    appropriate directions and any measures that may be necessary.

35. On the facts of this appeal, there were two opportunities for the issue
    of vulnerability to be raised. The purpose of the "Reply to the IAC
    Notice " is to "provide the Tribunal with the information needed to
    properly manage the appeal." In the reply document, there is a specific
    section (section 9) intended to identify those who are likely to be
    vulnerable witnesses and therefore may require the Tribunal to take
    certain measures in relation to their evidence. In the reply submitted
    on behalf of the appellant on 14 October, there was no reference in
    that section  nor was there any reference in the second reply submitted
    shortly for the hearing on 24 January 2020.

36. Whilst best practice is set out in AM (Afghanistan) for such issues be
    raised at the case management hearing to ensure that the procedures
    adopted meet the needs of any individual appellant, Mr Ahmed concedes
    that no such submissions were made to the Tribunal on behalf of the
    appellant at the substantive hearing either.

37. At paragraph [25] the panel were summarising the decision letter in
    which it was noted by the respondent that the appellant had stated that
    he suffered from depression when he was interviewed. There was no
    supporting medical evidence produced the Tribunal to assist them in
    determining the extent of any mental health problems that he may have
    or determining how any past history had affected him so that the
    guidance could properly take effect. As the decision in SB(vulnerable
    adult; credibility) [2019] UKUT 398 makes plain, even if a judicial
    factfinder decides to treat an appellant or a witness as a vulnerable
    adult, that does not mean that any adverse credibility finding in
    respect of that person is thereby to be regarded as inherently
    problematic and thus open to challenge on appeal. The grounds do not
    identify any particular findings or particularise any evidence given in
    which it is said was affected by any vulnerability of the appellant.

38. Consequently, it has not been demonstrated that there was any material
    error of law on the basis advanced above.

39. That said, I am satisfied that the issues raised at paragraph 13-14 of
    the grounds are made out.

40. The grounds challenge the assessment of the documentary evidence that
    was before the Tribunal and in particular that which the appellant had
    provided in support of his claim. The material in the appellant's
    bundle consisted of two FIR's, a number of court documents relevant to
    the property dispute between the appellant's family members and those
    whom he claimed had caused him harm and whom he claimed to be in fear
    of. There was also a report from WA (an advocate of the High Court in
    Pakistan) which made reference to a number of issues relevant to the
    claim.

41. As Mr Ahmed pointed out, the panel appears to have accepted WA's
    expertise at paragraph [34] where they stated that they accepted his
    evidence that family disputes concerning ownership of land are common
    in Pakistan and that they often lead to violence causing serious injury
    and death. The panel stated "we accept the evidence not only because Mr
    A has undoubtedly experience and expertise in the field but also
    because he has appended numerous media reports of such incidents. We
    therefore find that the appellant's account of his involvement in such
    a dispute is plausible at a general level, and we have taken this into
    account in his favour when assessing his credibility as a witness of
    truth."

42. However, when considering the documents provided by the appellant
    (including the court documents), the panel stated, "we approach the
    documents upon which the appellant now relies with a great deal of
    circumspection." This was based on their findings at [35] where they
    attached "very substantial adverse weight" to the appellant's failure
    to claim asylum for a very lengthy period and at [36) attaching
    "significant adverse weight" to having submitted a false bank
    statement. At [37] the panel went on to consider the documents in the
    context of the delay in making his protection claim and that they were
    surprised that he was able to provide a "wealth of documentary
    evidence" 12 years after the events. They therefore concluded that "we
    attach little weight to the fact the details of his account and the
    asylum interview accord with those contained within these documents.
    This is because he had an opportunity to study the detail of those
    documents in advance of that interview." It is right to observe that
    the panel went on to identify an inconsistency in one of the documents
    (at page 212) with his evidence in interview.


43. However in the assessment of the documentary evidence, the panel did
    not engage with the report of WA (whom they had earlier considered had
    at least some expertise) who had set out in the report his description
    as to the verification of the documents. At section 4, WA interviewed
    the appellant's mother and obtained information from her. He also set
    out the visit he made to the respective courts on 16 November (see
    paragraphs 4.2 - 4.3) to verify the documents, his visit to the lawyer
    for the family (at 4.4) and on 18 November his visit to the Peshawar
    High Court to verify the documents.


44. Whilst the panel did assess the evidence in the affidavits provided by
    the appellant's mother and the public prosecutor (at paragraph 38)
    there was no reference or any assessment made of the other documents in
    the light of the report of WA and the steps taken to verify the
    documents. This was a relevant consideration when undertaking a
    holistic assessment of the evidence (as set out in the decision of
    Tanveer Ahmed) and when the failure of any verification had been raised
    as an issue in the decision letter.


45. In his submissions Mr Diwnycz referred to the adverse credibility
    findings made by the panel and in particular his failure to claim
    asylum for such a lengthy period in the light of the explanation for
    that delay. Whilst it is right they did make adverse credibility
    findings which were open to them, and whilst an assessment of personal
    credibility might be a critical aspect of some claims, it is not an end
    in itself or a substitute for a holistic assessment of the evidence,
    which includes in this case the documentary evidence in the context of
    the report of WA.

46. Consequently, I am satisfied that the error of law was material and
    undermines the overall conclusions reached as to the appellant's
    account and his credibility.

47. Whilst there were other issues raised in the grounds, it is not
    necessary for me to deal with them in the light of my assessment of the
    error of law set out above which has the effect of undermining the
    overall conclusion reached. I therefore set aside the decision of the
    FtT panel.

48. I have therefore considered whether it should be remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In reaching that
    decision I have given  careful  consideration  to  the  Joint  Practice
    Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning  the
    disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

          "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied
         that:-
         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or
         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

49. Both advocates submit that the venue for hearing the appeal should be
    the FtT. I have considered their submissions in the light of the
    practice statement recited above. As it  will be necessary for the
    appellant  to give evidence and  to deal with the evidential issues,
    further fact-finding will be necessary alongside the analysis of risk
    on return in the light of the relevant documentary evidence and in my
    judgement the best course and consistent with the overriding objective
    is for it to be remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. The Tribunal
    will be seized of the task of undertaking a credibility assessment and
    will be required to do so on the basis of the evidence as at the date
    of the hearing.


50. In his submissions Mr Ahmed stated that the conclusions of the panel at
    [34] should be preserved. I have considered that submission with care
    but in the light of my assessment of the error of law in which the
    conclusions as to credibility have been undermined as a result of the
    evidence not having been considered holistically, in my judgement  no
    findings should be preserved. It will be a matter for the FtT on
    remittal to consider the evidence before it and reach a factual
    assessment of that evidence.

51. There appears to be a factual dispute as to what evidence there was
    before the Tribunal to support the claim made of the use of a false
    document by the appellant. This should be clarified by the provision of
    evidence, if available.

52. In the light of the issues raised in respect of the appellant  it  will
    be necessary for the appellant's solicitors to consider what,  if  any,
    evidence concerning the appellant's mental health is to be adduced and,
    if appropriate, to agree any  ground  rules  for  the  conduct  of  the
    hearing with the Tribunal and the Respondent.




Notice of Decision:


53. For those reasons, I am satisfied that it has been demonstrated that
    the decision of the FtT panel did involve the making of an error on a
    point of law. I therefore set aside the decision of the FtT Panel. It
    shall be remitted to the FtT for a further hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                                         Date      20/
9/2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

