
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09309/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 December 2018                 |On 9 January 2019                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                SHAHAB KARIMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Popal (counsel) instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Cohen  promulgated  on  20/09/2018,  which  dismissed   the
Appellant's protection appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 11/03/1999 and is a national  of  Iran.  The
appellant claimed to have a well-founded fear of persecution because of  his
political  opinion.  On  13/07/2018  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
Appellant's protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Cohen  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  24/10/2018
Judge Boyes gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    The grounds assert that the Judge did not consider the  Facebook
    material correctly and secondly, was wrong to conclude  as  he  did  in
    relation to the ethnicity argument. Thirdly, was procedurally unfair in
    relation to a drawing (?) And erred in requiring the appellant to  show
    corroboration.

    3.     Ground 3 is arguable. I do not know  on  what  basis  the  court
    thought it appropriate to conduct its own investigation and set up  its
    own experiments, on the hoof, then criticise the appellant thereafter.

    4.     Permission is granted on all the grounds however it is ground  3
    which is the shining light."

Hearing

5.    For the appellant, Ms Popal told me that the respondent served a  rule
24 notice in which the respondent concedes the appeal  and  asked  that  the
case be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard of  new.  Mr  Walker
did not have a copy of the rule 24 notice, but on the court file there is  a
rule 24 notice dated 19 November 2018 which says

    "The  respondent  does  not  oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal and invites the tribunal to remit  the  matter  to
    the First-tier in order for sustainable findings to be made."

6.    Mr Walker told me that he could not oppose the  appeal.  He  described
[32] of the decision as "an unusual approach to take". He told me  that  the
appeal is no longer opposed and asked me to remit this case  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Analysis

7.    It is clear from [32] of  the  decision  that  the  Judge  adopted  an
inquisitorial approach and then, having done so, reached findings which  are
not properly explained. [32] of  the  decision  contains  conclusions  drawn
from the Judge's own inquisition. The conclusions  that  the  Judge  reaches
are inadequately reasoned. The procedure that the Judge adopted  is  unfair.
The appellant had no notice of the test he was to  face  -  created  by  the
Judge on the spur of the moment. There is no evidence of the  qualifications
the Judge has to ponder the artistic character and quality  of  the  drawing
that he forced the appellant to produce.

8.    The result is that the Judge's findings cannot stand because they  are
not supported  by  adequate  reasoning  and  because  the  proceedings  were
tainted by unfairness. Those are material errors of law  because  the  Judge
places [32]  of  the  decision  at  the  heart  of  the  assessment  of  the
appellant's credibility. I therefore set the decision aside

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

9.     Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

10.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because a new fact-finding  exercise  is  required.   None  of  the  Judge's
findings are preserved. A complete re-hearing is necessary.

11.   I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor  House
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Cohen.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on  20  September  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed      Date 11 December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
