
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09037/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 December 2018                  |On 14 March 2019                     |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                 Waqas Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Hyder of Westbrook Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett promulgated on 29 August 2018 dismissing the appeal against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated 5 January 2018 refusing  a  protection
    claim.

2.   The primary issue before the Upper Tribunal, pursuant to the  grant  of
    permission to appeal of First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria on 24 September
    2018,  is  in  respect  of  Judge  Grimmett's  decision  to  refuse  an
    application to adjourn the appeal hearing. In the  circumstances  I  do
    not propose to set out the background immigration history or  substance
    of the Appellant's claim for protection in  detail:  such  matters  are
    adequately set out in the documents on file, including in the  Decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   It is pertinent to note, however, the following. The  Appellant  claims
    to have fled Pakistan and to have entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  14
    February 2015 because he was at risk; the risk was based on events that
    occurred in 2012, and a telephone threat in  respect  of  those  events
    received in 2014. The Appellant only claimed asylum, however, after  he
    was issued with a notice  as  an  overstayer  on  17  January  2018.  A
    screening interview was conducted on 19  January  2018;  a  substantive
    asylum interview was held five  months  later  on  19  June  2018.  The
    Appellant's application was refused on 5 July 2018,  and  a  Notice  of
    Appeal  lodged  on  19  July  2018  with  the   assistance   of   legal
    representatives. The appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took
    place on 20 August 2018.

4.   At the appeal hearing on 20  August  2018  the  Appellant  appeared  in
    person, unrepresented, and made an application for an adjournment.  The
    application was refused and the appeal proceeded.  In  due  course  the
    appeal was dismissed for the reasons given in  the  Decision  of  Judge
    Grimmett promulgated on 29 August 2018.

5.   Judge Grimmett dealt with the adjournment application in  the  Decision
    in the following way:

         "The   appellant   sought   an   adjournment   to   obtain    legal
         representation. He produced a fax from  a  charitable  organisation
         which said that he did not qualify for  legal  aid  and  could  not
         afford a representative. I could not see how an  adjournment  would
         benefit the appellant in those circumstances." (paragraph 6)

6.   By way of further context it is helpful to note the following.

         (i)  On 25 July 2018 Burton & Burton solicitors, who  had  assisted
         the Appellant in  lodging  the  Notice  of  Appeal,  wrote  to  the
         Tribunal noting that the appeal was  listed  for  20  August  2018,
         stating "we no longer represent" the Appellant, and requesting that
         the Tribunal's records be updated accordingly.

         (ii) Nottingham and Nottinghamshire Refugee Forum ('NNRF') wrote to
         the Tribunal by fax dated 31 July 2018 stating that  they  were  "a
         charitable OISC accredited organisation to level 3", and  that  the
         Appellant had presented himself to their  legal  department  on  23
         July 2018. On review, the senior adviser decided on  31  July  2018
         that the "appeal had no merit in pursuing". It was noted  that  the
         Appellant was not in receipt of legal aid and could not afford  the
         cost of representation from his former legal representatives Burton
         & Burton. Accordingly NNRF had decided to assist the Appellant  "by
         submitting a request that the First Tier Tribunal to give him  more
         time to prepare for the full hearing".

         (iii)    NNRF followed up the fax of 31 July 2018  with  a  further
         fax dated 8 August 2018, requesting a response.

         (iv) The request to postpone the appeal hearing was refused by  the
         Tribunal for reasons accompanying a reissued Notice of Hearing  and
         Directions sent on  7  August  2018.  Reasons  were  given  in  the
         following terms:

             "An application for  an  adjournment  has  been  made  by  the
             Nottingham and Nottinghamshire Refugee Form on behalf  of  the
             appellant to allow him more time to seek legal  representation
             and prepare for his appeal.

             I am refusing the request for an adjournment. There  is  still
             time before the hearing to prepare. The application says  that
             the appellant does not qualify for legal aid and does not have
             his own means to fund representation. It is therefore  unclear
             how the appellant intends to obtain legal  representation,  or
             that he will be able to within  a  reasonable  timeframe.  The
             Tribunal is a specialist body and is well  versed  in  dealing
             with unrepresented appellants."

7.   It may be seen  that  the  substance  of  the  Appellant's  application
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge on 20 August 2018 had already been
    considered and refused by the Tribunal prior to  the  hearing.  I  note
    from the record of proceedings that there was preliminary discussion in
    this regard between the Judge and  the  Appellant,  and  the  Appellant
    indicated that NNRF had said they would  send  a  further  fax  to  the
    Tribunal on the morning of the hearing. The  appeal  hearing  was  'put
    back' for any such transmission to be located  and  considered  by  the
    Judge. In the event it is apparent from the documents on file that NNRF
    did indeed send a transmission to the Tribunal on the  morning  of  the
    hearing, but it was no more than a forwarding of the earlier letters of
    31 July 2018 and 8 August 2018. In context it follows that  it  was  to
    these matters that the Judge was referring  when  he  stated  that  the
    Appellant had "produced a fax from a charitable organisation".

8.   In the premises, it seems plain that the  Appellant  had  had  adequate
    opportunity to gather and present any evidence upon which he wished  to
    rely in support of his protection claim. He had been present in the  UK
    for almost 3 years prior to making his application for  asylum,  during
    which time he could, had he been so minded, have made his claim  and/or
    obtained any relevant supporting evidence. Moreover there was  a  five-
    month gap between the making of his claim and  the  substantive  asylum
    interview - during which again he had the  opportunity  to  gather  any
    evidence. There was further opportunity between the interview  and  the
    decision, and necessarily between the decision  and  the  date  of  the
    appeal hearing. Indeed, the Appellant did present documents in  support
    of his case. Bearing in mind in particular that  the  key  events  upon
    which the Appellant based his claim had taken place in 2012,  and  that
    the only further event prior to his departure from Pakistan was by  way
    of a telephone threat, it is difficult to see what further  documentary
    evidence the Appellant might have been minded  to  pursue  had  he  had
    further time to prepare his appeal.

9.   Although there does  not  appear  to  have  been  a  witness  statement
    presented on behalf  of  the  Appellant,  he  had  the  opportunity  of
    relating the basis of his claim during the interview  process,  and  he
    also had the opportunity of further narrating his account at the appeal
    hearing. As was noted in the decision of 7  August  2018  refusing  the
    written application for an adjournment,  the  Tribunal  is  well-versed
    with dealing unrepresented appellants.

10.  Yet further in the premises it is apparent that the Appellant  has  had
    the  benefit  of  legal  representation  at  different  stages  in  the
    proceedings. Any difficulty  in  obtaining  a  representative  for  the
    appeal hearing itself appears to have been a product  of  the  lack  of
    merit in the case and the concomitant non-availability  of  legal  aid,
    and  the  absence  of  funding  for  private  representation.  In  such
    circumstances - and in the apparent absence of the  Appellant  offering
    any sort of articulation to  the  Judge  as  to  how  he  might  secure
    representation in the foreseeable future - the Judge's conclusion that,
    in substance, it had not been shown what would be achieved pursuant  to
    an adjournment that would assist the Appellant, was, in  my  judgement,
    entirely sustainable - and frankly, inevitable.

11.  The Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  make  what  are,  in  my
    judgement, essentially generalised assertions as to the possible  value
    of an adjournment, without articulating anything specific on the  facts
    of the instant case. For example, it is asserted without more that  "an
    adjournment was crucial for the appellant to prepare  and  present  his
    case properly": there is no foundation on the facts  here  for  such  a
    submission. Indeed it seems to me that the Grounds  are  in  essence  a
    sequence of slightly  different  but  essentially  similar  generalised
    assertions without any attempt to relate them to the particulars of the
    Appellant's case, or otherwise to give them any real substance.

12.  There was little by way of amplification of the  grounds  in  the  oral
    submissions before me. It was, again, emphasised that  an  asylum  case
    required anxious scrutiny. Mr Hyder asserted  that  the  Appellant  had
    been trying to arrange funding for  private  representation  through  a
    friend which he had not been able to do  by  the  date  of  the  appeal
    hearing; it was suggested that he had obtained some  financial  support
    after the hearing. I can see nothing in the materials before the First-
    tier Tribunal, including a consideration of the record of  proceedings,
    to suggest that the Appellant indicated that he thought that  he  could
    raise funds privately. Nor is there any evidence before me to found the
    submission in this regard: the Appellant  has  not  filed  any  further
    evidence before the Upper Tribunal and did not attend the hearing.

13.  The Respondent has filed a Rule  24  response  dated  7  November  2018
    opposing the appeal. It is noted that the Appellant had  been  able  to
    submit a bundle in  support  of  his  appeal,  and  that  the  Tribunal
    regularly dealt with litigants in person. Further, it is submitted: the
    fact that the appeal had not been previously adjourned did  not  oblige
    the Tribunal to adjourn on this occasion; and the grounds of appeal did
    not particularise in what way the Appellant had been  disadvantaged  by
    not having a representative.

14.  In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal Judge is not to be impugned.
The circumstances as presented to him did not suggest it was remotely
apparent that the Appellant would be able to obtain any further
representation notwithstanding the request to afford him the opportunity so
to do. I find that it was fair to proceed, and that no unfairness or
disadvantage has been visited upon the Appellant by requiring him to
proceed with the appeal unrepresented.  The Tribunal is used to dealing
with unrepresented appellants: indeed, the Tribunal Service more generally
is set up to provide ready and speedy access to justice without the usual
formalities of other courts, notwithstanding the potential gravity of the
subject matter. There is nothing to suggest that the First-tier Tribunal
Judge did not guide the Appellant through the procedures in the usual way,
or sought to elicit from him all that he wished to say in support of his
appeal, or otherwise facilitated the Appellant's full involvement in the
proceedings. I accept the Respondent's submission that the Appellant has
not identified any specific disadvantage to him: his arguments are based on
generalisations as to the perceived advantages of having a representative
at the hearing. I cannot identify any procedural unfairness that has arisen
by reason of the refusal to grant the adjournment.

15.  For the avoidance of any doubt I am not  remotely  persuaded  that  the
    absence of any overt reference  to  the  overriding  objective  in  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Regulations  invalidates  or  otherwise  renders  the  Judge's
    decision unlawful.

16.  For completeness, I do not see any  merit  in  the  suggestion  in  the
    Grounds that the First-tier Tribunal Judge may have fallen  into  error
    of law in the overall evaluation of the merits of case.  The  grant  of
    permission to appeal did not suggest that this line  of  challenge  was
    arguable, and Mr Hyder did not develop it before me.

Notice of Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    stands.

18.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

19.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


Signed:  Date: 12 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

