
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09135/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 July 2019                      |On 09 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR F H
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Selway, Solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent" and Mr F H  as  "the
    Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Eritrea  who  made  an  application  for
    international protection. It was  refused  by  the  Respondent  and  he
    appealed. Following a hearing at  North  Shields,  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 12 April 2019, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Caskie
    allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal. It was granted  on  17  May
    2019 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N Haria, her  reasons  for  so
    granting were: -

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, (in time), against a
         Decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Caskie who, in a Decision
         and  Reasons  re-promulgated  on  12  April   2019,   allowed   the
         Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
         reject his human rights and protection claim.

         2.   The  grounds  assert  that  the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to
         adequately consider the Appellant's claim in  the  round,  to  make
         clear findings on inconsistent evidence and give  adequate  reasons
         as to why the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof  in  the
         light of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 principles applying  to  the
         previous findings of First - tier Tribunal Judge Holmes.

         3.   It is arguable that the Judge erred as claimed and  that  such
         error is capable of materially affecting the outcome.

         4.   All grounds remain arguable."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. Mr Mills relied upon the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.  He
    submitted that this was an appeal to which the authority of  Devaseelan
    v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 000702 was applicable. There having been a previous
    hearing at which Judge Holmes did  not  find  the  Appellant  to  be  a
    credible or reliable witness. In these circumstances the categorisation
    of Judge Holmes' previous findings at paragraphs 49  and  50  of  Judge
    Caskie's decision as merely being an acknowledgment of the  Appellant's
    failure to discharge  the  burden  of  proof,  as  opposed  to  adverse
    credibility findings, are at the very least inadequately  reasoned  and
    arguably irrational. Further that the Judge has  inadequately  reasoned
    his decision both generally and specifically at paragraphs 53 and 54 of
    his decision are other material  errors.  These  are  compounded  by  a
    failure to apply the correct burden of proof to  various  documents  in
    the appeal including a birth  certificate.  The  Judge  has  failed  to
    properly apply the reasoning in NA (UT rule 45: Singh v Belgium)  Iran
    [2014] UKUT 00205 (IAC). Beyond that there has been a  general  failure
    to make findings in respect of inconsistent evidence within the appeal.

 6. Mr Selway did not accept that the Judge had  materially  erred  in  his
    approach to the appeal and particularly the way that he had dealt  with
    the Devaseelan hearing. He suggested that it was to  a  degree  a  "red
    herring" and, in light of the new and  compelling  evidence  which  the
    Judge was  obliged  to  take  into  account  should  not  find  himself
    "Deveseelan-bound". He made further submissions in  relation  to  other
    aspects of the appeal including the various documents. He  acknowledged
    that the Judge had erred at times in making references to Ethiopia when
    he meant Eritrea but these were immaterial.  In  his  analysis  of  the
    Respondent's grounds of appeal they  amount  to  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the Judge's findings.

 7. I do not accept that to be the position. Whilst Judge Caskie refers  to
    the authority od Devaseelan in his decision and  cites  at  length  the
    content of Judge Holmes' original decision his analysis of the position
    at paragraphs 49 and 50 of his decision  is  flawed.  Those  paragraphs
    state: -

         "49.  In  the  present  case  I  begin  my  consideration  of   the
         appellant's case with the findings made  by  Judge  Holmes.  It  is
         clear that in relation to a series of matters Judge Holmes did  not
         accept the appellant had discharged the burden of proof  upon  him.
         The appellant was legally represented before Judge Holmes and it is
         clear that he now relies upon documentation from  a  source  it  is
         said was not available to him in July 2015 when his previous appeal
         was heard.

         50.  It does seem to that  there  is  a  distinction  to  be  drawn
         between an appellant who is unable to prove his case  because,  for
         example, there are strong reasons to doubt his personal credibility
         and documentation that should be available to him he has  not  been
         produced so that he has failed to discharge the burden upon him  on
         the one hand and on the other hand, an appellant  who  deliberately
         advances falsehoods in order to advance his case. Whilst both  such
         appellants would be unsuccessful on appeal an appellant who had  an
         appeal rejected for  the  former  reasons  would  be  in  a  better
         position if documentation were to become available to them than  an
         appellant in the latter category. Evidence from an appellant in the
         latter category could properly be characterised as "the fruit of  a
         poisoned tree", whereas an appellant in the former  category  would
         not see evidence subsequently relied upon tainted, at least to  the
         same extent."

 8. This is  an  appeal  where  it  was  incumbent  upon  Judge  Caskie  to
    adequately consider the Appellant's appeal in the  round  and  to  make
    clear findings on inconsistent evidence and give adequate  reasons  for
    why the Appellant had discharged the burden of proof in  light  of  the
    principals enunciated in the  authority  of  Devaseelan.  That  he  has
    failed to do. That failure alone  is  a  material  error  of  law  that
    sufficiently infects this  decision  to  render  the  totality  of  the
    findings unsafe.

 9. In those circumstances the making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law and  is  set
    aside.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Caskie  and  Judge
Holmes.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                     Date:  1   August
2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


