
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09199/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th August 2017                      |On 8th September 2017             |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                    [Z A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Javid of Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is  recorded
    as [ ] 1985.  On or about 20th February 2016 he  made  application  for
    international protection as a refugee.  On 17th August 2016, a decision
    was made to refuse the application and  the  Appellant  appealed.   His
    appeal, based upon his Ahmadi faith  and  consequent  persecution,  was
    heard on 9th December 2016 by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Haria
    sitting at Hatton Cross.  Judge Haria dismissed the appeal.

 2. Not content with that decision, by Notice  dated  1st  March  2017  the
    Appellant made application for permission to appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  There were three grounds.   Ground  1  was  based  upon  the
    contention that the judge had mis-contextualised or otherwise misquoted
    the Appellant's evidence.  Ground 2 placed reliance upon the submission
    that the judge had failed to follow the guidance in  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]
    UKSC 31.  The third ground was not pursued before me, it being accepted
    by Ms Javid that it was misconceived.

 3. HJ (Iran) establishes that where a person would in future refrain  from
    behaving in a way that would expose them to danger because of the  risk
    of persecution that behaviour brings, that person is a refugee.

 4. On 8th June 2017, with  some  reservations,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cruthers granted permission.

Ground 1

 5. The following is taken from the grounds themselves:

         "8.  At paragraph 58 the learned judge states;

                        'The  Appellant  at  paragraph  8  of  his   witness
                  statement states he  ...  'Did  not  preach  anyone  [sic]
                  because of I was afraid of the treatment I  had  faced  in
                  Karachi'. [sic]  As a consequence, on the Appellant's  own
                  evidence I find that he did not preach whilst in Pakistan.

          9. Again, at paragraph 60 of the determination, the learned judge
             found:

             'The Appellant in his own evidence has stated that  whilst  in
             Pakistan he did not preach or proselytise his religion'.

         10. It  is  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  has  been
             considered in the wrong context.  It was Appellant's  evidence
             at paragraph 7 of his witness statement he preached his faith.
              At paragraph 8, he describes how he described his belief to a
             close  friend  Adnan.   This  resulted  in  problem  (sic)  in
             Karachi.  The Appellant was forced to relocate to  Faisalabad.
             While describing his activities in Faisalabad,  he  said  that
             while in Faisalabad, he did not preach anyone (sic) because of
             the treatment he received in Karachi.  It does not follow  the
             conclusion that the Appellant claimed that he did  not  preach
             anyone while in Pakistan.  At paragraph 8, he only  refers  to
             his activity in Faisalabad.

         11. It is submitted that the learned judge erred in assessment  of
             facts in this regard.

         12. At paragraph 59 the First-tier Tribunal noted;

                  'It  is  implausible  that  a  person  who  has   suffered
                  mistreatment since childhood because of his faith and  who
                  has not previously revealed his faith to a non-Ahmadi  and
                  who knows the implications of disclosing his  faith  would
                  choose to reveal his faith to someone at work'.

         13. It is submitted that A did not tell that  he  never  disclosed
             his  faith  to  non-Ahmadis  (in  Pakistan).   His   religious
             affiliation was known at school and local area  (AIR109).   On
             the contrary, it was his evidence that he used to  preach  his
             faith (paragraph 7 of witness statement), he told  his  friend
             Adnan not only about his faith  but  also  about  his  beliefs
             (para 8 of witness statement).  He was seeking  conversion  of
             Adnan (AIR125 and 126).  The learned judge  totally  misquoted
             A's evidence.  The conclusion reached is not supported by  any
             evidence.

         14.  While  assessing  the  evidence  in  relation  to   preaching
             activities in the UK the learned judge found:

                  '62. ... this inconsistency  is  to  when  he  started  on
                      preaching  programme  through  his   doubt   on   his
                      credibility.  It is of note that there is no  mention
                      of his having participated in a  preaching  programme
                      prior to August/September 2016'.

         15. Again, this is simply incorrect.  The letter, dated 26th  July
             2016,  from  AMAUK  (referred   at   paragraph   45   of   the
             determination) states that the  Appellant  participated  in  a
             preaching programme including 'Tabligh stalls and distribution
             of literature at Hammersmith'.

 6. In summary, therefore at Ground 1 was the contention that  the  finding
    that the Appellant did not and would not preach was against the  weight
    of the evidence.

 7. I have looked with some care at paragraphs 7 and 8 of  the  Appellant's
    witness statement to which I was taken  by  Ms  Javid.   They  read  as
    follows:

         "7.  As I grew older, I became active in my religion and  initially
             was a part of the Atfal Auxiliary  Organisation  (for  Ahmadis
             aged up  until  15  years  old),  thereafter  the  Khuddam  Ul
             Ahmadiyya (for Ahmadis aged from 15 years to  40  years  old).
             With each organisation, I was  active  and  would  attend  the
             mosque and preach my religion.

         8. Though my problems has (sic) started from very  early  age,  yet
            they were not life  threatening  until  February  2010.   I  was
            working in a grocery shop and I told my colleague Adnan  who  is
            very close to me about my belief as I had refused to  pray  with
            other in congregation.  I would pray in separate  instead.   Two
            of my colleagues Zahid Ahmed and Hamid Ahmed were very fanatics.
             They asked Adnan about me and he told them that I was an Ahmadi
            that was why I was not praying with them.   They  complained  to
            mullahs of the Khatn-e-Nabowat but I was praying and prostrating
            in an Islamic manner which I was not allowed to.  They  led  the
            mullahs to my house in a mob.  They were banging on the door and
            calling for me to come out.  I  hid  myself  in  my  neighbour's
            house.  My mother and brother told them I was not at  home.   My
            elder brother advised me to leave the house and go to Faisalabad
            and stay with my paternal aunt.  I worked at different places in
            Faisalabad.  I also worked as a salesman  in  cloth  market.   I
            also worked in a textile factory until December 2012.  I used to
            pray  in  the  factory  but  avoided  praying  with   other   in
            congregation.  I  .....  delayed  my  prayers  and  avoided  any
            confrontation.  I did not preach anyone because I was afraid  of
            the treatment I faced in Karachi'.

 8. The burden of the submission was that at paragraph 58 of his  decision,
    the judge had misunderstood the Appellant's evidence.  It was submitted
    that the evidence of the  Appellant  was  that  he  had  in  fact  been
    preaching until he arrived in Faisalabad.

 9. I remind myself that  the  proper  test  is  not  whether  the  judge's
    findings were open to some other  interpretation  or  construction  but
    whether the findings of the judge were open to him on the basis of  all
    the evidence that was presented.

10. It is perfectly clear from paragraphs 58 through  to  60,  being  those
    paragraphs specifically relied upon in the first part of Ground 1, that
    the judge had read all of paragraphs 7 and 8, or at least the important
    parts because they are set out in the Decision.  It is further of  note
    that the judge had regard to paragraph 14 of the  Appellant's  response
    to the refusal letter as further  support  for  his  finding  that  the
    Appellant had not been preaching whilst in Pakistan,  although  I  note
    that the last three words of paragraph 7 of the witness statement makes
    reference to preaching his religion (though it is not clear whether  he
    was for saying that that was inside or outside the  mosque).   However,
    consistent  with  preaching  inside  the  mosque,  the  Appellant,   at
    paragraph 14 explains in terms why he  had,  in  his  own  words,  "low
    preaching activity". It is to be  noted  that  those  words  follow  an
    explanation as to why preaching in Pakistan was  virtually  impossible.
    That part of the statement is not on its face necessarily  confined  to
    any later activities of the Appellant, but as I have already said  that
    is not the test.

11. The Decision and reasons is to be read as a whole. It is of  note  that
    at paragraph 14(3) the judge found the  Appellant  to  be  evasive  and
    generally lacking in credibility.  It is of note that  the  Appellant's
    own representative accepted that there were difficulties in getting the
    correct information from the Appellant.  Mr Wilding invited me to  have
    regard to the fact that the judge had stated that he had looked at  all
    the evidence in the round as set out  at  paragraph  33  and  that  the
    decision when read demonstrated that to be the case.  I  also  observe,
    though it is trite that just because a witness  says  something  (which
    obviously includes the Appellant) the judge is not bound to  accept  it
    provided the reasons  for  rejecting  that  evidence  are  sufficiently
    clear.

12. In further support of his finding that the Appellant  had  not  been  a
    reliable witness, and therefore impacting on the judge's assessment  of
    the extent of the Appellant's "current religious observance", the judge
    found there to be  an  inconsistency  in  part  of  the  evidence.  The
    Appellant had stated that he joined the preaching programme on  arrival
    in the United Kingdom in July 2016.  Yet in oral  evidence  had  stated
    that it was at the end of December 2015 and that  he  arranged  Tabligh
    stalls.   The  date  of  July  2016  at  paragraph  62  is  clearly   a
    typographical error because the Appellant arrived in July 2015 but  the
    inconsistency remains.  It was at question 77  in  interview  that  the
    Appellant had said that he joined the preaching programme in the United
    Kingdom when he came to the United Kingdom.  As to  spreading  messages
    and handing out leaflets, that taken from the record of interview  from
    question 29 onwards, is clearly reference to activities in  the  United
    Kingdom and certainly open to such an interpretation.

13. The Judge was of course  obliged  to  consider  not  only  whether  the
    Appellant had been preaching when in Pakistan in order to ascertain the
    likely risk facing the Appellant upon return, but was required also  to
    have regard to any "sur place" activity in the United Kingdom, in order
    to make that same assessment. Here reliance was placed by Ms  Javid  on
    paragraph 19 of the witness  statement,  in  which  the  Appellant  had
    actually stated that he would continue preaching,  although  discretely
    and with people that he would trust were he to return to Pakistan.   If
    the Appellant were found to be a person who would preach but  exercised
    discretion because of fear of persecution (applying the lower standard)
    then, applying the guidance in HJ (Iran) the Appellant's case was  made
    out.

14. On the issue as to whether there was an inconsistency as identified  by
    the judge at paragraph 62, my attention was drawn  to  question  66  in
    interview, in which the Appellant was asked when he attended the annual
    convention in 2015. He had said it was, "last September", so  that  the
    arrival in the United Kingdom, to which I have already referred, was in
    fact to be seen in the context of all of the  interview  questions  and
    answers. Had it been then the apparent inconsistency, it was submitted,
    would have been explained.

15. Further as to the Appellant's history of preaching in Pakistan,  I  was
    invited to have regard to question 109 in which the Appellant had  been
    asked what problems he had growing up. He said that when at  school  it
    was known that he was Ahmadi and he was teased for it.  I would  simply
    observe that if the Appellant were teased, that without more  would  be
    some way below the threshold of persecution, though I  appreciate  that
    in interview the Appellant was saying that threats to kill were made.

16. I have already made some reference to the view that the judge  took  as
    to the Appellant's evidence generally and I observe that  at  paragraph
    63 the judge noted that it was difficult to  obtain  details  from  the
    Appellant as to the process involved in participating in Tabligh stalls
    and the distribution of literature.  The judge went on to  explain  why
    he had difficulty in accepting that the Appellant had been involved  in
    any of these stalls or indeed preaching.   What  was  more,  the  judge
    supported his reasoning by reference to the absence of the  Appellant's
    brother or evidence from him.  Still further the judge noted that there
    was generally a  lack  of  supporting  evidence  from  family  members.
    Indeed, from paragraph 62 onwards,  the  judge  spends  a  considerable
    amount of time explaining why he did not  accept  the  Appellant  as  a
    reliable witness and in particular, a person who would be  involved  in
    preaching were he to return to Pakistan.

17. The third ground which was abandoned by Ms Javid was to the effect that
    the judge had relied on what was said to be an unreported  decision  of
    AB (Ahmadiyya Association UK: letters) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 511  (IAC).
    In fact, Ms Javid accepted that the decision was a  reported  case  and
    the judge in reliance upon it was entitled to look  to  the  supporting
    letters from the Ahmadiyya Association  UK  with  circumspection.   The
    judge fully explains why he attached little weight to those letters and
    the amount of weight that he attached to them was indeed a  matter  for
    him, provided he was not perverse or irrational or made findings  which
    could be said to be against the weight of the evidence.   Provided  the
    judge made findings that were open to  him,  then  as  I  have  already
    indicated the fact that there may have been an alternative inference or
    finding does not mean that what the judge has done amounts to an error.



18. It seems to me, looking at all  the  evidence  to  which  I  have  been
    referred and looking to the decision itself, that the  judge  was  very
    careful in his assessment of the evidence and whilst it may be possible
    to infer from the witness statements that the Appellant was saying that
    he had preached in Pakistan before sharing his religion with Adnan, the
    evidence is in my judgment open to the interpretation preferred by  the
    judge. It is not to be forgotten that whilst the standard of  proof  is
    low the burden remains upon the  Appellant  and  if  he  is  found  for
    reasonable cause to be an unreliable witness then that  itself  may  be
    sufficient basis to find against the Appellant. In this  case,  however
    there were other factors clearly set out in the Decision.

19. If there were some uncertainty, then it was for the Appellant  and  his
    representatives, at the time of the hearing, to  present  the  evidence
    with greater clarity.  But I would also add, as Judge Cruthers  pointed
    out in the grant of permission, that the guidance in  the  case  of  TK
    (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ 40 is apposite in this case because the  sort
    of corroborative evidence that one might reasonably  have  expected  in
    this case was absent.  Of course, it is trite law that corroboration is
    not required in order to find that a person is a refugee but, there has
    to be sufficient evidence and if the evidence of the Appellant alone is
    found to be inadequate and if there is other evidence  that  one  might
    reasonably have expected to have been made available, then the judge is
    entitled to draw adverse inferences as is indeed occurred here.

20. I turn then to the second ground.

Ground 2

         "It was the Appellant's case that on  his  return  to  Pakistan  he
         would not be able to practise his faith without fear.  The  learned
         judge considered this part of his claim at paragraph 75  and  found
         that this demonstrates that it is not of particular  importance  to
         the Appellant to preserve his religious identity.  It is  submitted
         that the judge failed to follow the step-by-step approach asked  by
         HJ  (Iran),  to  assess  if  the  reluctance  is  due  to  fear  of
         persecution.  It is the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs  19  and
         20 of his witness statement he would be compelled to compromise the
         religious freedom."
21. The step-by-step approach is as follows:
22. "When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a well-founded
    fear of persecution because he is gay, the tribunal must first ask
    itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is gay, or that
    he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in his country of
    nationality.
    If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied on the
    available evidence that gay people who lived openly would be liable to
    persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.
    If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what the individual
    applicant would do if he were returned to that country.
    If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby be exposed to a
    real risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded fear of
    persecution - even if he could avoid the risk by living "discreetly".
    If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant would
    in fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask
    itself why he would do so.
    If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose to live
    discreetly simply because that was how he himself would wish to live,
    or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to distress his
    parents or embarrass his friends, then his application should be
    rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount to persecution
    and the Convention does not offer protection against them. Such a
    person has no well-founded fear of persecution because, for reasons
    that have nothing to do with any fear of persecution, he himself
    chooses to adopt a way of life which means that he is not in fact
    liable to be persecuted because he is gay.
    If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a material reason
    for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a fear of
    the persecution which would follow if he were to live openly as a gay
    man, then, other things being equal, his application should be
    accepted. Such a person has a well-founded fear of persecution. To
    reject his application on the ground that he could avoid the
    persecution by living discreetly would be to defeat the very right
    which the Convention exists to protect - his right to live freely and
    openly as a gay man without fear of persecution. By admitting him to
    asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as a gay man without
    fear of persecution, the receiving state gives effect to that right by
    affording the applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution
    which his country of nationality should have afforded him.

23. Ms Javid invited me to find that the judge has simply got  this  aspect
    of the case wrong.  Mr Wilding submitted that the answer to this ground
    of the appeal was to be found at paragraph 77 in which the judge said:

         "Considering all the evidence in the round, I find that the core of
         the Appellant's account of persecution lacks credibility and  is  a
         fabrication designed to enable the Appellant to remain in  the  UK.
         Overall I am  not  persuaded  by  the  evidence  that  there  is  a
         reasonable degree of likelihood that the Appellant  is  spiritually
         active Ahmadi who is committed to  preaching  or  similar  acts  of
         proselytising  in  Pakistan  and  has  a   well-founded   fear   of
         persecution arising as a result.  He has not discharged the  burden
         of proof upon him of having a well-founded fear of persecution  for
         a Refugee Convention reason  and  nor  that  there  is  a  real  or
         substantial risk of  his  suffering  torture  or  ill-treatment  on
         return.  For these reasons this appeal must be dismissed".

24. The question that I have to ask is was  that  a  finding  open  to  the
    judge.  Was it adequately reasoned and explained?  In my  judgment,  it
    was.  Although it is submitted in the grounds that the  judge  had  not
    considered why the Appellant  would  be  compelled  to  compromise  his
    religious freedom, in fact the judge did  not  need  to  consider  that
    because he had found, as was open to him, that the Appellant simply was
    not as committed to his faith as he would have the  judge  believe  and
    though finding the Appellant to be Ahmadi that was all that in  reality
    (material to this appeal) that the judge  felt  able  to  find  in  the
    Appellant's favour.

25. In all the circumstances  the  appeal  fails  on  the  basis  that  the
    findings were open to the judge.  This is in my judgment an example  of
    what McCombe LJ was speaking of in the case of VW  (Sri  Lanka)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 522 at paragraph 12 when he said:

         "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,
         when the First-tier Tribunal Judge has given a judgment  explaining
         why he has reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow  out
         industriously areas of evidence that have  been  less  fully  dealt
         with than others and then to use this as a  basis  for  saying  the
         judge's decision is legally flawed because it did not deal  with  a
         particular matter more fully.  In my judgment, with respect that is
         no basis on which to  sustain  a  proper  challenge  to  a  judge's
         finding of fact ...".

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed


Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Zucker                                 25th
August 2017









