
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
pa/09070/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 January 2018                        | On 05 February 2018              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   MR MSH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hussain, Raiyad Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in  this  appeal  is  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    respondent is Mr MSH.  However for the purposes of  this  decision  and
    reasons I refer to the parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where Mr MSH was the appellant and the Secretary of State  was
    the respondent.

 2. Mr MSH, who was born on 1 June 1989 and is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,
    first arrived in the UK in 2010 on a student visa, as a minor, and  his
    leave was extended until 2015.   In  April  2015  his  application  for
    further leave to remain was refused.  He applied for asylum in November
    2015.  The Secretary of State refused that application on  1  September
    2016.  In a decision and reasons, promulgated on 30 October 2017, Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal  Hawden-Beal  allowed  Mr  MSH's  appeal  on
    asylum and human rights grounds.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed on the following grounds:

    Ground 1

    That the First-tier Tribunal, having found that the appellant would not
    live an openly gay life on return to Bangladesh, erred in  law  in  its
    approach to HJ Iran [2010] UKSC 31, given that the appellant  does  not
    live an openly gay life in the UK.

 4. It was submitted that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  at
    [43] that there was a risk from the state  was  inconsistent  with  her
    considerations at [39].  It was [39] that the  Bangladeshi  state  does
    not enforce action against the LGBT community.

    Ground 2

     The Secretary of State further submitted that the judge had  erred  at
    [43] in finding  that  following  the  case  of  HJ/HT  Iran  those  in
    Bangladesh were liable for persecution if they live openly  as  or  are
    perceived to be gay, and it was submitted that HJ/HT dealt with Iranian
    and Cameroonian nationals and that this did not  support  that  someone
    from Bangladesh is at risk.

Error of Law Discussion

 5. Mr Avery made no submissions in relation to the  second  ground.   That
    was the proper approach in my view, as the grounds contain  a  complete
    misreading of the judge's findings at [43]  where  the  judge  said  as
    follows:

         "In the circumstances following HJ/HT, I am  satisfied  that  those
         who are gay or perceived to be gay are  liable  to  persecution  in
         Bangladesh.  I am satisfied that the appellant will live discreetly
         as he has done so here but would do so for the same reasons  as  he
         has done so here, for fear of what his  family  would  do  if  they
         found out and in Bangladesh for fear of what the  state  would  do.
         ..."

 6. In my view it is difficult to argue that the judge was  doing  anything
    other than applying the test which he was required to do in HJ Iran  in
    stating that she was satisfied that those who are  gay  are  liable  to
    persecution in Bangladesh.  It is not properly arguable, in the context
    of all her findings, including that she clearly  recognised  that  this
    appellant was from Bangladesh and considered in some detail,  including
    at [39], [40] and [41], the country evidence background information  in
    relation to the treatment of homosexuals in Bangladesh in her  decision
    and reasons, that she was relying on HJ Iran as evidence that those who
    are gay face  persecution  in  Bangladesh.   Rather  the  Tribunal  was
    properly applying the rationale of HJ Iran to  the  facts  as  she  had
    found them, including, at [40] that:

     'I am satisfied that those from the LGBTI community who live openly in
    Bangladesh are liable to persecution there...'

    The second ground of appeal is not made out

 7. The relevant paragraph of HJ Iran that the judge had in mind, at  [43],
    sets out the now familiar test as follows at paragraph 82:

         "The approach to be followed by Tribunals

         82.  When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a  well-
             founded fear of persecution because he is  gay,  the  Tribunal
             must first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the  evidence
             that he is gay,  or  that  he  would  be  treated  as  gay  by
             potential persecutors in his country of nationality.

             If so, the  Tribunal  must  then  ask  itself  whether  it  is
             satisfied on the available evidence that gay people who  lived
             openly would be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's
             country of nationality.

             If so, the Tribunal must go on to consider what the individual
             applicant would do if returned to that country.

             If the applicant would in fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
             exposed to a real risk of persecution  then  he  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution-even if he could avoid the risk by
             living "discreetly".

             If, on  the  other  hand,  the  Tribunal  concludes  that  the
             applicant  would  in  fact  live  discreetly  and   so   avoid
             persecution it must go on to ask itself why he would do so.

             If the Tribunal concludes that the applicant would  choose  to
             live discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would
             wish to live, or because of social pressures, e.g. not wanting
             to distress his parents or embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
             application should be rejected.  Social pressures of that kind
             do not amount to persecution and the Convention does not offer
             protection against them.  Such a person  has  no  well-founded
             fear of persecution because, for the reasons that have nothing
             to do with any fear of  persecution,  he  himself  chooses  to
             adopt a way of life which means that he is not in fact  liable
             to be persecuted because he is gay.  If, on  the  other  hand,
             the  Tribunal  concludes  that  a  material  reason  for   the
             applicant living discreetly on his return would be in fear  of
             the persecution which would follow if he were to  live  openly
             as a gay man, other things being equal, his application should
             be accepted.   Such  a  person  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution.  To reject his  application  on  the  grounds  he
             could avoid the persecution by living discreetly would  be  to
             defeat the very right which the Convention exists to right-his
             right to live freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of
             persecution.  By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to
             live  freely  and  openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear   of
             persecution, the receiving state gives effect to that right by
             affording the applicant a surrogate for  the  protection  from
             persecution which  his  country  of  nationality  should  have
             afforded him."

 8. Mr Avery submitted that the judge, at [38],  had  made  findings  which
    were not entirely clear; although the judge had accepted  that  Mr  MSH
    had had sexual relations with at least three men in the UK,  the  judge
    went on to state that the fact that he  had  had  sexual  relationships
    with three men did not automatically mean that he is gay.  However  the
    judge was "satisfied that it is highly likely that if that  information
    was common knowledge then the appellant would be considered to  be  gay
    and thus would be at risk."

 9. These findings must be read in the context of the  Tribunal's  findings
    as a whole, including that the subsequent  findings  proceeded  on  the
    basis that the judge accepted that Mr MSH was gay, including  that  the
    judge found at [43] that the appellant would live discreetly as he  has
    done in the UK but "for the same reasons as he has done  so  here,  for
    fear of what his family would do if they found out  and  in  Bangladesh
    for fear of what the state would do".  That necessitates an  acceptance
    that the appellant has been living discreetly in the UK as  a  gay  man
    rather than openly as a gay man.

10. I also take into account that the Secretary of State had  not  disputed
    in her grounds the Tribunal's findings in relation to  whether  or  not
    the appellant was a gay man and I am  not  satisfied  that  this  is  a
    "Robinson" obvious point.  Even if I am  wrong,  the  Tribunal's  quite
    properly, at 43, applied the rationale of HJ Iran which applies to both
    those who are gay 'or perceived to be gay' and it  is  clear  that  the
    Tribunal at [38] found the appellant, at the very least, as someone who
    would be considered or perceived to be gay.

11. The main thrust of the Secretary of  State's  arguments  in  ground  1,
    which is the only ground with any realistic prospects of success, given
    that I am satisfied that ground  2  was  predicated  on  a  significant
    misreading of the judge's findings, was that it was inconsistent of the
    judge to find that the appellant would live discreetly because of  risk
    of persecution given that he lived discreetly in the UK  and  that  the
    findings were inconsistent as to risk from the Bangladeshi state.

12. I am satisfied that the Secretary of State's grounds disclose  no  more
    than a disagreement with the careful and cogent reasonings of the Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  The fact that the appellant does not  live
    openly as a gay man in the UK is not a barrier to him succeeding  under
    the HJ Iran principles.  The judge accepted in  her  findings  that  he
    lived discreetly in the UK because of his fear of his family  and  that
    "his sister would swear at him, his brother would kill him, his  father
    would disown him and then kill him, and the community would  beat  him,
    drive him from the village and may kill him."  The judge also  properly
    directed herself as to the test in HJ Iran including asking herself, at
    [41], whether the appellant would live discreetly because he wanted  to
    to avoid embarrassing friends and family or if he would live discreetly
    because he feared persecution.

13. The judge placed these findings in the context of her findings that she
    was satisfied, at [41], that those from the  LGBT  community  who  live
    openly in Bangladesh were liable to persecution.  It is no more than  a
    quarrel with those findings for the Secretary of State  to  state  that
    the Tribunal's reasons are inconsistent, on the basis  that  the  judge
    had found at [39] that although consensual same sexual  activities  are
    illegal, the law is not enforced.  The judge went on to  find  however,
    significant difficulties with the treatment of  homosexual  individuals
    in Bangladesh, which is supported by the background country information
    before her and which the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  substantively
    challenge.

14. For example, at [40], the judge found that the evidence confirmed  that
    LGBTI individuals "cannot be open about their sexuality  regardless  of
    their socio-economic status or  the  geographical  location"  and  that
    "LGBTI individuals, especially gay men faced a high  risk  of  societal
    discrimination because of the widespread traditionally held views about
    sexuality and gender and visibly gay men faced a high risk of violence,
    including being killed."  The judge also found that attacks on  victims
    were not reported.

15. The judge gave adequate  reasons  for  those  findings  and  it  cannot
    properly be said that they were irrational on the basis of  the  wealth
    of information before  the  judge  in  relation  to  the  treatment  of
    homosexuals in Bangladesh.  In that context, it is somewhat mischievous
    of the  Secretary  of  State  to  suggest  that  a  finding,  that  the
    Bangladeshi state do not  enforce  their  law  criminalising  same  sex
    activity means, in itself, that a finding that an openly gay man  would
    be at risk of persecution is inconsistent.

16. I do not share Mr Avery's submission that the judge's  findings  as  to
    whether the appellant is gay, were unclear and indeed as I have already
    noted this was not challenged in the Secretary of State's  grounds.   A
    proper  reading  of  Judge  Howden-Beal's  decision  reveals  that  she
    assessed the evidence before  her  both  from  the  appellant  and  the
    background country information and  reached  careful  findings  on  the
    basis of that evidence and then applied the law to  those  findings  of
    fact.

17. The fact that the appellant's fear includes a fear of persecution  from
    his family as well as a fear of  the  wider  community  in  Bangladesh,
    which is the reason why he would live discretely, is a different  issue
    from the appellant living discretely because of fear of  embarrassment.



18. It was the judge's reasoned  findings,  which  cannot  be  said  to  be
    irrational, that the appellant's fear of  persecution  arose  from  the
    combined elements of his family and the  wider  community  finding  out
    about his sexuality which would put him at an objectively  well-founded
    fear of  persecution  on  the  basis  of  his  sexuality  or  perceived
    homosexuality.  No error of law is disclosed in the respondent's  first
    ground.



Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is  dismissed.   The  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error of law and shall stand.

I continue the anonymity order that was made in the First-tier Tribunal


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date:  1 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application was made and I make no fee award.






Signed                                  Date:  1 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
