
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/09601/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2020                    |On 17 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     AP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  further  to  directions  issued  by
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on 23 March 2020  and  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Macleman on 2 July 2020.

The appellant is a national  of  Afghanistan  born  on  27  March  1997.  He
claimed asylum in 2012 shortly after arriving  in  the  UK.  His  claim  was
refused but he was  granted  discretionary  leave  to  October  2014  as  an
unaccompanied minor. His  application  for  further  leave  was  refused  in
October  2015  and  he  unsuccessfully  appealed  against   that   decision,
eventually becoming appeal rights  exhausted  on  11  April  2017.  He  made
further submissions on 19 July 2019 which were refused on 6  September  2019
with a right of appeal. That appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Callow on 21 November 2019 and was dismissed in a  decision  promulgated  on
17 January 2020. It is  that  decision  that  the  appellant  now  seeks  to
challenge.

The appellant's original claim was made on the basis of a fear of return  to
Afghanistan as a result of having fled the country after being held  by  the
Taliban with the purpose of training him to  become  a  suicide  bomber  and
escaping from their camp in the mountains.  In  dismissing  the  appellant's
appeal against the respondent's decision  refusing  that  claim,  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Froom found the  entire  account  to  be  a  fabrication  and
concluded that the appellant could safely return  to  Afghanistan  where  he
was not at risk and where his family remained.

The appellant's further  submissions  made  on  19  July  2019  were  on  an
entirely different basis, namely  his  fear  of  return  to  Afghanistan  on
account of his decision to disassociate himself from  the  Muslim  religion.
He claimed to have had a religious Muslim upbringing in Afghanistan  but  to
have changed his views on Islam as a result of having been placed in  foster
care  in  the  UK  with  a  Christian  family.  He  had  not  converted   to
Christianity but believed himself to belong to no religion  and  to  believe
only in humanity. He did not express his views openly and he  would  not  be
able to do so in Afghanistan as he would be at risk as an apostate, a  crime
which  was  punishable  by  death.  He  would  be  killed  or  tortured   in
Afghanistan and would be considered as a spy of the West.

The respondent, in refusing the  appellant's  claim,  did  not  address  the
appellant's claim in regard to his religion but considered whether he  would
be at risk in Afghanistan as a result of being westernised, concluding  that
he would not and that he could safely return to that country.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by  Judge  Callow
in the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant did not give oral evidence at  the
hearing, in light of a report from a  senior  clinical  psychologist,  Dr  K
Bentham, concluding that his ability to give  evidence  was  compromised  by
the fact that he was suffering from  C-PTSD.  Reliance  was  instead  placed
upon his witness statement submitted with his appeal  bundle.  Judge  Callow
made some adverse credibility findings against the appellant and found  that
he would not be at risk on return to Afghanistan.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on  the  grounds  that  the
judge  had  made  adverse  credibility  findings  without  clarifying  which
evidence he rejected and why; and that the judge, having made findings  that
he no longer associated with Islam and was afraid of so declaring  and  that
it was not safe  for  him  to  express  his  disassociation  with  Islam  in
Afghanistan, had erred by failing to follow through and allow the appeal  in
line with the guidance in HJ (Iran)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2010] UKSC 31 in light of  the  background  information  on  the
penalties for apostacy. It was asserted also that the  judge  had  erred  by
not accepting  that  atheism  was  a  protected  belief  under  the  Refugee
Convention.

Permission was granted on 17 February 2020 and the respondent filed  a  rule
24 response on 4 March 2020 opposing the appellant's appeal.

The matter was listed for hearing in the Upper Tribunal, but  was  adjourned
in light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread  of  Covid-19.
The case was then reviewed by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith who, in a Note  and
Directions sent out on 23 March 2020, indicated that  she  had  reached  the
provisional view that the question  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision involved the making of  error  of  law  and,  if  so,  whether  the
decision should be set aside, could be made without a  hearing.  Submissions
were invited from the parties.  In  the  absence  of  any  response  to  the
directions from either  party,  further  directions  were  issued  by  Upper
Tribunal Judge Macleman on 2 July 2020 in similar terms  but  providing  the
parties with an extension of time in which to make submissions.

Submissions were received from Mr Clarke for the respondent on 8  July  2020
and were also emailed to the appellant's solicitors the  same  day.  However
there has been no response to the  directions  from  the  appellant  or  his
solicitors, despite the extension of time and  further  directions.  In  his
submissions, Mr Clarke resisted the appellant's appeal  and  requested  that
the judge's decision be upheld.  He  had  no  objection  to  the  matter  be
determined without a hearing.

I have considered whether it would be just and fair to  proceed  to  make  a
decision in this case without a hearing, even  without  notification  of  an
objection from the appellant. I have decided that it  would.  The  appellant
has failed to respond to directions on two occasions.  The  directions  were
sent initially by first-class post to the appellant himself as  well  as  to
his solicitors on 23 March 2020 and subsequently by email to his  solicitors
on 2 July 2020. In addition, Mr Clarke's  submissions,  which  set  out  the
Tribunal's directions, were emailed to the appellant's solicitors on 8  July
2020.  It  is  clear  that  the  directions  were  properly  served  on  the
appellant. Given the lengthy period of time since the directions were  first
made, I cannot find that the general circumstances relating  to  coronavirus
provide any justification for the failure to respond. There has been  plenty
of opportunity for the appellant to reply to the  directions  and  to  voice
any objection to the matter being determined in the  papers.   In  addition,
the decision I make is one which benefits the appellant  in  any  event,  to
the extent that I set aside the  judge's  decision  dismissing  the  appeal,
albeit without preserving any of the findings. In  the  circumstances  I  do
not consider there to be any unfairness in my proceeding  to  determine  the
matter without a hearing.

The main ground of challenge is  that  the  judge,  having  found  that  the
appellant was an apostate and feared to declare so, ought  to  have  allowed
the appeal following the steps set out in the guidance in  HJ  (Iran),  when
considering  the  background  evidence  which  showed  that  apostates   and
atheists were subjected to persecution, and that he failed  to  give  proper
reasons for not doing so. However, I do not consider  that  the  judge  made
findings in such clear terms and indeed it seems  to  me  that  the  judge's
findings were particularly unclear. The judge found  the  appellant's  claim
to lack  credibility.  The  grounds  acknowledge  that  adverse  credibility
findings were made and the first ground asserts  that  the  judge  erred  by
failing to make clear which  parts  of  the  claim  lacked  credibility  and
failing to explain  which  parts  of  the  appellant's  statement  were  not
accorded weight. Accordingly, it is not the  case,  in  my  view,  that  the
judge unequivocally accepted the factual basis of the  claim  but  dismissed
the appeal on the question of  risk  on  return.  To  the  extent  that  the
grounds suggest that he did, I find that they lack merit.

The lack of clarity in the judge's credibility findings is  demonstrated  by
the fact that the respondent, in the rule  24  response  at  [6],  submitted
that the judge accepted that the appellant had distanced himself from  Islam
but not for the  reasons  stated,  whereas  Mr  Clarke  in  his  submissions
appears to have considered the adverse credibility findings to  relate  only
to how the appellant would behave in Afghanistan. My own view is that it  is
difficult to understand what the judge's findings were at all, at {23],  and
it seems that UTJ  Macleman,  at  [5]  of  his  directions,  was  expressing
similar misgivings.

At  [24]  the  judge  expressed  concerns  about  the  credibility  of   the
appellant's claim and at the end  of  [23]  he  concluded  that  a  personal
witness statement alone was not sufficient  to  establish  the  claim.  When
considering that the witness statement  from  the  appellant  was  the  only
evidence of his claim, and when considering the  judge's  findings  at  [17]
that there was  no  good  reason  why  the  appellant  had  not  given  oral
evidence, it is difficult to understand whether the judge, in the  remaining
part of [23], was indeed accepting the appellant's claim to  have  renounced
his faith and to fear expressing that openly in Afghanistan, and if he  was,
why he did so. I am entirely  in  agreement  with  the  suggestion,  in  UTJ
Macleman's directions, that the  judge's  findings  at  [23]  and  [24]  are
inconsistent and irreconcilable. To the extent that  the  findings  at  [23]
are relied upon by the appellant as including positive credibility  findings
about his (lack of) religious beliefs and how and why he would  desist  from
expressing those beliefs, I find those findings to be simply  unsustainable.
I therefore reject the appellant's second ground  of  appeal,  but  consider
that the merits of his  challenge  to  the  judge's  decision  lies  in  the
assertion in the first ground, at [4] and [5], in regard to the findings  of
fact.

In view of the unsustainability of the judge's findings of  fact,  the  only
appropriate course is  for  the  case  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be heard de novo before a different judge, with no  findings  of
fact preserved.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge Callow.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for  anonymity.  I  continue  the
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 11 August 2020
