


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
PA/09162/2016

                                                      PA/09173/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |           Decision  & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 5 September 2017                   |           On 18 September 2017      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                   SR (1)
                                   HR (2)
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse, instructed by Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are brothers from Afghanistan, born respectively  on  30
    October 2000 and 12 January 2001.  The appeal with  permission  against
    the decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge Graham that was  issued
    on 11 April 2017.

 2. An anonymity  direction  was  made  by  Judge  Graham  because  of  the
    appellants' ages and the content of the  appeals.   It  is  appropriate
    that anonymity is continued and I make the appropriate order at the end
    of this decision and reasons statement.

 3. The appellants challenge the decision because they are not  happy  with
    the way Judge Graham carried  out  the  credibility  assessment.   They
    allege that if the credibility assessment  is  not  sound,  then  Judge
    Graham also erred by failing to consider  relevant  background  country
    information.

 4. The first ground challenges Judge Graham's finding that it was unlikely
    or  implausible  the  second  appellant  would  not  have  overheard  a
    conversation between the first appellant and  his  father  about  their
    political interests or activities.  Judge Graham was concerned that the
    second appellant had no knowledge of his  parents'  political  opinions
    although his parents disclosed them to his older brother.

 5. This challenge centres on three factors.  First, Judge  Graham  had  no
    evidence about where the conversation took place and assumed it was  in
    a place where the second appellant could overhear  it.   Second,  Judge
    Graham did not have regard  to  the  explanation  given  in  the  first
    appellant's witness statement about why the second  appellant  was  not
    told about his parents'  political  opinions.   Third,  Judge  Graham's
    conclusion that there was an inconsistency  in  the  first  appellant's
    accounts as to when he was told by his maternal uncle the  reasons  for
    his  parents'  arrest  failed  to  take  account  of  the  explanations
    provided.

 6. The second ground challenges  the  weight  Judge  Graham  gave  to  the
    screening interview record, particularly because that interview was not
    recorded.

 7. The third ground argues that Judge Graham failed  to  take  account  of
    background country information about the risk to family members of PJAK
    members/sympathisers contained in the Home Office's policy guidance  on
    Iranian Kurds.

 8. Mr Woodhouse adopted these grounds.

 9. Mr Woodhouse had nothing to add to the first issue about why the second
    appellant had no knowledge of his  parents'  political  opinions.   The
    second appellant, for whatever reason,  was  not  informed.   There  is
    reference to his level of maturity as a reason for  the  non-disclosure
    by his parents, maternal uncle and first appellant.

10. Mr Woodhouse reminded me that the appellants had  submitted  statements
    following their interviews two days  before  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letters were issued.  The first appellant had said  at  interview  that
    his uncle did not tell  him  the  reasons  why  his  parents  had  been
    arrested because his younger brother was with him.  In  his  statement,
    submitted before the reasons for refusal letter was issued,  he  sought
    to clarify this answer by saying that his uncle mentioned briefly  that
    his parents had been arrested because of their political  opinions  but
    gave no details because  his  brother  was  present.   In  his  witness
    statement, the first appellant explained that he was not know the  full
    details of why his parents were arrested, only finding that  out  later
    when at the home of one of his father's friends.

11. Mr Woodhouse also reminded me that the appellants were  both  under  18
    and special care had to be given to the assessment of  their  evidence,
    particularly as it dealt with events in 2015.

12. As to the other grounds,  Mr  Woodhouse  submitted  that  only  limited
    weight could be given to a screening interview because of  the  way  it
    was conducted.  The fact Judge Graham relied at [38] on "all the  above
    factors together" indicated her concerns with the  screening  interview
    record was part of her credibility assessment and  decision  to  reject
    the whole account.  This could only mean the credibility assessment was
    fundamentally flawed.

13. As to the final ground, Mr Woodhouse argued that as the appellants were
    both children, it was incumbent on Judge Graham to give more weight  to
    background country information when assessing plausibility and  general
    credibility than in cases involving adults.  The  failure  to  consider
    the evidence  risk  to  family  members  of  PJAK  members/sympathisers
    contained in the Home Office's policy guidance on Iranian  Kurds  meant
    the credibility assessment was flawed since this gave objective  weight
    to the appellants' claim.

14. Mr Mills relied on the rule 24 reply of 26 June 2017  and  argued  that
    Judge Graham's decision and reasons was  more  than  adequate  and  her
    credibility findings were sustainable.  He reminded me that it was  for
    Judge Graham to assess the evidence and it was open to her to find  the
    second appellant's lack  of  knowledge  about  his  parents'  political
    opinion to be unlikely because they lived in the same household.

15. Mr Mills reminded me that Judge Graham considered the age of the second
    appellant (and in fact both appellants) at [35] when she said that "she
    made  allowances  for  children  maturing  at  different  ages",  which
    indicated she had proper regard to  case  law  and  guidance  regarding
    child appellants.   It  was  open  to  her  to  find  that  the  second
    appellant's age and immaturity were not sufficient to  explain  why  he
    had no  knowledge  of  his  parents'  involvement.   Judge  Graham  was
    entitled to reject the explanations provided by  the  first  appellant.
    Of course, Judge Graham did not have to recite the explanations  given;
    it was clear that she rejected them.

16. Mr Mills submitted that Judge Graham was entitled to find at [37]  that
    the failure of the first appellant  to  mention  a  key  issue  in  his
    screening interview was a relevant factor  to  consider.   She  clearly
    took account of his age when reaching that conclusion.

17. Mr Mills relied on the alternative findings of Judge  Graham  at  [43].
    Therein she considered whether the appellants had a  well-founded  fear
    of persecution if she accepted their account.  She concluded  that  the
    evidence did not show  they  were  at  risk  merely  because  of  their
    relationship.  He reminded me that the maternal uncle  was  the  direct
    relative of the appellants' mother and the fact the Iranian authorities
    had shown no adverse interest in him was significant.  Judge Graham was
    entitled to find that if the authorities were not interested in a close
    adult relative, then it was reasonably  unlikely  they  would  have  an
    adverse interest in the appellants as children.

18. As a  result,  Mr  Mills  disagreed  with  Mr  Woodhouse's  submissions
    regarding the relevance  of  the  background  country  information  and
    argued that it did  not  help  them  establish  the  appellants'  claim
    because even if their account was believed they failed  to  established
    they faced a real risk of persecution on return.

19. Mr Woodhouse replied and reminded me that Judge Graham's findings  were
    illogical.  At [37] she said the first appellant  had  embellished  his
    claim by mentioning only for the first time  his  activities  with  his
    father after his screening interview.  This conclusion made no sense of
    the appellants' admissions that the second appellant knew nothing about
    his parents' political opinions or actions; if they  were  embellishing
    their accounts, then they would have not denied such knowledge.

20. I reserved my decision and reasons, which I now give.

21. I am unable to infer that Judge Graham had regard to  the  explanations
    given by the first appellant about the two key  issues.   Although  she
    refers to the witness statements at [14], she does not give any  reason
    for  rejecting  the  explanations  provided  regarding   the   apparent
    discrepancies in the accounts.  Failure to consider evidence is a legal
    error.

22. Furthermore, I am not satisfied she has properly analysed the relevance
    of the second appellant's age and maturity.   The  appellants'  parents
    would have known that disclosure of their  political  activities  would
    bring them to the adverse attention of the  Iranian  authorities,  with
    negative consequences for the appellants.  It is  usual  not  just  for
    parents but for any person to keep  sensitive  information  private  to
    prevent unintended disclosure by a person, such as an  immature  child,
    who  might  not  understand  the  consequences.   The  fact  the  first
    appellant is also a child made it incumbent on the judge to ensure this
    issue was fully explored either by the representatives or  by  herself.
    I find this to be a legal error because it failed to give proper regard
    to the vulnerability of both appellants, contrary to  the  Presidential
    Guidance and the assessment of credibility.

23. In addition, I accept that it is wrong in law to find that a failure to
    disclose at a screening interview every key factor that will  be  later
    relied upon.  That is not the purpose of  a  screening  interview  (see
    para 19 of YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004]  UKIAT  00145).   I  find  the
    comments of Judge Graham at [37] to be contrary to  such  guidance  and
    therefore a legal error.

24. In light of these findings, it is unnecessary to make a finding  as  to
    whether Judge Graham's approach to the background  country  information
    was correct in law.  I find both representatives made  relevant  points
    in context.  Mr Woodhouse  was  right  to  point  out  that  background
    country information can help assess whether a claim  is  plausible.   A
    claim which is consistent with independent sources is more likely to be
    credible that one that is not.  Mr Mills was right to  point  out  that
    the country information was not as clear cut as Mr Woodhouse portrayed.



25. This will be a matter that the next judge  will  have  to  consider  in
    detail.  I say that because in light of  my  findings  that  there  are
    errors of law in Judge Graham's decision and reasons statement,  I  set
    her decision aside.  The parties agreed that if I were  to  reach  that
    conclusion, then given the nature of the errors it would be appropriate
    to remit the appeals to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
    different judge.  I find that approach to be consistent with the Senior
    President's guidance and make that direction.



Decision

The decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge Graham  contains  errors  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  (de
novo) before any judge other than Judge Graham.



Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The appellant can be referred to as  "SR"
and "HR".



Signed                              Date         15 September 2017

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
