
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09310/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th December 2017                         |On 23rd January 2018          |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     ZA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Jones made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 23rd February 2017.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran. She claimed asylum in the UK on the
    basis that she feared  persecution  there  on  account  of  an  imputed
    religious opinion.  She said that her husband was a factory  owner  who
    employed members of the Bah'ai faith and who is presently in detention.
     He had refused to sell his sharehold in the factory  to  Sepah,  as  a
    consequence of which the authorities seized the factory.  Since she had
    taken his place on the Board she was advised that she should  flee  the
    country, following the issuing of an arrest warrant against her.

 3. The judge found that the appellant's account was internally consistent.
     He also  noted  the  background  evidence  which  suggested  that  the
    authorities apply pressure to take over businesses.  He  recorded  that
    he had heard oral evidence from the appellant's  brother,  although  he
    was unaware of the actual circumstances  which  led  the  appellant  to
    leave Iran.

 4. The judge dismissed the  appeal  because  he  said  that  there  was  a
    surprising lack of supportive evidence in relation to the existence  of
    the factory  and  from  the  family  lawyer  who  had  represented  the
    appellant in Iran.

 5. Although Mrs Pettersen initially sought to defend the determination she
    did acknowledge that it would appear that the judge had  dismissed  the
    appeal on the basis of a lack of corroborative evidence.

 6. The judge erred in law.  In TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40  the
    Court of Appeal said:
         "Where evidence to support an account given by a party is or should
         be readily available a judge is in my view plainly entitled to take
         into  account  the  failure  to  provide  that  evidence  and   any
         explanations  for  that  failure.   This  may  be   a   factor   of
         considerable weight in relation  to  credibility  where  there  are
         doubts about the credibility of a party for other reasons".

 7. However, in this case Judge Jones did not  identify  any  other  doubts
    regarding the appellant's credibility.  Indeed, he  concluded  that  it
    was detailed, internally consistent  and  supported  by  the  objective
    evidence.  Neither was any criticism made of the oral evidence from her
    brother, who confirmed the existence of the factory.

 8. Accordingly, the judge erred in rejecting the appellant's claim  solely
    on the basis of an absence of documentary evidence which amounts to  an
    impermissible requirement  for  corroboration.   His  decision  is  set
    aside.

 9. The appellant now lives in Rochdale.  The  case  will  be  relisted  at
    Manchester before  a judge other than Judge Jones.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed[pic]                             Date 22 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
