
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09496/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 May 2019                        |On 30 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     mhs
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Ata & Co
Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 20 March 2019 Judge  Hanbury  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the  appellant,  a  national  of
    Afghanistan, against a decision made by the respondent on 26 July  2018
    to refuse his protection claim.  The basis of his asylum claim was that
    he was at risk of persecutory harm from the Taliban  who  had  targeted
    him due to his employment with UNICEF.  The respondent was prepared  to
    accept, on the basis of supporting documentation,  that  the  appellant
    had worked for UNICEF, but otherwise found his claim not credible.  The
    judge in his conclusions stated:

         "24. Given my findings on the lack of credible threats made to  the
             appellant by the Taliban, the case appears to turn on risk  on
             return.  The appellant's  family  remain  in  Afghanistan  and
             appear safe, which would itself be surprising, if the  threats
             the appellant alleges  were  made  by  the  Taliban.   If  the
             appellant's claim were true, it would have  given  rise  to  a
             claim under the Refugee Convention, I have found that although
             the appellant may have a subjective fear of  the  Taliban,  as
             they   are   a   notoriously   brutal   and   backward-looking
             organisation, he has not been able to substantiate  his  claim
             that he received threats relied upon.  I do  not  consider  he
             has demonstrated he would be reasonably likely to be killed so
             as to fall within article 2 of ECHR, nor  has  he  established
             that he would be subjected to inhuman and degrading  treatment
             or punishment such as would fall within article 3.  As far  as
             the Qualification Directive is concerned, the appellant  would
             need to establish  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
             believing that the appellant returned to  Afghanistan  face  a
             real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable or owing  to
             such risk  unwilling  to  avail  himself  protection  of  that
             country within  the  terms  of  paragraph  339CH  rules.   The
             appellant has failed to establish this claim to  the  required
             standard of proof."

2.   The grounds raised seven challenges, it being  argued  that  the  judge
    (1) reached contradictory findings regarding  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim that he was threatened by the Taliban;  (2)  attached
    too much weight to his finding that the appellant had failed to provide
    verification that the threatening text from the Taliban and  UNICEF  e-
    mails were genuine; (3) failed to identify the evidential basis  for  a
    number of findings which were materially relevant to his assessment  of
    the appellant's claim to have been threatened by the Taliban/failed  to
    resolve apparent conflict in the evidence before him; (4) relied upon a
    perverse reason for concluding that  the  appellant's  credibility  had
    been damaged on account of his failure to  verify  the  text  from  the
    Taliban;    (5)    failed    to    consider    the    UNICEF    e-mails
    "holistically"/adopted a contradictory approach to  the  assessment  of
    the reliability of the  UNICEF  e-mails;  (6)  failed  to  address  the
    appellant's renewed application for an adjournment at the start of  the
    hearing, which related to a matter about which the FTTJ went on to make
    a negative credibility finding against the appellant; and (7) failed to
    take any account or consider the fact that the report from Dr Giustozzi
    verified the police report submitted by the appellant in support of his
    claim.

3.   I am grateful to the brief submission I received from Mr Fripp  and  Ms
    Everett.  Both agreed (Ms Everett after discussion)  that  the  judge's
    decision could not stand.

4.   I shall not rehearse my reasons in full for concluding that  the  judge
    materially erred in law but in brief I see no arguable merit in grounds
    (5) and (6) - and  one  aspect  of  ground  2.   As  regards  (5),  the
    documentary basis in which the appellant was accepted by the respondent
    to have worked for UNICEF was quite separate  from  the  UNICEF  e-mail
    adduced  by  the  appellant;  the  respondent's   acceptance   of   the
    appellant's UNICEF employment in  light  of  those  documents  did  not
    oblige the judge to accept the reliability of the UNICEF  e-mails.   As
    regards (6), the judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant  had
    had ample time to produce evidence corroborating  the  authenticity  of
    the UNICEF e-mails.

5.   However I see particular force in ground 1.  The  judge's  analysis  at
    paragraph 17 was that:

         "17. I found the appellant be an essentially  honest  witness.   He
             may well have a fear the Taliban.  That does not mean that his
             fear is objectively justified or that he necessarily  received
             the threats he claims to have received.  Clearly, working  for
             an international organisation he  would  have  been  aware  of
             their brutality and may well have a legitimate desire to  seek
             to move abroad.  It is possible for  him  to  be  telling  the
             truth over part of this case but  to  have  exaggerated  other
             parts  of  his  evidence.   In  particular,  I  have  to  look
             critically  at  documents  produced,  which  have   not   been
             verified.  In some cases  those  documents  were  inconsistent
             with the behaviour  normally  expected  of  the  Taliban.   In
             particular, as we pointed out in submissions, the  Taliban  do
             not normally make threats by letter.  There is  also  evidence
             to suggest Taliban do not normally  make  threats  by  letter.
             There is also evidence to  suggest  Taliban  do  not  normally
             telephone their victims or intended victims in  advance.   The
             reasons for this are obvious; it would  make  them  easier  to
             trace.  As I understand it, the appellant's mobile  phone  was
             not submitted for verification and the respondent was provided
             with copy texts.  The original texts could not be checked.  It
             is striking that the appellant did not seek confirmation  from
             a member of UNICEF that the emails he says  he  received  from
             his work colleagues genuinely emanated from that organisation.
              It would have been relatively straightforward to have  sought
             the original e mail thread instead of merely providing  print-
             outs, which may or may not be genuine.  The lack  of  verified
             documents is a recurring theme.  This is surprising since  the
             appellant had nearly a fortnight between arriving  in  the  UK
             and advancing this claim.  He also has now  had  well  over  a
             year  to  verify   the   documentary   evidence.    Had   this
             verification been provided early on, the documents would  have
             simply been accepted by the respondent.   It  is  particularly
             difficult, when faced with, for  example,  text  messages,  to
             verify they are genuine.  Therefore, even making allowance for
             the apparently honest account the appellant  gave-without  any
             reliable documentary evidence  in  support  his  case  appears
             weaker than it would otherwise appear."

6.   There is a  clear  contradiction  within  this  paragraph  between  the
    unqualified terms of the first sentence "I find the appellant to be  an
    essentially honest witness" and the  highly  qualified  terms  of   the
    final sentence: "the apparently honest account", especially given  that
    in between the judge expressly rejects the appellant's  claim  to  have
    received texts from the Taliban.

7.   I also find force in ground 3 (and the related aspect of ground  2)  in
    relation to the judge's reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim  to
    have received texts from the Taliban.   Perhaps  by  use  of  the  word
    'normally' (as  in  "the  Taliban  do  not  normally  make  threats  by
    letter"/"telephone their victims"), the judge meant to  convey  it  was
    not impossible, but there was evidence before the judge stating that it
    was not uncommon (see in particular paragraph 13 of the report from  Dr
    Giustozzi) and it was at least incumbent on the judge to explain why he
    did not think this evidence applied in the  appellant's  case.   Ground
    (4) also makes a reasonable point about the judge's  treatment  of  the
    appellant's failure to verify the texts by way of submitting his  phone
    to the respondent to be checked: the respondent did not ask him to.

8.   I consider ground (7) is also made out.  Considering how much  emphasis
    the judge placed on the lack of verification of documents  it  is  very
    odd that he did not address the fact that Dr Giustozzi had verified  by
    way of a short additional report the police reports submitted  as  part
    of his claim. It is true that  this report was not  sent  to  the  FTTJ
    until four days after the hearing (which took place  on  22  February),
    but the judge did not promulgate his  decision  until  20  March  2019,
    nearly a month later and the Tribunal had confirmed to the  appellant's
    solicitors that this document had been  passed  to  the  judge.   Given
    that. it must  be  presumed  the  judge  received  this  report  before
    promulgating, and as such he should  have  addressed  it  or  at  least
    explained why he would not take account of it, see E &  R  [2004]  EWCA
    Civ 49 at [92].

9.   Mr Fripp also  submitted  that  the  judge's  approach  to  credibility
    failed to apply a structured approach in line with  KB  &  AH  Pakistan
    [2017] UKUT 00491 (IAC).  That is a valid criticism,  but  the  judge's
    errors went further than simply a lack of a structured approach.

10.  I did pause over the issue of whether the judge's error  were  material
    given his alternative finding on internal relocation. However, although
    the judge at paragraph 23 also stated that the appellant would have "an
    internal flight alternative", it cannot be said that this survives as a
    free-standing, finding, not least because the judge himself  stated  at
    paragraph 24 that if the appellant's claims were true, "it  would  have
    given rise to a claim under the Refugee Convention"  (in  context  that
    can only mean, the claimant was entitled to succeed in his claim).

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law.

12.  The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Hanbury).   Whilst  I
    make no specific direction to the next judge hearing the case, I  would
    observe that in light of the argument raised at ground (6), it  can  be
    expected that the appellant would have taken steps by  then  to  obtain
    independent corroboration from UNICEF as to  the  authenticity  of  the
    UNICEF e-mails adduced by the appellant.  Indeed  Mr  Fripp  said  such
    steps were underway.

13.  The next judge  will  also  obviously  need  to  apply  Upper  Tribunal
    country guidance such as is current at the date of the hearing.

14.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Hanbury).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 25 May 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

