

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number PA/09023/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
             Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 29th January 2019
             On 20th February 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

            A G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Ms M Gherman (Counsel, instructed by Virgo Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's asylum claim was rejected by the Secretary of State and
   his appeal dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff in a decision
   promulgated on the 7th of September 2018. The Judge's findings and
   conclusions are set out at paragraphs 26 to 38 of the decision. These are
   referred to in more detail below but in summary the Judge accepted the
   Appellant's factual account of events in Turkey including his detentions
   but found that these did not amount to persecution but only to harassment
   and that he could return to his home area.

2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
   the basis that the Judge arguably failed properly to characterise the
   Appellant's past ill-treatment as not being sufficiently serious to
   amount to persecution or contrary to article 3. Although that did not
   mean that the Appellant would be at risk on return past ill-treatment was
   relevant to the assessment of future risk and the Judge may not have
   considered IK properly.

3. At the Upper Tribunal hearing Mr Clarke conceded that decision did
   contain a material error of law as the factual findings of ill-treatment
   were such that they should properly have been accepted as amounting to
   persecution. The parties' submissions are set out in the Record of
   Proceedings. Given that the Judge's credibility findings remain
   undisturbed it was accepted that the decision could be remade in the
   Upper Tribunal. Both representatives made submissions in line with their
   respective positions and at the end of the hearing the decision was
   reserved.

4. The Judge's findings where there is no challenge are at paragraphs 26 to
   29. The Judge accepted that the Appellant was an uneducated shepherd and
   accepted that the Appellant was from the area of Turkey that he had said.
   The Judge also accepted that the Appellant regularly had his lunch stolen
   by the PKK and that he had been arrested on occasions by the Turkish
   authorities because, as a shepherd, it was thought that he might be
   taking supplies to PKK members hiding in the hills and that he had been
   beaten up but there were no specific injuries attributed to this
   treatment.

5. The risk to the Appellant has to be assessed in light of the guidance in
   the case of IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKAIT 312,
   the generic conclusions are set out at paragraph 133 of the decision. The
   GBTS system "comprises only outstanding arrest warrants and previous
   arrests, restrictions on travel abroad, possible draft evasion, refusal
   to perform military service and tax arrears. "Arrests" as comprised in
   the GBTS require some court intervention and must be distinguished from
   "detentions" by the security forces followed by release without charge."
   The system is available to the border Police at Istanbul airport.

6. Paragraph 133, points 5 to 7, deal with what would happen on an
   Appellant's return to Turkey. From point 6 the Appellant would be
   returning on a one-way ETD and so be identified as a failed asylum seeker
   and so could be sent for further investigation. From point 5 if the
   Appellant were detained in the situation justified it then additional
   enquiry could be made of the authorities in his home area where more
   extensive records could be kept. The adjudicator would have to assess the
   questions that would be asked and how the Appellant would reply without
   lying.

7. There is nothing in the Appellant's interview or witness statements that
   suggests that he was ever charged or brought before a court or other form
   of legal proceedings. The account does not contain the suggestion that
   the Appellant's details were taken or that he was targeted rather he was
   picked up on an occasional basis at the whim of the security forces. His
   last detention according to his interview 2012 or thereabouts and his
   reason for coming to the UK was the land feud he described with local
   Arabs and not the treatment he received from the Police or PKK. The
   Appellant did not suggest that his family had suffered from adverse
   Police or security forces attention.

8. Whilst it is accepted that the treatment of the Appellant by the
   authorities in his home area amounted to persecution it does not appear
   from the Appellant's account that he was targeted by name or on the basis
   of evidence or intelligence but by virtue of his occupation as a shepherd
   and the assumption that he would be providing assistance to the PKK. As
   his details were not taken and there is no evidence of judicial or other
   official involvement in his detentions the Appellant's details would not
   appear on the GBTS system or local records of any sort.

9. In those circumstances the Judge's findings at paragraph 37 were
   justified, the Appellant has no profile that would bring him to the
   attention of the authorities and he would not be considered to be
   involved in opposition politics. Applying the guidance in IK to the
   Appellant's circumstances and the evidence that was accepted I find that
   the Appellant would not be identified as being of any interest on return
   to Turkey and that he could either return to his home area or he could
   internally relocate within Turkey. Although the Judge erred in the
   characterisation of the Appellant's treatment in Turkey I find that
   applying the approach from IK to the findings that had been made lead to
   the conclusion that the Appellant is not in need of international
   protection.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and remake the decision dismissing the appeal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 18th February 2019























                          (c) Crown copyright 2019
