
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09124/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|At a remote hearing via Skype for Business|                                 |
|On 29 April 2021                          |On 7 May 2021                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AAO
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') (Judges TR Smith and D Kelly) sent on 18  February
         2020, dismissing his appeal on international protection grounds.

      2. I maintain the anonymity direction made  by  the  FTT  because  the
         appellant, a citizen of Iraq, has made a  claim  for  international
         protection.

Background

      3. In her decision dated 25 May 2019, the respondent accepted the vast
         majority of the appellant's account.  In particular, the respondent
         accepted that the appellant:

              - is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish origin who resided in  Koya
                city in the KRI;



              - was  discovered  as  being  involved  in  an  extra-marital
                relationship with K, a married woman  and  daughter  of  an
                Iman, on 29 October 2018, which resulted in K being  killed
                in an 'honour killing';


              - did not return home but  immediately  fled  Iraq  with  the
                assistance of an agent (paid for by  his  paternal  uncle),
                his family members having been threatened that he would  be
                killed.

      4. The respondent therefore accepted the material facts underlying the
         appellant's asylum claim but concluded that  he  would  not  be  at
         prospective risk in Iraq because he (i)  would  obtain  police  and
         sufficient state protection and, in any event (ii) would be able to
         internally  relocate  to  Erbil  or  Sulaymaniya.   The  respondent
         considered that internal relocation was an option available to  the
         appellant because, inter alia, he would  be  able  to  contact  his
         family in Iraq in order to obtain  his  CSID  (which  he  had  left
         behind in the family home when he fled).

      5. The appellant relied upon a short witness statement before the  FTT
         dated 2 October 2019.  This alleged that he had  been  disowned  by
         his family and as such they would not assist him to return to  Iraq
         by providing his CSID or otherwise.  The FTT rejected this evidence
         and found that the appellant could safely and reasonably internally
         relocate to another part of the KRI.

Appeal to the UT

      6. The grounds of  appeal  are  twofold  and  challenge  the  two  key
         conclusions of the FTT.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  UTJ
         Jackson in a decision dated 29 May 2020.

      7. At the hearing before me  Mr  Greer  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
         appeal.  As to ground 1, he submitted  that  when  the  appellant's
         asylum interview was read as a whole, it was simply  irrational  to
         conclude, as the FTT did, that the appellant failed to explain that
         he had been disowned by his family.   Mr  Greer  also  relied  upon
         ground 2 and submitted  that  the  FTT's  findings  in  support  of
         internal relocation were not open to it.   Mr  Tan  relied  upon  a
         comprehensive rule 24 response in which he addressed  each  of  the
         grounds of appeal.  I address  these  submissions  in  more  detail
         below.

      8. After hearing from both representatives, I  reserved  my  decision,
         which I now provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

      9. I am entirely satisfied that the FTT's decision  contains  material
         errors of law, as pleaded in the grounds of appeal, and must be set
         aside.

Ground 1 - adverse finding regarding contact with family

     10. As set out in ground 1, each of the two reasons provided by the FTT
         for disbelieving the appellant's claim that he did not have contact
         with his family and they  would  not  assist  him  because  of  his
         behaviour with K, do not withstand scrutiny.

     11. In the particular circumstances of  this  case,  at  [65]  the  FTT
         irrationally   concluded   that   the   appellant's   failure    to
         categorically state at the interview "what he now says is the truth
         (that he was disowned by  his  family)  is  a  factor  that  weighs
         heavily against his credibility" (my emphasis).   It is significant
         that the core of the appellant's account was entirely  accepted  by
         the respondent.  The decision letter drew attention to internal and
         external  consistencies   regarding   material   aspects   of   the
         appellant's account.  By contrast, within its decision, the FTT has
         not  drawn  attention  to  any  cross-examination  of  note.    The
         appellant's general credibility was an  important  foundation  from
         which to approach this particular issue.  Although the FTT said  at
         [67] that it took into account factors pointing 'for' and 'against'
         the appellant's credibility, there has been no clear recognition of
         the significance of the respondent having already  accepted  almost
         every  single  aspect  of  the  appellant's  core   account.    The
         plausibility of the appellant's claim is mentioned at [64]  without
         mentioning any of the other significant factors in support  of  the
         appellant's credibility.

     12. As stated in the grounds of appeal, the  appellant's  responses  at
         interview were not inconsistent with his claim that his family  had
         disowned him.  Indeed, the appellant said that he  had  no  contact
         with his family (Q 46) since the incident, he did not 'dare'  phone
         them (Q 163) and his uncle told him that his father said  "just  do
         what you can do with him".  When the interview is read as a  whole,
         it is clear that the briefly stated claim that he was  disowned  by
         his family did not  materially  embellish  what  had  already  been
         disclosed during the interview: the appellant had no  contact  with
         his family because  they  washed  their  hands  of  him  after  his
         perceived breach of social mores and the shame  that  brought  with
         it.

     13. The FTT irrationally found that that 'the  truth'  of  having  been
         disowned was not tolerably clear from a  combination  of  what  was
         said in the interview together with how most families  would  react
         in the context of the  country  background  evidence  on  the  KRI,
         particularly in the light of  it  having  been  accepted  that  the
         appellant was a generally credible witness.

     14. As to the uncle, when [64] to [66] are viewed  together,  this  was
         clearly a factor the FTT regarded to be of less importance.  In any
         event, as UTJ Jackson observed when granting permission to  appeal,
         the FTT failed to make any specific  findings  as  to  whether  the
         appellant was otherwise in contact with  his  family  in  Iraq  and
         simply assumed that they would be willing to  support  his  return.
         That assumption is inconsistent with the appellant's clear evidence
         that he has had no contact with his family since he  fled  in  2018
         and they were resolute in the need for him to flee Iraq quickly.

Ground 2 - internal relocation

     15. The respondent's case was clearly set out in the decision letter to
         the following effect: (i) the appellant's genuine subjective  fears
         were not well-founded because he would  be  able  to  access  state
         protection in his home area; (ii)  even  if  state  protection  was
         unavailable in his home area he could safely relocate  because  K's
         family members did not have the motivation, power or  influence  to
         locate him in other parts of Iraq; and it would be  reasonable  for
         him to internally relocate.  In these circumstances, it is  unclear
         why the FTT addressed internal  protection  before  addressing  the
         sufficiency of state protection.  Internal relocation  only  became
         material if the FTT reached the conclusion that the appellant could
         not obtain state protection in his home area.

     16. It is clear from [87] to [90], and the conclusion at [91] that  the
         FTT was satisfied, contrary to the respondent's position, that  the
         appellant would not receive sufficient state protection,  but  that
         the appellant could reasonably (as opposed  to  safely)  internally
         relocate.  The FTT did not limit the absence  of  state  protection
         here to the appellant's home area.  By contrast, the FTT appears to
         find at [70] to [73] and at [80] that the K's family would not have
         the power or influence to trace the appellant to  another  part  of
         the IKR.  Confusingly the FTT lists this as a factor supporting the
         conclusion that it would not be 'unduly harsh' for the appellant to
         internally relocate - see [78] to [80].  The findings  on  internal
         relocation are therefore confusing and inconsistent.

     17. I do not need to address the materiality of these errors because  I
         am satisfied that the first two points contained in  ground  2  are
         made out.

     18. First, the FTT was  wrong  to  find  at  [70]  that  the  appellant
         accepted he had 'no' evidence of K's family members' connections to
         the security service when he clearly stated that by virtue of being
         an Imam K's father was able to wield power over other parts of  the
         KRI - see Q 76-78.

     19. Second, the FTT's conclusion at [73] that it was not satisfied that
         K's family members were members of the Jaff tribe  is  inadequately
         reasoned (even when considered in the context of  the  neighbouring
         paragraphs) in the context of this case, where, as explained  above
         the respondent  accepted  the  vast  majority  of  the  appellant's
         evidence.

     20. I do not accept the  third  and  fourth  points  in  ground  2  are
         justified for the reasons set out in Mr Tan's written  submissions.
         It is not necessary to address these in any  detail  because  I  am
         satisfied that the remainder  of  the  grounds  are  sufficient  to
         vitiate the FTT's decision.

Disposal

     21. I have had regard to  [7.2]  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided,
         that this is an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.  Although the
         issues in dispute  were  narrowed  by  the  respondent  within  the
         decision letter, no part of the FTT's adjudication of those  issues
         can be preserved and the matter  therefore  needs  to  be  entirely
         remade.  I acknowledge that there is no need to make detailed fresh
         findings as the respondent has already accepted the  vast  majority
         of  the  appellant's  account.   However,  there  remain  important
         factual matters to resolve in this appeal.

Decision

     22. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     23. The matter is remitted to the FTT, to a judge other than  Judge  TR
         Smith and Judge D Kelly.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

Dated: 29 April 2021
