
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09822/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 February 2018                        |On 1 March 2018                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Sadiq of Adam Solicitors.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge M Davies (the  Judge)  promulgated  on
        the 20 June 2017, in which the Judge allowed the appellant's appeal
        on asylum and human rights grounds.
     2. Three grounds of challenge are pleaded the first of which asserts a
        procedural impropriety in the way the Judge conducted  the  hearing
        expressed in the following terms:

          1. In the interests of justice,  the  appellant's  case  must  be
             dismissed on the grounds  of  procedural  impropriety.  It  is
             clear that at the hearing on 9 June 2017,  the  FTTJ  did  not
             permit the SSHD's  Presenting  Officer  (POU)  to  make  final
             submissions. At the end of  the  cross  examination  the  FTTJ
             informed the POU that he found the witness  credible  and  was
             going to allow the appeal.


          2. The POU  protested  because  he  had  not  been  afforded  the
             opportunity to make his submissions. He also asserted that the
             appellant's witness was not related and for the  discrepancies
             raised at the hearing, wasn't credible. Whilst  attempting  to
             rely on the SSHD's refusal letter and  persuade  the  FTTJ  to
             follow due process, the POU was cut off at this juncture,  and
             the FTTJ disagreed, and reluctantly reserved his  appeal.  The
             FTTJ informed the appellant that "it's just an  administrative
             thing but I will allow the appeal."


          3. It is respectfully submitted  that  in  cutting  off  the  POU
             clearly the FTTJ had already made his mind  up  to  allow  the
             appeal. This seems to have been a clear  lack  of  objectivity
             and no reasons were given such impetuous decision  to  curtail
             the hearing before the  SSHD  had  an  proper  opportunity  to
             conclude her submissions based on what had transpired  through
             the cross examination.


          4. It is clear that at para 43 the FTTJ  had  already  determined
             that the SSHD's cross examination would have no effect on  his
             decision. This is procedural impropriety and does  not  afford
             the SSHD to make a case in a proper manner in accordance  with
             the law.

     3. A number of other points asserting a conflict of fact  and  failure
        to give adequate reasons and a failure to adequately assess risk on
        return by reference the country material are pleaded in  Grounds  2
        and 3.
     4. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal.
     5.  Before  the  Upper  Tribunal  relevant  sections  of  the   Judges
        contemporaneous typed record of proceedings were  read  out.  These
        record:

             Respondents Submissions


             Not family member






             Appellants Submissions


             Need not address me

     6. The record is stated to be a typed verbatim copy of what  was  said
        at the hearing. At [37] of the decision under challenge  the  Judge
        records "Mr Holt simply relied  on  the  contents  of  the  refusal
        letter. I should take into account  that  the  witness  was  not  a
        family member of the Appellant".
     7. Mr McVeety referred to the Presenting Officers contemporaneous note
        of the hearing which reads:

             Cross Exam


             Re Exam


             Immediately after IJ say he allowed.






             I  made  submissions  witness  not  related  and  there   were
             discrepancies






             IJ disagreed and cut off my submissions.

     8. Mr Sadiq, who had the advantage  of  being  one  of  the  advocates
        present at the earlier hearing, was asked  whether  the  Presenting
        Officers note was an accurate record of what had occurred  at  that
        stage of the proceedings which he confirmed it was.




Discussion



     9. Whilst there is nothing wrong in a judge adopting a robust approach
        to case management to  ensure  all  relevant  issues  are  properly
        addressed and to maximise the effectiveness of proceedings,  it  is
        settled law that any party to litigation  is  entitled  to  a  fair
        hearing. This is enshrined in Article 6  ECHR  which  protects  the
        right to a fair trial.
    10. Judges receive reminders as part of their judge craft training that
        not only must justice be done but it must be seen to be done.
    11. Advocates submissions in contested proceedings  form  an  important
        part of the legal process. Denying an advocate the  opportunity  to
        make submissions, especially in the face of a specific statement by
        that advocate that they wish to make submissions, gives rise to the
        question of whether the advocate concerned has been denied  a  fair
        hearing.
    12. In this matter I find  that  the  action  taken  by  the  Judge  in
        preventing the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  from  making  the
        detailed submissions he was seeking to make was procedurally unfair
        and denied the advocate the opportunity to state his case in  full.
        There is nothing in the Judges contemporaneous notes or  any  other
        record of the proceedings that  would  justify  such  action  being
        taken.
    13. I find the Secretary State has established legal error on the basis
        of the  denial  of  a  fair  hearing  and  procedural  irregularity
        sufficient to amount to an error of law for this reason.
    14. This is not a case in which the Judge  indicated  that  submissions
        were not required but then allowed  the  appeal  in  the  Secretary
        State's favour which may not have amounted to arguable legal  error
        in the same way the Judge indicated he did not require  submissions
        to be made from Mr Sidiq.
    15. Whether such error is material depends upon whether the outcome  of
        the decision would have been the same if such submissions had  been
        made. The Judge clearly formed a view of the evidence and concluded
        at the end of re-examination that the appeal must succeed. There is
        nothing wrong with a judge forming a view of the merits of the case
        as they hear the evidence but care must be taken in expressing such
        a view until all the necessary procedural steps have been  complied
        with.
    16. What is not known in relation to this appeal is  exactly  what  the
        Presenting  Officer  would  have  said.  There  are   clearly,   as
        identified in Grounds 2 and 3  of  the  respondent's  challenge,  a
        number of factors  based  upon  discrepant  evidence  and  conflict
        within the evidence upon which the Judge would have  been  required
        to make specific findings. The decision does not contain sufficient
        or adequate reasoning to enable the reader to see what the  Judge's
        view was on these particular issues or how they have been  factored
        into the decision-making exercise.
    17. I find the error to be material.
    18. I find as a result of  the  procedural  unfairness,  based  on  the
        denial of a fair hearing to the Secretary of States representative,
        the only option in relation to this appeal is for the  decision  of
        the Judge to be set aside. There shall be  no  preserved  findings.
        The appeal shall be remitted to the Manchester Hearing Centre to be
        heard afresh by a judge other than Judge M Davies.

Decision

    19. The First-tier Judge materially erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision  of  the  original  Judge.  I  remit  the  appeal  to  the
        Manchester Hearing Centre to be heard by a judge of  that  Tribunal
        other than Judge M Davies.




   Anonymity.


    20. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 27 February 2018












