

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/09930/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reason Promulgated|
|on 18 January and 25 April 2019               |on 1 May 2019                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                KAI BING WANG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant, Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors

For the Respondent, on 18 January Mrs M O'Brien, and on 25 April Mr A
Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by FtT Judge David  C  Clapham
    SSC, promulgated on 2 February 2018, on grounds headed "error of law in
    relation to family planning policy", set out as (i) - (iv).

 2. On 18 January, Mrs O'Brien conceded that  the  FtT  erred  in  law,  by
    failing to deal with the report of Professor Christoph Bluth  dated  29
    December 2017.

 3. It was agreed that the decision  should  be  remade  in  the  UT  at  a
    continued hearing.

 4. The appellant provided an updated report by Professor  Bluth  dated  23
    April 2019, although it was not suggested that there was  any  material
    difference between the two.  Further references herein are to the later
    report.

 5. The appellant is a citizen of China, born on 11 March 1983.  He says he
    is from Fu Qing City in Fujian Province.  His wife, born on  6  October
    1988, is also a Chinese citizen.  They had one child at the time  these
    proceedings began, born on 15 January 2014.   They  married  after  the
    birth of that child, and now have a second child.   Both  children  are
    also Chinese citizens.  His wife and children have  no  entitlement  to
    live in the UK.  Removal to China would be as a family group.  His case
    is now advanced only in relation to family planning policy and on human
    rights grounds, based on the best interests of the children.

 6. Mr Govan put the respondent's position, in outline, thus.  The decision
    dated 22 September 2017 at  89  -  105  correctly  applied  AX  (family
    planning scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT 00097.  The report  of  Professor
    Bluth took "a very broad-brush approach" and did not  identify  sources
    which were more recent, or to different effect, than  those  considered
    in AX.  Nothing in the report justified a different outcome.

 7. Mr Winter put the appellant's position, in  outline,  thus.   The  case
    turned on interpreting the report  of  Professor  Bluth.   It  did  not
    depend on "overturning" AX, but on issues not dealt with in that  case,
    emerging from  the  report.   The  report  did  not  make  sweeping  or
    unsupported statements,  but  provided  sources.   Findings  about  the
    likely consequences of return to China in line with  the  report  would
    establish protection  grounds.   Additionally,  or  alternatively,  the
    report disclosed consequences for the children which  were  adverse  to
    their best interests, establishing human rights grounds.   This  was  a
    case such as envisaged in YC [2019] CSIH 5 at [20] - production  of  an
    expert report to show that AX should not be followed.

 8. The headnote of AX states:

      Chinese family planning scheme:


      (1)   In China, all state obligations and benefits depend on the  area
      where a person holds their 'hukou', the  name  given  to  the  Chinese
      household registration system.  There  are  different  provisions  for
      those holding an 'urban hukou' or a 'rural hukou': partly  because  of
      the difficulties experienced historically by peasants  in  China,  the
      family planning scheme is more relaxed for those with a 'rural hukou'.

      (2)   It is unhelpful (and a mistranslation of the  Chinese  term)  to
      describe the Chinese family planning scheme as a  'one-child  policy',
      given the current vast range of exceptions to  the  'one  couple,  one
      child'  principle.  Special  provision  is  made  for  'double-single'
      couples, where both are only children  supporting  their  parents  and
      their grandparents. The number of children authorised  for  a  married
      couple, ('authorised children') depends on the provincial  regulations
      and the individual circumstances of the  couple.  Additional  children
      are referred as 'unauthorised children'.

      (3)   The Chinese family planning scheme expects childbirth  to  occur
      within marriage.  It  encourages  'late'  marriage  and  'late'  first
      births.   'Late' marriages  are  defined  as  age  25  (male)  and  23
      (female) and 'late' first births from age 24.  A birth permit  is  not
      usually required for the first birth,  but  must  be  obtained  before
      trying to become pregnant  with  any  further  children.  The  Chinese
      family planning scheme also originally included a requirement for four-
      year 'birth  spacing'.  With  the  passage  of  time,  province  after
      province has abandoned  that  requirement.  Incorrect  birth  spacing,
      where this is still a requirement, results in a financial penalty.

      (4)   Breach of the Chinese family planning scheme is a civil  matter,
      not a criminal matter.

      Single-child families

      (5)   Parents who restrict themselves  to  one  child  qualify  for  a
      "Certificate of Honour for Single-Child  Parents"  (SCP  certificate),
      which entitles them to a range of enhanced benefits  throughout  their
      lives,  from  priority  schooling,  free  medical  treatment,   longer
      maternity, paternity and honeymoon leave, priority access  to  housing
      and to retirement homes, and enhanced pension provision.

      Multiple-child families

      (6)   Any second child, even if authorised, entails the  loss  of  the
      family's SCP certificate. Loss of a family's SCP results  in  loss  of
      privileged access to schools, housing, pensions and free  medical  and
      contraceptive  treatment.  Education  and  medical  treatment   remain
      available but are no longer free.

      (7)   Where an unauthorised child is born, the family  will  encounter
      additional penalties. Workplace discipline for parents  in  employment
      is likely to include demotion or even loss of employment. In addition,
      a 'social upbringing charge' is  payable  (SUC),  which  is  based  on
      income, with a down payment of 50% and three years to pay the balance.



      (8)   There are hundreds of thousands of  unauthorised  children  born
      every year.  Family planning officials are not entitled to  refuse  to
      register unauthorised children and there is no real risk of a  refusal
      to register a child. Payment for birth permits, for  the  registration
      of children, and the imposition of SUC charges for unauthorised births
      are  a  significant  source  of  revenue  for  local  family  planning
      authorities.  There is  a  tension  between  that  profitability,  and
      enforcement of the nationally imposed quota of births  for  the  town,
      county and province, exceeding which can harm officials' careers.

      (9)   The financial consequences for a family of losing its  SCP  (for
      having more than one child) and/or of having SUC imposed  (for  having
      unauthorised children) and/or  suffering  disadvantages  in  terms  of
      access to education, medical treatment, loss of employment,  detriment
      to future employment etc will not,  in  general,  reach  the  severity
      threshold to amount to persecution or serious  harm  or  treatment  in
      breach of Article 3.

      (10) There are regular national campaigns  to  bring  down  the  birth
      rates in provinces and local areas which have exceeded  the  permitted
      quota.  Over-quota birth rates  threaten  the  employment  and  future
      careers of birth control officials in those regions, and  where  there
      is a national campaign, can result in large scale unlawful  crackdowns
      by local officials in a small number of provinces and areas.  In  such
      areas, during such large scale crackdowns, human rights abuses can and
      do occur, resulting  in  women,  and  sometimes  men,  being  forcibly
      sterilised  and  pregnant  women  having  their  pregnancies  forcibly
      terminated. The last such crackdown took place in spring 2010.

      Risk factors

      (11)  In general, for female returnees,  there  is  no  real  risk  of
      forcible sterilisation or forcible termination in China. However, if a
      female returnee who has already had her permitted quota of children is
      being returned at a time when there is a  crackdown  in  her   'hukou'
      area, accompanied by unlawful practices such  as  forced  abortion  or
      sterilisation, such a returnee would be  at  real   risk  of  forcible
      sterilisation or,  if  she  is  pregnant  at  the  time,  of  forcible
      termination of an unauthorised pregnancy.   Outside  of  these  times,
      such a female returnee may also be able to show  an  individual  risk,
      notwithstanding the absence of a general risk, where there is credible
      evidence that she, or members of her family remaining in  China,  have
      been threatened with, or have suffered, serious adverse  ill-treatment
      by reason of her breach of the family planning scheme.

      (12)   Where  a  female  returnee  is  at  real   risk   of   forcible
      sterilisation or termination of pregnancy in her  'hukou'  area,  such
      risk is of persecution, serious harm and Article 3 ill-treatment.  The
      respondent accepted that such risk would be by  reason  of  a  Refugee
      Convention reason,  membership of a particular  social  group,  'women
      who gave birth in breach of China's family planning scheme'.

      (13)  Male returnees do not, in general, face a real risk of  forcible
      sterilisation, whether in their 'hukou' area or elsewhere,  given  the
      very low rate of sterilisation of males overall, and  the  even  lower
      rate of forcible sterilisation.

      Internal relocation

      (14) Where a real risk exists in the 'hukou' area, it may be  possible
      to avoid the risk by moving to a city. Millions  of  Chinese  internal
      migrants, male and female, live and work in cities where they  do  not
      hold an 'urban hukou'.  Internal migrant women are required to stay in
      touch with their  'hukou'  area  and  either  return  for  tri-monthly
      pregnancy tests or else send back test results.  The country  evidence
      does not indicate a real risk of effective pursuit of internal migrant
      women leading to forcible family planning  actions,  sterilisation  or
      termination,     taking     place      in      their      city      of
      migration. Therefore, internal relocation will, in almost all cases,
      avert the risk in the hukou area.  However,  internal  relocation  may
      not be safe where there is credible evidence of individual pursuit  of
      the returnee or her family, outside the 'hukou' area.  Whether  it  is
      unduly harsh to expect  an  individual  returnee  and  her  family  to
      relocate in this way will be a question of fact in each case.

 9. The respondent's decision founds also upon the following paragraphs:

      Foreign-born children

      186.  In  general,  the  evidence  before  us   indicates   that   the
      consequences of an unauthorised birth once it  has  occurred  (whether
      within or outside China) are social and financial. We remind ourselves
      that breach of the family planning policy is not  a  criminal  offence
      but a civil matter, and that after a down payment of 50%, the  balance
      of any SUC imposed may be paid over at least three years.   We  accept
      Professor  Fu's  evidence  regarding  the   existence   of   statutory
      protection against destitution for those who cannot pay. We note  that
      many couples regard giving birth abroad  as  evidence  of  wealth  and
      status, and that significant numbers of parents travel  to  Hong  Kong
      and Macao, in particular, for that purpose.

      187. The attitude taken by provincial  birth  control  authorities  to
      parents returning with foreign-born  children  remains  unclear;  some
      provincial officials indicated that  the  additional  child  would  be
      treated as unauthorised and registered only on payment of SUC; others,
      that foreign-born children do not breach the  family  planning  scheme
      because their  birth  did  not  breach  the  PFP  Regulations  in  any
      particular province.

      188. Parents returning with  foreign-born  children  are  expected  to
      produce birth certificates for that birth and  to  pay  the  SUC.   In
      general, the rate of SUC, even if it is imposed, is not likely  to  be
      beyond the means of a couple who have lived  abroad  for  some  years.
      There is very little  evidence  of  parents  being  disproportionately
      penalised when they return to China with foreign-born children.

      189. We find that in general, couples with foreign-born children, over
      and above the permitted number for that  couple  (which  is  variable,
      depending whether they are a double-single couple, children of  heroes
      or miners, members of ethnic minorities and so forth) will  on  return
      to China not be at real risk of persecution,  serious  harm  or  human
      rights breaches engaging international protection.

      190.  It  was  not  suggested  by  either  representative   that   the
      international protection Conventions would be  engaged  either  by  an
      appellant's intention to become pregnant unlawfully  after  return  to
      China, or her intention to abstain from such pregnancy. That  was  not
      the evidence in this appeal and we do not purport to give guidance  on
      the point.

10. Country guidance is not superseded simply  by  producing  a  report  of
    later date.  It is necessary to show that such a  report  is  based  on
    evidence which is not the same as, or similar to, the  evidence  before
    the tribunal in the country  guidance  case.   Not  to  follow  country
    guidance requires very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence:  SG
    [2013] 1 WLR 41, approved in YC at [18].

11. Professor Bluth at 5.3.9 - 11 refers to YZ [2017] CSIH  41  as  a  case
    which "could be interpreted to challenge some of the key  findings"  of
    AX on forced sterilisation and coercive measures, and cites the  report
    of Dr S Gordon as showing an absence of consideration in AX of the  use
    of pressure to obtain registration of children.  Professor Bluth  finds
    the methodology of Dr Gordon "very impressive and convincing" and "much
    more solid and reliable" than the respondent's sources.

12. That approach by Professor Bluth is based on  misconceptions  about  YZ
    which are put firmly to rest in YC:

      [19].  The  reference  in  a  purely  procedural  decision  to  a  few
      paragraphs of an expert report used simply to show that there was some
      evidence of a particular nature available to the fact finder  in  that
      case does not constitute cogent evidence for treating  a  CG  case  as
      superseded.  Nor does the fact that in some other  individual  case  a
      FtT has been persuaded not to follow that guidance.

13. It is plain that Professor Bluth's knowledge of the report of Dr Gordon
    is limited to reading the excerpts quoted in YC.  That is an  extremely
    weak reason for placing her methodology above anything relied  upon  by
    the respondent, which includes  country  guidance,  in  turn  based  on
    evidence from multiple sources.

14. Professor Bluth refers at 5.3.13 to "very extensive use of coercion  to
    ensure reliable birth control" as supporting the argument by Dr Gordon.
     This is an example of sweeping generalisation which runs  through  his
    report.

15. The report concludes at 6.1:

      ... the appellant violated the family  planning  policy  by  having  a
      child out of wedlock.   There  is  a  risk  of  imposition  of  fines,
      discrimination including the possibility of forceful sterilisation  if
      the appellant is returned to China ... the important  decision  in  YZ
      ... accepted the evidence that forceful birth control measures,  which
      commonly include female  sterilisation,  will  be  imposed  after  the
      second child.  Moreover, the appellant will be denied  the  choice  of
      having another child which is also a violation of his human rights.

16. YZ is not authority that  return  to  China  having  had  two  children
    carries a risk of forceful birth control measures.

17. The appellant has referred to  no  instance,  in  any  source,  of  the
    Chinese authorities being concerned about children born abroad prior to
    the marriage of their parents, or of imposing sterilisation on  parents
    returning to China with foreign born children.

18. Professor Bluth inextricably mixes up references to  difficulties  over
    registering births and difficulties over registering  for  hukou.   The
    children in this case have  birth  certificates.   It  has  never  been
    suggested that the  Chinese  authorities  do  not  recognise  UK  birth
    certificates, or require any  further  registration  of  the  birth  of
    Chinese citizens abroad.

19. There is no analysis in the report by Professor Bluth, or elsewhere  in
    the appellant's case, of which sources are different from  those  which
    were before the tribunal deciding AX.

20. The gist of later evidence is that the imposition  of  family  planning
    policies in China has in recent years become more relaxed, not sterner.



21. Professor Bluth in his conclusion and  throughout  his  report  clearly
    believes that anyone returned to China is subject to violation of human
    rights, because that person may  be  denied  the  choice  of  how  many
    children to have.  That may be a respectable opinion  on  a  matter  of
    very wide principle, but it  lies  far  outside  the  scope  of  expert
    evidence on country circumstances.

22. The appellant has not referred to sources in the  report  of  Professor
    Bluth or elsewhere which take his case beyond AX at  188  -  189:  very
    little evidence of disproportionate penalties on return  with  foreign-
    born children, and no real risk of persecution, serious harm  or  human
    rights breaches engaging international protection.

23. The decision of the FtT is set aside, but the appeal, as brought to the
    FtT, is again dismissed.

24. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      25 April 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




