
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09517/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st July 2020                    |On 4th August 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     AAO
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to directions sent on 17 April 2020 and amended on 13 May 2010
    indicating a provisional view  that  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions  against  the  spread  of  Covid-19  and   the   overriding
    objective, it would be appropriate in this case to determine the  issue
    of whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an
    error of law and if so whether the decision should be  set  aside;  the
    parties agreed with no objections being raised and  both  made  written
    submissions on the issues raised in the appeal.  It is in the interests
    of justice to proceed to determine these issues on the papers in  light
    of the detailed written submissions  from  the  parties  and  the  full
    appeal files.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Parker promulgated on 27 November  2019,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection
    and human rights claim dated 12 September 2019 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, born on 8 May 1988, who arrived in
    the United Kingdom on 8 March 2008 and applied  for  asylum  that  day.
    The Respondent refused his claim in a decision dated 26  February  2010
    and his appeal against refusal was dismissed on  15  April  2010.   The
    Appellant made further submissions on 10 April  2018,  the  refusal  of
    which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The Respondent refused the application the basis that ...

 5. Judge Parker dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  27
    November 2019 on all grounds.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on five grounds  as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in failing to  have  regard
    to relevant considerations and was procedurally unfair in not accepting
    the Appellant's home area is Kirkuk, which has never  been  in  dispute
    and was not raised with the Appellant at the hearing.   Secondly,  that
    the First-tier Tribunal made  material  mistakes  of  fact  as  to  the
    Appellant's date of birth and whose identity  card  was  taken  to  the
    Iraqi Consulate; failed to properly take into account the evidence  and
    failed to apply the applicable law and country guidance in terms of the
    Appellant's ability to obtain an identity card and as to  contact  with
    family members  to  do  so.   Thirdly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law  in  failing  to  take  into  account  relevant
    evidence and/or failing to give adequate reasons as to the  Appellant's
    family in Iraq.  Fourthly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially
    erred in law in its consideration of whether there was an Article 15(c)
    risk to the Appellant in  Kirkuk,  the  claim  being  rejected  without
    reasons and without giving adequate reasons for departing from the then
    country  guidance  to  the  contrary.   Finally,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in  law  in  failing  to  apply  the  country
    guidance as to whether the Appellant could travel from Baghdad  to  the
    IKR and as to the reasonableness of internal relocation.

 7. In her rule 24 response dated 28 April 2020, the  Respondent  indicated
    that she did not oppose the appeal, agreeing that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was not entirely coherent and considered matters in
    issue that were not which affected the credibility findings; had failed
    to give reasons for some findings and has not properly  considered  the
    Appellant's ability to obtain a CSID or travel to Baghdad or  the  IKR.
    As such, it is submitted that the decision should be set aside and  the
    appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 8. Further detailed written submissions were received  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, as well as confirmation that the Appellant agrees  with  the
    Respondent's submissions and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    should be set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a de novo hearing.  In light of the agreement between the  parties,
    I do not set out here the further detail in those written submissions.

Findings and reasons

 1. I find that the Respondent has properly and appropriately accepted that
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision contains material errors of law such
    that it is necessary  to  set  it  aside.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision is very poorly written, without proper punctuation, grammar or
    structure and is at least in parts more of a stream of consciousness in
    note form rather than what  is  reasonable  to  expect  in  a  Tribunal
    decision setting out the issues, evidence, law  and  findings  clearly.
    The decision is not coherent or internally consistent and I  find  that
    all grounds of appeal identified establish material errors of law  such
    that it is necessary to set it aside.  Given the succinct reasons given
    by the Respondent with which I  agree,  I  do  not  set  out  any  more
    detailed findings or reasons on each of the five  separate  grounds  of
    appeal beyond the general comments already made.

 2. Separately, the parties are both aware of the new country  guidance  in
    SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) CG Iraq  [2019]  UKUT
    400 which will be relevant to the fresh determination of  this  appeal.
    That new country guidance to some extent overtakes the  materiality  of
    some of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal (such as they were)  in
    relation to the old country guidance but is not  sufficient  reason  to
    find that there was no material error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, nor to preserve any findings of fact.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal (Manchester hearing centre) to be heard de  novo  by
any Judge except Judge Parker.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         21st July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

