
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09590/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given following hearing         |                              |
|                                              |On 9 April 2020               |
|On 27 January 2020                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     MK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a young man who was born in December 2002.   He  is  a
    child of mixed parentage; his mother is Iranian and his  father  is  an
    Afghan national.   He  claims  to  have  left  Iran  in  2015  arriving
    eventually in this country in December 2017.  When he left the  vehicle
    he had been hidden in in which he had come to this country he indicated
    an intention to claim asylum which he has subsequently done.

 2. The appellant's asylum claim was refused by the respondent on  24  July
    2018  but  as  is  normal  in  the  case  of  minors  he  was   granted
    discretionary leave to remain  until  June  2020  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor.

 3. The appellant appealed against the decision refusing him asylum and his
    appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge R  Sullivan,  sitting
    at Taylor House  on  18  October  2019.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 8 November 2019 Judge Sullivan dismissed the appellant's
    appeal.

 4. It was accepted throughout the hearing that the appellant had been born
    in December 2002 as he had claimed, and accordingly as at the  date  of
    the hearing he was 16 years old.  It is accepted before  this  Tribunal
    by Ms Jones, acting for and on behalf of the respondent, that the issue
    before the judge at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal was  whether
    or not at the date of hearing the appellant  was  entitled  to  asylum.
    Regrettably, it is clear from paragraphs 24 and 25 of Judge  Sullivan's
    decision that she considered what the position would be with regard  to
    a person in the appellant's position (that is, with  an  Afghan  father
    and an Iranian mother) when or if he applied for Iranian citizenship on
    becoming 18, in other words what his position would be in  the  future,
    not what it was at the date of hearing.

 5. There are a number of other issues  arising  out  of  Judge  Sullivan's
    decision, including the treatment  of  expert  evidence  regarding  the
    nationality  of  the  appellant  and  the  Iranian  acceptance  of  his
    nationality which turned  on  the  registration  of  the  marriage  and
    concerning which expert evidence had been  called,  but  regardless  of
    these issues Ms Jones accepts that the judge's failure  effectively  to
    consider the appellant's position as at the  date  of  hearing  was  so
    fundamental that this appeal must be reheard.

 6. I agree.  Whatever the position might  be  when  the  appellant  is  18
    (which will not be for some months) he was entitled to have  his  claim
    considered at the date of the hearing which it was not.

 7. It follows that there will have to be a rehearing and as his claim  was
    not considered as it ought to have been having regard to  the  date  of
    hearing, that hearing will have to be a fresh hearing with no  findings
    of fact retained.  In those circumstances it is  agreed  on  behalf  of
    both parties that the appropriate course is  to  remit  this  case  for
    rehearing by the First-tier Tribunal by any judge other  than  Judge  R
    Sullivan.

 8. I accordingly make the following decision:

Decision

I  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sullivan   as
containing a material error of law and direct that the appeal be reheard  in
the First-tier Tribunal Judge, sitting at Taylor House, by any  judge  other
than Judge R Sullivan.

The hearing will be a fresh hearing, with no findings of fact retained.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 18 March 2020




