
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  PA/09209/2019 (V)
                                                           PA/11050/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 August 2020                     |On 9 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    N R S
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    D K R
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Mr Harvey, instructed by Latta & Co. Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These two appeals raise the same question: in  Scotland,  when  does  a
    country guidance (CG) decision become authoritative, so  as  to  affect
    the decision on an appeal?

 2. The two respondents, to whom we shall refer as the claimants, are  both
    nationals of Iraq, but are not otherwise connected.  NRS made an asylum
    and human rights claim, which was refused on  6  September  2019.   His
    appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Cox on 17 December
    2019.  Judge Cox considered the existing  country  guidance,  including
    the decisions in AA [2007] EWCA Civ 944 and AAH [2018]  UKUT  212.   He
    followed  that  guidance,  despite  being  asked  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer to depart from it.  He  was  aware  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had heard an appeal with a view to giving CG on Iraq, but  the
    decision, and the guidance contained in it, had not  been  forthcoming.
    He indicated that if the decision came out shortly  after  the  hearing
    the parties should let him know.  He heard evidence and submissions and
    made findings of fact.  He applied the  existing  country  guidance  to
    those findings and allowed  the  appeal.   He  allowed  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.  His decision bears a  typed  date  20
    December 2019.  It was sent to the parties on 31 December 2019.

 3. In the case of DKR, the asylum and protection claim was refused  on  23
    October 2019.  Judge Green heard the appeal on 18 December  2019.   The
    judge noted that on that date the new CG on Iraq was awaited but it had
    not been published.  Judge Green rejected the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer's submission that he should not follow the existing CG  on  the
    basis that "things had moved on".  He heard evidence and made  findings
    of fact.  He allowed DKR's appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds.
    His decision bears a typed date 23 December 2019.  It was sent  to  the
    parties on 27 December.

 4. On 23 December 2019 the decision of this Tribunal in  SMO  [2019]  UKUT
    00400 was published, marked "CG".  As we understand  it,  there  is  no
    dispute that the guidance provided in SMO might have had a  bearing  on
    the outcome of these appeals, and might make it less likely that either
    of them would succeed on humanitarian protection grounds.  The date  of
    the publication of SMO was in each case after the date of  the  hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  In the case of NRS it was also  after  the
    date when the judge signed the decision.  In DKR, it was  on  the  same
    date as the judge signed the decision.  In both  cases  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision was sent out after SMO was published.

 5. The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to  this  Tribunal
    on the ground that each of the judges erred in law in failing  to  take
    into account the country guidance provided in SMO.  We  should  say  at
    once that there is no suggestion of any criticism of the  judges:  they
    had, so far as they knew, completed their work on the case and  had  no
    reason to know the date at which their decisions would be sent  to  the
    parties.




STATUS OF CG DECISIONS

 6. Section 107(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as
    amended) provides as follows:

         "(3) in the case of proceedings under section 82 or  by  virtue  of
         section 109, or proceedings in the Upper Tribunal  arising  out  of
         such proceedings, practice  directions  under  section  23  of  the
         Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 -

          a) may require the Tribunal to treat a specified decision of  the
             Tribunal or Upper Tribunal as authoritative in  respect  of  a
             particular matter; and

          b) may require the Upper Tribunal to treat a  specified  decision
             of the Tribunal or Upper Tribunal as authoritative in  respect
             of a particular matter."

    "Tribunal" is defined in s.81 as meaning the First-tier  Tribunal;  and
    s.107(3A) provides a further definition of the references to a decision
    of the Tribunal.

 7. There are relevant practice  directions.   They  are  to  be  found  at
    paragraph 12 of the Practice Directions of the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.  They  were
    made  by  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals  in  2010;   subsequent
    amendments have not affected this direction which, so far as  relevant,
    is as follows:

         "12.2  A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT
         bearing the letters "CG"  shall  be  treated  as  an  authoritative
         finding  on  the  country  guidance   issue   identified   in   the
         determination, based upon the evidence before the  members  of  the
         Tribunal, the AIT or the  IAT  that  determine  the  appeal.  As  a
         result, unless it has been expressly superseded or replaced by  any
         later "CG" determination, or is inconsistent with  other  authority
         that is binding on the Tribunal, such a country  guidance  case  is
         authoritative  in  any  subsequent   appeal,   so   far   as   that
         appeal:(a)relates  to  the  country  guidance  issue  in  question;
         and(b)depends upon the same or similar evidence.

         12.3  A list  of  current  CG  cases  will  be  maintained  on  the
         Tribunal's website. Any representative of  a  party  to  an  appeal
         concerning a particular country will be expected to  be  conversant
         with the current "CG" determinations relating to that country.

         12.4    Because of the principle that like cases should be  treated
         in  like  manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,   apparently
         applicable country guidance case or to show why it does  not  apply
         to the case in question is likely to be  regarded  as  grounds  for
         appeal on a point of law."

 8. There is thus no room for doubt that, insofar as SMO was applicable  to
    the appeals in this case, the failure  to  follow  the  guidance  found
    therein would be likely to result in a  decision  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law.

    THE ARGUMENTS

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Deller relied on  the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in NA (Libya) v The Secretary  of  State  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 143.  In that case the timescale was similar to  that  in  the
    present appeals.  The hearing in the First-tier Tribunal was on 20 June
    2014.  At that hearing it was known that the Upper Tribunal had heard a
    case intended to give country  guidance  on  Libya,  but  had  not  yet
    published its decision.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  signed  her
    decision on 30 June 2014.  It was sent out on 16 July 2014.  On 14 July
    2014 the Upper Tribunal published its decision in AT [2014]  UTUT  318,
    marked as country guidance.  The principal question  for  determination
    by the Court of  Appeal  was  whether  that  guidance  applied  to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  After considering  the  arguments
    and the authorities, McFarlane LJ (with whom the other members  of  the
    Court agreed) said that  it  did.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  remained
    seised of the case until it has sent out  its  decision.    A  decision
    sent out subsequent to the publication of  the  CG  is  a  "subsequent"
    appeal within the meaning of paragraph 12.2 of the Practice  Direction.
    The principle is not affected by the parties' failure to draw attention
    to a country guidance decision which comes out after the hearing.   The
    rule propounded by the Court of Appeal promoted certainty  ([28]-[33]).
    Mr Deller urged us to apply the decision in NA to the present cases.

10. Mr Harvey reminded us that NA is a decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal,
    binding in England and  Wales  but  of  only  persuasive  authority  in
    Scotland.  He invited us not to follow NA.  He submitted that,  so  far
    from  promoting  certainty,  the  decision  in  NA  was  prone  to  the
    development of uncertainty in the decision-making process in the Frist-
    tier Tribunal.  A judge cannot know when a decision will be  sent  out;
    and, in similar manner, the judge does not know when a CG decision  may
    eventually be published.  If NA is followed, then a judge not only does
    not know what arguments have to be taken into account at  the  hearing:
    even after the hearing it remains uncertain what  factors  need  to  be
    taken into account in preparing the decision.  There has to be a  point
    at which the matter is closed to further adjustment, and that ought  to
    be the date on which the judge completes the decision, reflected in the
    date of signing the decision.

11. Mr Harvey deployed his arguments with great patience and skill.  We are
    grateful to him for presenting every argument that  possibly  could  be
    presented on that side of the case.  We have come  to  the  conclusion,
    however, that his arguments should be rejected.

12. In the first place, they are based on what may be described as  a  very
    shaky assertion of fact.  The basis of them is that  certainty  can  be
    derived from the date at the end of a judge's decision.  That, however,
    is not right.  First, a judge is under no obligation to date a decision
    at all.  Secondly, a judge is under no obligation to  date  a  decision
    accurately; and no enquiry is ever made as to whether the date that may
    appear at the end of a decision is in truth the actual date upon  which
    the judge made any final amendments.  It may reflect software  printing
    "today's date" on a decision in fact finalised a previous day;  or  the
    date may be unaltered despite the fact that the judge  returns  to  the
    decision the following  day  and  makes  some  amendment  to  it.   The
    apparent presence of a signature next to the date is,  these  days,  no
    assurance that the date and the signature  were  contemporaneous.   The
    signature may  itself  have  been  produced  without  the  judge's  pen
    touching the paper on which the determination  has  been  printed.   Mr
    Harvey's proposal that the date on which the determination is finalised
    should be taken as the date for the purposes of the applicability of CG
    therefore suffers from the difficulty that  such  a  date  may  not  be
    apparent from the decision or, if apparent, may be incorrect.

13. Secondly, even if that date were ascertainable, it would be  liable  to
    produce exactly the same  difficulties  as  the  date  of  promulgation
    identified as the correct  one  in  NA.   That  that  is  the  case  is
    demonstrated by the course of events in the present appeals.   Both  of
    the judges were aware that the country guidance might well be imminent.
     Both of them wrote their decisions in ignorance  of  the  guidance  in
    SMO.  One of them finished his decision in such a way that  it  bore  a
    date before SMO was published; the other  on  the  date  that  SMO  was
    published.  One can readily  envisage  a  further  case  in  which  the
    judgment bore the following day's date.  It is not immediately easy  to
    see why, if the decisions are all sent out at the same  time,  the  law
    applying to them should be affected by the speed  at  which  the  judge
    wrote the decision.

14. Thirdly, Mr Harvey's proposal glosses over what we regard as  the  most
    important factor, which is that identified by the Court  of  Appeal  in
    NA.  That is that the First-tier Tribunal must be regarded as seised of
    the appeal until the decision  is  sent  out.   That  is  to  say  that
    whatever the judge may have done in the way of preparing and/or signing
    a decision, it is not final until it is sent out.  Before  it  is  sent
    out, the judge is at liberty to make any alteration  in  the  decision.
    After it is sent out, the judge does not have that power.  If Mr Harvey
    is right, a judge who noted that the CG had come out, and  amended  his
    decision to take account of  it,  and  re-dated  it,  would  produce  a
    decision governed by different principles  from  the  decision  of  his
    colleague, who had made no  amendment,  (despite  perhaps  having  also
    noting the appearance of a country guidance)  and  whose  decision  was
    sent out on the same day;

    CONCLUSIONS

15. As it appears to us, there are at least three reasons why the date  for
    the ascertainment of whether a CG is applicable to a decision should be
    regarded as the date on which the decision is sent out.

16. First, the date on  which  a  decision  is  sent  out  is  readily  and
    objectively ascertainable.  It does  not  depend  on  the  practice  of
    signing  and  dating  which  is  neither  obligatory  nor   verifiable.
    Secondly, the decision is not final until it  is  sent  out.   At  that
    point the First-tier Tribunal is no longer able to make any changes  to
    it.  It is (so far as that stage of  the  process  of  determining  the
    appeal is concerned) final.  It leaves, so to speak, the custody of the
    First-tier Tribunal and enters that of  the  parties,  whose  time  for
    challenging it runs from then (not, of course, from any earlier date at
    which the determination was signed).

17. Thirdly, although of course we give every respect to the difference  in
    legal cultures between Scotland on the one hand and England  and  Wales
    on the other, Mr Harvey's proposal would draw a distinction between the
    law of England and Wales and that of Scotland for no good reason.   The
    Tribunal is a United Kingdom Tribunal, centrally administered and using
    identical processes for the promulgation of its  decisions.   If  there
    had been a good reason for preferring Mr Harvey's argument to  that  of
    the Court of Appeal in NA it might have been proper to allow the law of
    Scotland to depart from that of England and Wales.   But  in  a  matter
    purely of adjectival law there can be no perceptible justification  for
    the differentiation proposed.

    DECISION

18. As we have indicated, there is no realistic doubt that the guidance  in
    SMO might affect the  outcome  of  the  present  appeals.   Indeed,  Mr
    Harvey's vigorous attempt to show that SMO  does  not  apply  to  these
    appeals supports that view.  Each of these decisions was sent out after
    SMO became applicable.  Each of them shows an error of  law.   In  each
    case we think it is appropriate to set the decision aside.

19. The grounds of appeal in DKR are considerably longer than those in NRS,
    but in neither case is there any challenge that does not depend on  the
    point which we have considered.  There is no challenge by either  party
    to the judge's findings of primary fact.   In  these  circumstances  we
    consider it appropriate  to  remit  these  appeals  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be redetermined in each case by the judge  whose  decision
    has been under appeal.  That judge is the most  appropriate  person  to
    consider what (if any) further evidence is necessary,  and  to  receive
    submissions, in order to apply the  current  country  guidance  to  the
    factual situation already identified by the evidence in the findings he
    made.

20. In each case, therefore, the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  We  remit  NRS's
    appeal to Judge Cox and DKR's appeal to Judge Green, in each  case  for
    redetermination in the light of current CG after hearing  such  further
    evidence and submissions as each of them may consider appropriate.




                                                           C. M. G. Ockelton


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 23 October 2019

