
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09482/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the              8th              December              2017
               On the 18th December2017

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                  MR H. S.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  Khan  promulgated  on  the  30th  January  2017.   The
      Appellant is a citizen of Iran who claims that  he  is  a  homosexual.
      Within his decision Judge Khan did not accept the Appellant's  account
      of having been caught having sex with Massoud by Massoud's father  and
      sister  and  further  found  there  was  no  other  evidence  of   the
      Appellant's homosexual other than 4 photographs, which  he  found  had
      been taken by the Appellant to support his claim for homosexuality.

   2. The Appellant seeks to appeal against that decision  for  the  reasons
      set out within the Grounds of Appeal.  That is a matter of record  and
      is therefore not repeated in its entirety here but in summary,  it  is
      argued that the Judge's  findings  were  insufficient  and  failed  to
      express  any  sustainable  reasoning  except  for  finding  that   the
      Appellant was "vague and evasive" and the Judge had ignore evidence in
      his witness statement about the reasons why he  had  intercourse  with
      his partner downstairs in the living room, rather  than  upstairs  and
      argues that the Judge was wrong to find that  the  Appellant  had  not
      raised that contention at any stage.  It was said that the  Judge  had
      not provided sustainable reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account
      and that it is necessary for Judges to  explain  in  clear  and  brief
      terms their reasons so that the parties can understand why  they  have
      won or lost and that a bare statement a witness was not believed  does
      not satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

   3. Permission to appeal in this case has been granted by  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Finch who found that there were arguable errors of  law  in  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and reasons.

   4. At the start of the appeal although Mrs Aboni  initially  relied  upon
      the Rule 24 Reply, having heard submissions made by Mr Hussain  as  to
      the lack of explanation provided by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  as
      to his reasons for finding  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  not
      consistent regarding his account of having sex in the living room, the
      lack of sufficient reasons regarding the Judge's finding the Appellant
      was extremely vague and evasive in regards to the  claimed  events  in
      Iran and the submission that he had  failed  to  give  sufficient  and
      adequate reasons for rejecting  the  Appellant's  account,  Mrs  Aboni
      conceded that pragmatically she had to accept that there was a lack of
      adequate reasoning here to substantiate the Judge's findings and  that
      there was a material error regarding the reasons given  for  rejecting
      the Appellant's account. She conceded that the decision of Judge  Khan
      should be set aside and the decision remitted back to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for rehearing.

   5. In light of that concession, I do accept and find that the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan does contain a material error  of  law,
      in that the Judge's reasons for finding that the  Appellant's  account
      was 'extremely vague and evasive' regarding the events claimed to have
      happened in Iraq have not been adequately explained, nor  his  reasons
      for finding that the Appellant's account of  having  had  sex  in  the
      living room was not only not credible but also not consistent have not
      been explained. No details of such inconsistency have been  explained.
      The fact that it was said that they had put on a sex video and decided
      to have sex despite them having little time, was  something  that  the
      Judge took against the Appellant, without  adequately  explaining  the
      reasons why he did not consider that to be credible. Additionally, the
      Appellant had provided an explanation as to why they had  sex  in  the
      living room, rather than in Massoud's sister's room, on the basis that
      the computer was locked in his sister's room.  Although the  Judge  at
      [21] found that the answer when asked why it was important for him  to
      watch gay sex films while they were having sex and he said  that  they
      both liked watching these films was vague and evasive, the  Judge  had
      not adequately explained why that answer was  vague  or  evasive.   It
      seems perfectly plausible that they may  wish  to  watch  pornographic
      movies when having sex, and the reasons for the  Judge's  findings  in
      that regard have not been adequately explained.  I therefore do  find,
      especially in light of the concession made  by  Mrs  Aboni  in  having
      fully considered the Judgment, that the decision of  Judge  Khan  does
      contain material errors of law and I set aside that  decision  in  its
      entirety.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan does contain material  errors
of law and is set aside in its entirety;

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  before
any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M.  A.
Khan;

I do make an anonymity order in this case, such order having  been  made  by
the First-tier Tribunal. In such circumstances, the  Appellant  is  entitled
to anonymity.  No report or other publication of these  proceedings  or  any
part or parts of them shall name or  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
Appellant or any member of his family.  This direction applies both  to  the
Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction  can
lead to contempt of court proceedings;

The case is to be reheard at Bradford, if possible, for the  convenience  of
the Appellant.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 8th December 2017


