
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/09540/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 May 2019                                |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R K Rai, counsel,
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Watson, promulgated on 19 June 2018. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 29 October 2018.

Anonymity

 2. A direction was made previously and is renewed below.

Background

 3. The appellant was granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 6 June 2000 on the basis of  his  marriage.  On  26  January
    2015, the appellant was convicted of three counts of sexual touching  a
    woman aged 16 or over without consent and one count of battery and  was
    sentenced to 42 weeks' imprisonment. On 7 August 2015, the Secretary of
    State wrote to the appellant to inform him that deportation action  was
    considered but not proceeded with as he did not meet the  criteria  for
    deportation. The same letter warned  the  appellant  about  his  future
    conduct. The appellant was subsequently convicted of  two  breaches  of
    the Sexual Offences Act 2003 for moving address without notification to
    the police and for failing to notify the police  that  he  intended  to
    travel abroad for which he received a sentence of 8 weeks' imprisonment
    on 29 June 2016. A deportation order was signed on 30  September  2016,
    following which the appellant made an asylum  claim.  On  11  September
    2017 a decision was made to refuse  his  protection  and  human  rights
    claim and deport him on the basis that his deportation was conducive to
    the public good. It is this decision  which  is  the  subject  of  this
    appeal.

 4. In the decision letter dated 11 September 2017, the Secretary of  State
    considered the  appellant's  claim  to  fear  his  brothers-in-law  but
    concluded that acts complained of did not amount to  persecution,  that
    there was a sufficiency of protection in Pakistan  and  that  he  could
    reasonably be expected to  internally  relocate  to  avoid  his  wife's
    relatives. The respondent also considered  the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim which concerned his wife and children however, it was  considered
    that his wife and children lived abroad and thus there  was  no  family
    life. As for private life, it was considered that there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to the  appellant's  reintegration  in  Pakistan,
    where he had lived since the age of 21. Lastly, it was considered  that
    the appellant's offending would have caused serious harm to the victims
    and that his deportation did not breach  his  rights  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the  appeal  on  protection  grounds,
    humanitarian protection grounds and under Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argued,  in  view  of  the  respondent's  earlier
    decision that the offences did not merit deportation,  that  there  had
    been insufficient reasons given by the Tribunal for concluding that the
    appellant's offences were serious.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that there  was  arguably
    little assessment or reasoning in the judge's decision  as  to  whether
    and why the appellant's offences caused serious harm.

 8. This appeal came before The Honourable Mrs  Justice  Farbey  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kebede on 15 January 2019. The  appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal set aside in so far
    as it related to Article 8 grounds.

 9. The appeal was set down for  a  rehearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    Article 8 grounds alone. Directions were made  for  the  respondent  to
    send, within 8 weeks, further and better particulars of the appellant's
    criminal offences.  A small bundle of unindexed material  was  received
    in advance of the hearing.

10. On 7 May 2019, Principal Resident Judge O'Connor transferred the appeal
    to be heard by a differently constituted Tribunal.

The hearing

11. The appeal proceeded by way of submissions alone. Mr Rai relied on  the
    appellant's bundle which was submitted on 15 January 2019 and his brief
    skeleton argument. He submitted that the appellant was  not  a  foreign
    criminal in that he had not been convicted  of  an  offence  which  had
    caused serious harm and it was not in the  public  interest  to  deport
    him. He further submitted there was no definition of  serious  harm  in
    the statute or in the Immigration Rules. Mr Rai placed emphasis on  the
    respondent's decision not to deport  the  appellant  after  the  sexual
    offences, the absence of any evidence of serious harm being  caused  to
    the victims, that the conviction was at the lower end of the sentencing
    scale and that it was unclear which  conviction  was  seen  as  causing
    serious harm. He argued that  it  was  open  to  me  to  reach  my  own
    conclusion as to what amounts to serious  harm,  SC  (Zimbabwe)  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 929 applied. Lastly, he referred me  to  the  remarks  of  the
    previous panel who described  the  Secretary  of  State  as  having  an
    "uphill task" in resisting the appeal.

12. Mr Tufan accepted that only one of the witness statements from the four
    victims made any reference to lasting effects of the sexual assault. He
    urged me to apportion weight to the respondent's guidance  as  to  what
    amounts to serious harm, albeit without  referring  to  any  particular
    aspect of it. He argued that it was obvious that the  appellant  was  a
    persistent offender, albeit he conceded this was an argument which  had
    not been made previously.

13. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Decision on error of law

14. The appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain in the  year  2000
    and the basis of the decision to deport him was that his offending  had
    caused serious harm. This is the sole issue before  me.  No  indication
    was given in the decision letter as to which of his offences had caused
    this harm. Nor were any facts provided  to  justify  the  Secretary  of
    State's conclusion. The decision letter, in using the term "would have"
    in relation to harm caused, raised an assumption that  the  appellant's
    offences caused serious harm. It was not  contended,  in  the  decision
    letter, that the appellant was a persistent offender, however Mr  Tufan
    introduced this issue during his submissions.

15. In response to directions, the  respondent  recently  provided  witness
    statements from appellant's four victims. As Mr  Tufan  conceded,  just
    one of the four victims raised concerns about the harm  caused  by  the
    sexual assault upon them.

16. The relevant witness statement is dated 26 January 2015 and was written
    in connection with the Victim Personal Statement Scheme. The  statement
    addresses an assault which took place two days earlier, on  24  January
    2015, regarding which the victim had already provided a statement which
    set out the facts. Those facts, as summarised in a summary of  the  key
    evidence provided by the respondent are as follows:

         "(the victim) was walking  her  dog...A  male  approached  her  who
         engaged her in conversation and when she walked away from (him)  he
         grabbed her bottom and pulled himself  close  to  her.  The  victim
         confronted him and made off."

17. In her statement of 26 January  2015,  the  victim  explained  how  the
    sexual  assault  affected  her.  She  stated  that  she  felt   "really
    apprehensive" about going out  and  had  only  been  going  out  during
    daylight, although the following day she was  planning  to  go  out  in
    darkness. The victim further stated that she plans to  avoid  going  to
    the area where the assault happened as she did not want to be  reminded
    of what happened. In addition, on days when she  had  to  go  out  very
    early in the day, she would ask her daughter to come and walk the  dog.
    Finally, the witness adds that the assault has had a  "bad  effect"  on
    her daughter and other relatives, whom she describes as very protective
    of her.

18. There was no challenge to the evidence setting out the  impact  on  the
    victim. I have therefore placed considerable weight  on  that  evidence
    and have no hesitation in accepting that the victim and her family were
    affected as claimed at the time the statement was written.

19. The respondent was required to make  a  deportation  order  (s32(5)  UK
    Borders Act 2007) if he considered that the  appellant  was  a  foreign
    criminal as defined in section 117D of the 2002 Act and, which reads as
    follows;

         117D (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

                 (a)   who is not a British citizen,

                 (b)   who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                 offence, and

                 (c)   who-

                    (i)    has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                    at least 12 months,

                    (ii)   has been convicted of an offence that has  caused
                    serious harm, or

                    (iii)  is a persistent offender.



20. In SC (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 929, McCombe LJ said at [19]

         "....It seems to me quite clear that once the matter comes before a
         tribunal or court, what has to  be  applied  is  s.117D(c)  of  the
         Act....the view of the Secretary of State or indeed of a  judge  in
         sentencing remarks may be of assistance to a Tribunal or  court  in
         deciding whether an offence has caused serious harm or  whether  an
         offender is a persistent offender,  but  I  do  not  see  that  the
         statutory words compel any particular weight to  be  given  to  the
         Secretary of State's view on either in the assessment..."

21. The respondent's most recent guidance on  criminality  in  relation  to
    Article 8, published on 31 January 2019,  sets  out  the  Secretary  of
    State's view. The following extracts are relevant to this appeal:

         "An offence that has caused 'serious harm' means  an  offence  that
         has caused serious physical or psychological harm to  a  victim  or
         victims, or that has  contributed  to  a  widespread  problem  that
         causes serious harm to a community or to society in general."

         "Where a person has been convicted of one or more violent, drugs or
         sex  offences,  they  will  usually  be  considered  to  have  been
         convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm."

22. Having considered all the evidence before me, including  the  views  of
    the Secretary of State as expressed in the  publicly  available  policy
    guidance  as  well  as  the  submissions  made,  I  conclude  that  the
    appellant's offending has not caused serious  harm  for  the  following
    reasons.

23. Firstly, considering the statement of the only  victim  to  provide  an
    account of the impact of the sexual assault upon her and her family,  I
    accept that it caused her to be  apprehensive  and  caused  her  family
    concern. While I find that the victim and her family were caused  harm,
    particularly in the two or three days immediately after the assault,  I
    do not accept that there  is  any  evidence  that  the  offence  caused
    serious psychological harm. Nor is there any evidence of long-term harm
    caused, serious or otherwise, by the offence. Indeed, Mr Tufan did  not
    seek to persuade me otherwise.

24. Secondly, it is relevant that the respondent considered  deporting  the
    appellant after he was convicted of the four counts of assault but,  as
    of 7 August 2015, decided not to because "he did not meet the  criteria
    for deportation." It was open to the respondent to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's assault convictions amounted to serious harm or that he was
    a persistent offender at that stage, however he declined to reach  that
    conclusion after giving some thought to the matter.

25. Thirdly, deportation action was triggered by the appellant's failure to
    notify the authorities of his address and travel plans, as required  by
    section 91(10(a) and 2 of the Sexual Offences  Act  2003,  however  the
    respondent has  never  explained  how  this  second  conviction  caused
    serious harm.

26. Fourthly, the appellant's conviction for the assaults was  towards  the
    lower end of the sentencing scale, which according  to  the  Sentencing
    Council Guidelines ranges from a community order to 7 years' custody.

27. Lastly, on this point,  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant has contributed to a widespread problem which causes harm  to
    society in general.

28. Mr Tufan contended that the appellant was a persistent offender, albeit
    those submissions were undeveloped.

29. To summarise, the appellant has two convictions. The first relates to a
    series of assaults he carried out in January 2015 and the second to the
    notification offences which took place in June 2016.

30. According to the respondent's guidance, "Persistent offender'  means  a
    repeat offender who shows a pattern of offending over a period of time.
    This can mean  a  series  of  offences  committed  in  a  fairly  short
    timeframe, or which escalate  in  seriousness  over  time,  or  a  long
    history of minor offences."

31. The term persistent offender was defined in  Chege  ("is  a  persistent
    offender") [2016] UKUT 00187 (IAC), with the conclusions being endorsed
    by the Court of Appeal in SC (Zimbabwe). Headnote 3 of Chege states  as
    follows:

         "3.  A "persistent offender" is someone who keeps on  breaking  the
         law. That does not mean, however, that he has to keep on  offending
         until the date of the relevant decision or that the  continuity  of
         the offending cannot be broken. A "persistent offender"  is  not  a
         permanent status that can never be lost once it is acquired, but an
         individual can be regarded  as  a  "persistent  offender"  for  the
         purpose of the Rules and the 2002 Act even though he may  not  have
         offended  for  some  time.  The  question  whether  he  fits   that
         description will depend on the overall picture and pattern  of  his
         offending over his entire offending history up to that  date.  Each
         case will turn on its own facts."

32. A further passage from Chege which is relevant to the appellant's  case
    can be found at [54] of the decision and reasons:

         "Plainly, a persistent offender is not simply someone  who  offends
         more  than  once.  There  has  to  be  repeat  offending  but  that
         repetition,  in  and  of  itself,  will  not  be  enough  to   show
         persistence. There has to be a history of repeated criminal conduct
         carried out over a sufficiently long period to  indicate  that  the
         person concerned is someone who  keeps  on  re-offending.  However,
         determining whether the offending  is  persistent  is  not  just  a
         mathematical exercise. How long a period and how many offences will
         be enough will depend very much on the facts of the particular case
         and the nature and circumstances of  the  offending.  The  criminal
         offences need not be the same, or even of  the  same  character  as
         each other. Persistence may be shown by  the  fact  that  a  person
         keeps committing the same type of offence, but it  may  equally  be
         shown by the fact that he has committed a wide variety of different
         offences over a period of time."

33. Applying Chege to the facts of the appellant's case,  in  my  view,  he
    cannot be considered to be a persistent offender. Indeed, that was  the
    view of the Secretary of State in 2015 when deportation was  considered
    and rejected and in 2016 when a deportation action commenced.

34. The appellant's two convictions in 2015 and 2016 for different,  albeit
    related,  offences,  do  not  amount  to  criminal  offending  over   a
    sufficiently long period to indicate that he is someone  who  keeps  on
    offending, when viewed against the backdrop of  his  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom since 1999 and the absence of any evidence of  offending
    prior to his arrival, aged 20, in the United Kingdom.

35. In view of my foregoing findings, the appellant cannot be regarded as a
    foreign criminal and his removal would  amount  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with his Article 8 rights.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Directions Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal of court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of any fee which has been paid or may be  payable  for  the  following
reason.  The  respondent  was  unable  to  establish  that  the  appellant's
offending caused serious harm or that he is a persistent offender.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

