
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09051/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13th November 2018                 |On 27th November 2018                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                   Mr z h
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee of Counsel instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of  Afghanistan  whose  appeal  to  require
    international protection was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Page in a decision promulgated on 12th September 2018.

 2. The judge  did  not  find  the  Appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness
    (paragraph 12).  He noted that on his own account the Taliban were only
    interested in him in his local area so there was no reason why  he  had
    to leave the country.  The judge said he could have relocated to Kabul.
     The judge recorded the Upper Tribunal decision in AS (Safety of Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) and that in general it would not
    be unreasonable or unduly harsh for the Appellant  as  a  single  adult
    male "in  good  health"  to  relocate  to  Kabul  even  if  he  had  no
    connections there.  The judge noted (paragraph 13) that he was a  young
    man with "no health problems" who could relocate there.

 3. The judge went on to say that even if the  Appellant's  claim  was  the
    truth he could be returned to Kabul safely.  The judge  said  that  the
    Appellant's claim did not disclose an arguable case to asylum in  light
    of the Upper Tribunal's decision in AS.  He  went  on  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

 4. Grounds of application were made. It was said that  the  Appellant  was
    not asked as to why he did not relocate or claim asylum  en  route  and
    the finding that he should have moved  to  Kabul  to  was  procedurally
    improper.  The CG on relocation of children  to  Kabul  was  that  they
    should generally not be expected to do so if  they  did  not  have  any
    family support.  The judge had gone on to find  that  children  who  do
    join the Taliban and were trained by them were generally not forced  to
    do this.  This evidence indicated that  there  was  a  real  risk  that
    children were forcibly recruited by the Taliban.  The judge was obliged
    to consider the  Appellant's  evidence  including  the  profession  and
    abduction of his father in considering the credibility issue but he did
    not do so.

 5. AS did not say that all male adults could be safely relocated to Kabul.
    This Appellant had a different factual matrix to what was said in AS.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes
    who said that the judge had made a brief decision and it was  far  from
    clear why the claim that he faced forced conscription into the  Taliban
    was incredible.  Since the judge had found that the general recruitment
    of children was a voluntary process it stood  to  reason  that  he  was
    accepting that sometimes it was  not.   There  was  also  an  issue  of
    whether the judge had properly considered  the  Appellant's  individual
    circumstances and that too could be argued.  Permission to  appeal  was
    therefore granted in a decision dated 3rd October 2018.

 7. The Home Office responded by way of a Rule 24 notice in a letter  dated
    24th October 2018 noting that the judge had given a number  of  reasons
    for rejecting the credibility of the Appellant and there could not have
    been a material error in light of the judge's clear  self-direction  at
    paragraph 16 that he could be returned to Kabul safely if his claim was
    the truth.

 8. Thus, the matter came before me on the above date.

 9. Mr Mukherjee of Counsel appeared for the Appellant and he  pointed  out
    to me what was said at  pages  85  to  93  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    relating to the Appellant having chronic hepatitis.  As such the  judge
    was wrong to say that  the  Appellant  was  in  good  health.   It  was
    accepted  in  AS  that  the  healthcare  provisions   were   not   very
    satisfactory.  This was  an  Appellant  who  had  been  diagnosed  with
    hepatitis which was a severe condition and the judge had made  a  fatal
    error in not dealing with this in assessing that he was in good health.
     I was asked to set aside the decision and  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

10. For the Home Office Ms Everett acknowledged that the judge had  made  a
    brief decision and there was a possible error of  law.   The  Appellant
    had mentioned his  hepatitis  in  his  statement  at  page  10  of  the
    Appellant's bundle noting that he would not get the required  treatment
    for his condition if returned  to  Afghanistan.   Nevertheless,  I  was
    asked to find there was no material  error  in  law  and  the  decision
    should stand.

Conclusions

11. It seems to me that there  is  merit  in  the  attack  on  the  judge's
    findings on credibility.  As the grounds say the judge did not  explain
    why the Appellant, as a child, could be expected to have  relocated  to
    Kabul in the first place.   Furthermore,  whilst  concluding  that  the
    Appellant was  not  asked  to  join  the  Taliban  the  judge  arguably
    contradicted himself when saying that this  did  happen  from  time  to
    time.  In addition, there was no finding about  whether  the  Appellant
    was in contact with his family or the claim that his  father  had  been
    abducted.

12. The more worrying point in the decision is that the judge proceeded  on
    the basis that the Appellant was in good  health.   The  judge  made  a
    point of emphasising this in paragraph 13.   The  judge  described  the
    Appellant as a single adult male "in  good  health".   The  judge  went
    further than that describing  him  as  a  young  man  "with  no  health
    problems".  This went directly against the evidence  presented  to  the
    judge in terms of the Appellant's own witness statement and  backed  up
    by the medical evidence.  It goes  to  the  heart  of  whether  or  not
    relocation to Kabul is appropriate.   Not    to  take  account  of  the
    medical evidence was a material error in law and it seems  to  me  that
    the decision is therefore unsafe.

13. In these circumstances I have concluded that the judgment must  be  set
    aside.  I was asked to remit the case and it seems to me that  this  is
    appropriate because further fact-finding is necessary  and  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Page.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  In the meantime, the anonymity order  will
    be continued.









Notice of Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

16. I set aside the decision.

17. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed     JG Macdonald                               Date    20th  November
2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
