
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09286/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th October 2020                 |On 19th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     DM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. By a decision dated 12 March 2020 the Upper Tribunal  set  aside,  by
       agreement, a determination of the First-tier Tribunal which dismissed
       the appellant's appeal.
    2. Preserved findings are those relating to the appellants identity as a
       Kurdish citizen of Iraq  born  on  12  March  1993,  his  immigration
       history, and home area of Sulaymaniyah in the IKR.




Background

    3. The core of the appellant's claim is that  he  began  a  relationship
       with his paternal cousin [I] in 2014. They intended to marry. One  of
       his uncles, [K], one of [I's] sisters and two  of  his  friends  were
       aware of the relationship and raised no objection on the  basis  they
       intended to marry.
    4. The appellant told his family about  the  relationship  with  [I]  in
       order that he could ask [I's] family for her hand in marriage.
    5. When asked [I's] father did not approve the relationship or give  his
       consent.  The appellant stated he asked twice for [I's] hand but  was
       refused on both occasions. The  appellant  stated  this  was  because
       [I's] father and family members are involved with the KDP whereas his
       father is not political. A feud ensued in which his father sided with
       [I's] father and disowned the appellant.
    6. On 20 July 2018 [I] married another person. The appellant  stated  in
       his evidence this was when his problem began as [I's] sister told him
       it has been discovered that [I] was not a virgin. The  appellant  was
       told that [I] had made a full disclosure of their  relationship.  The
       appellant was told that [I] had been killed by her own  father  as  a
       result of bringing dishonour to the family, who was  now  looking  to
       kill him as he was the cause of the dishonour.
    7. The appellant was sent to a village by his maternal  uncle  where  he
       remained until arrangements were made for  him  to  leave  Iraq.  The
       appellant stated his mother forced the uncle to assist him. The uncle
       paid for the journey to the UK. The appellant flew from  Sulaymaniyah
       airport in August 2018 to Turkey. Whilst there the appellant received
       a telephone call from [I's] sister advising him the family were aware
       of his location, as a result of which he travelled  to  Addis  Ababa,
       Luanda, Paris and then to the UK.
    8. The appellant claims that if he is returned to Iraq he will be killed
       by [I's] family or his own father.
    9. The respondent's HO Minute Sheet dated 20 November 2018  records  the
       appellant arriving from Paris and presenting a Bulgarian passport  in
       his identity with a  substituted  bio-date  page.  A  search  of  his
       luggage discovered papers indicating he had claimed asylum in  Turkey
       in August 2018. The salient details arising from the  Port  Screening
       interview are said to be:

         . The appellant had no medical issues.


         . The appellant was a former shop keeper, was unmarried,  and  had
           no children.


         .  The appellant claimed to have left Iraq on  18/08/18,  been  in
           Turkey until 31/10/18, then flown to Addis Ababa, then travelled
           to Luanda, Angola. The appellant then travelled  to  Paris  five
           days before arriving in the UK but claimed not to have known  he
           was in France and  stating  he  had  not  claimed  asylum  there
           because he was controlled by an agent.


         . He had given his own IRQ passport to  an  agent  in  Turkey  and
           travelled on the forged BGR passport since then. Claimed not  to
           have any details of his  facilitators  but  had  been  sent  his
           multiple ticket details by  WhatsApp  messages  to  his  Turkish
           mobile phone.


         . He was claiming asylum on the  basis  that  he  had  been  in  a
           relationship with his cousin. When her parents and  his  parents
           had found out in July, a family feud had developed, and  he  had
           been told by a maternal uncle to leave and not come back as they
           would kill him.

   10. The appellant has provided evidence in support  of  his  claim  which
       includes a number of photographs as well as his asylum interview  and
       response to lengthy cross examination undertaken by Mr Diwnycz.
   11. The appellant claimed that the woman appearing with him in one of the
       photographs (No.9) is the cousin with whom he  had  the  relationship
       who is  also  the  same  person  appearing  in  a  wedding  dress  in
       photographs [11, 12, 13, and 15] standing with a person dressed in  a
       suit who is not the appellant, who it  is  claimed  is  the  man  [I]
       married.
   12. Whilst it is not disputed the person dressed as the groom is not  the
       appellant, a cornerstone of his claim  is  that  the  female  in  the
       wedding dress is his cousin, [I], who was subsequently killed when it
       was discovered she was not a virgin  and  confessed  to  an  intimate
       relationship with the appellant.
   13. It is not the role of a judge to act as a facial  recognition  expert
       and despite these photographs having been in the  possession  of  the
       Secretary of State for some time, as they were the  same  photographs
       used before the First-tier Tribunal, there is no  indication  of  any
       report having been commissioned by the respondent to confirm  whether
       the person in the photograph of the woman in a wedding dress  is  the
       same person in the photograph the appellant claimed  is  his  cousin.
       There appear to be similarities in their facial  structures  although
       the fact one appears in full wedding day make up  and  the  other  in
       less, is also an issue.
   14. Although Mr Diwncyz undertook  a  lengthy  cross-examination  of  the
       appellant regarding the dates the photographs were taken and how they
       had been obtained, and in particular in relation to the nature of the
       vehicle the appellant claimed he had  been  travelling  in  with  the
       woman concern  with  particular  reference  to  photographs  [7]which
       appeared to be a right-hand drive vehicle whereas in Iraq they  drive
       on the left, he was unable to produce anything through  his  line  of
       questioning sufficient to undermine the appellant's claim in relation
       to the photographs. In particular, although photograph [7]  could  be
       interpreted as Mr Diwnycz  suggested  the  difficulty  is  that  some
       photographs taken on mobile telephones reverse the image which may be
       an explanation for why the picture appears as it did.
   15. For the links in the chain of causation in this appeal to be  met  it
       requires  a  finding  that  not  only  was  the  appellant   in   the
       relationship with his cousin as claimed, but for the claims  that  it
       was discovered [I] was not a virgin on her wedding night which led to
       her being confronted, the eventual  confession  of  her  relationship
       with the appellant, the claimed killing of [I] as a result of honour,
       giving rise to the direct threat to the appellant, to be made out.
   16. The First-tier Tribunal's determination stands as  a  record  of  the
       evidence given even though the eventual findings have been set aside.
       In that it was written:

           "50.   It is submitted that the Appellant has been unclear about
                how it was discovered that I was no longer  a  virgin.   The
                Appellant was asked about this  in  cross  examination.  The
                Appellant was clear that he was not present  when  this  was
                discovered. It appears  from  the  evidence  that  this  was
                discovered by I's new husband on  their  wedding  night.  Ms
                Bashow made  clear  submissions  on  this  point.  She  made
                reference to custom and culture in this regard, referring to
                the expectation of blood after consummation of the  marriage
                on the  wedding  night.   Custom  often  requiring  the  bed
                clothing  to  be  produced  as  evidence.   The   event   is
                significant in such culture.  Mr Mullarkey made reference to
                the fact that  I's  new  husband  himself  would  have  been
                experienced and so questioned how he himself would have been
                aware of the fact that I was not  a  virgin.  As  Ms  Bashow
                notes however,  given  the  significance  of  this,  is  not
                implausible that  I's  husband  would  have  known  what  to
                expect. The Appellant could not have  been  clearer  in  his
                evidence  that  he  was  not  there  and  could  only   make
                presumption about the discovery. I do  not  find  that  this
                undermines the Appellant's credibility."

   17. There was nothing before the Upper Tribunal to cast  doubt  upon  the
       submissions made to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the
       cultural aspects of the practice on the  morning  after  the  wedding
       night referred to before First-tier Tribunal Judge Turner. There  has
       been ample opportunity to produce rebuttal  evidence,  but  none  was
       forthcoming.
   18. It has not been shown to  be  implausible  that  in  accordance  with
       tradition if blood is absent on the sheets after  the  wedding  night
       suspicion will have been raised, leading to questions being asked  of
       [I].
   19. The appellant's evidence that the photographs show him  with  [I]  in
       proximity to each other that are supportive of the  contention  of  a
       romantic involvement between them, to the lower  standard  applicable
       in an asylum appeal, has not been undermined by Mr Diwnycz.
   20. The photograph produced by the appellant of persons he claims  to  be
       adult male  family  members,  who  he  states  are  of  a  particular
       political leaning, is supported by the fact they appear to be holding
       up a finger with black ink on the  end  ordinarily  indicative  of  a
       person who has voted. In this appeal it was stated  this  related  to
       the vote relating to Kurdish independence which is plausible  in  the
       circumstances.
   21. The appellant also claimed in his evidence that [I's]  sister,  named
       Barez O. Maroof, had warned him that the family  were  aware  of  his
       whereabouts in Turkey. Evidence of this warning was provided  in  the
       respondent's bundle. A message sent on 14  October  2018  is  clearly
       noted as being from Barez O. Maroof with there being a  further  note
       of a missed call from 'Barez'. Nothing was raised in relation to this
       during the course of cross-examination nor has been any evidence been
       adduced to undermine the appellant's claim in relation to this aspect
       of the evidence which further corroborates the appellant's account.
   22. Having assessed the evidence as a whole with the required  degree  of
       anxious scrutiny I find, to  the  lower  standard  applicable  in  an
       asylum appeal, that the appellant has established that his  claim  to
       have been involved in  a  sexual  relationship  with  [I],  that  the
       relationship was discovered as a result of [I] confessing  after  her
       wedding night, resulting in [I]  being  killed  for  offended  family
       honour, and the appellant being targeted as result  of  his  role  in
       tarnishing the honour of the family, is made out.
   23. The appellant claimed that he would  not  have  the  support  of  his
       father on return which was a claim not subject to challenge by way of
       detail  cross-examination  from  Mr  Diwncyz.  There  is  nothing  to
       undermine the appellant's claim in this respect.
   24. It was not suggested the appellant could return to Baghdad  and  live
       there safely in light of the findings made the Upper Tribunal in SMO,
       KSP & IM [2019] UKUT 400.
   25. In relation to return to his home area, or elsewhere in the IKR,  the
       appellant faces a real risk at the hands of his relatives as a result
       of the above findings.  Mr  Brown  relied  upon  country  information
       concerning the risk faced by a male who is the subject of  an  honour
       killing in Iraq. It was not made out the  appellant  would  have  the
       protection of the authorities and the only way he could  avoid  being
       the subject of an honour killing would be to go into hiding  or  flee
       the country,  as  he  did.  The  report  by  the  Danish  Immigration
       Services, Fact Finding Mission to Erbil, Honour crimes against men in
       Kurdistan region of Iraq and the availability of protection;  clearly
       supports the appellant's contention that  even  if  he  was  able  to
       return to the IKR he will face a real risk as the family seeking  him
       would be likely to pursue him and that it would not be an option  for
       the appellant to go into hiding for an extended period of time.
   26. I find on  the  facts  of  this  case  there  is  no  sufficiency  of
       protection available to the appellant who will face a  real  risk  of
       serious harm in the IKR of being the victim of an honour killing  for
       whom no reasonable internal relocation option exists, for the reasons
       stated. On that basis the appeal must be allowed.

Decision

   27. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.

  Anonymity.

   28. I continue the anonymity order  made  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson.

Dated the 16 November 2020

