
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Pa/09355/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision and reasons Promulgated          |
|On: 14 September 2018            |On: 03 October 2018                       |
|                                    |                                       |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMAD [K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Chang of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, appealed against the  decision
    of the respondent dated 16 August 2016, refusing to grant the appellant
    asylum and humanitarian protection in the  United  Kingdom.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Carrol dismissed the appellant's appeal  in  a  decision
    dated 5 April 2017



 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First- tier Tribunal  Judge  Chohan
    on 16 August 2018 stating it is arguable that the Judge did  not  treat
    the appellant as a vulnerable witness given that he was 15 years of age
    at the date of hearing.


 3. The hearing there was no dispute that the appellant was 15 years old at
    the date of hearing. There was also no  dispute  that  the  appellant's
    credibility was one of the main issues in the appeal. Therefore, it was
    incumbent  on  the  Judge  to  considered  that  the  appellant  was  a
    vulnerable witness and to apply the Joint Residential Guidance  Note  2
    of the 2010 guidance.


 4. It is clear from the decision that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  other
    than mentioning appellant's age at the beginning of the decision,  made
    no further reference to his age when determining his credibility.



 5. At the hearing, Mr Tarlow was not able to point out  one  paragraph  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge where the Judge indicated
    that he was aware that he was evaluating the evidence of  a  vulnerable
    witness.


 6. As a consequence, the decision is not safe. I find that there has  been
    a material error of law in the decision as the Judge as he  has  failed
    to take into account the appellant's age when considering the  evidence
    in the appellant's credibility. Therefore, as it stands the decision is
    not safe and findings of fact need to be made and  consideration  being
    given to the fact that the  appellant  was  a  child  when  the  events
    occurred.


 7. In the circumstances, I direct that the appeal  be  placed  before  any
    First-tier Tribunal Judge apart from first-tier Tribunal  Judge  Caroll
    for the appeal to be heard de novo and the Joint  Residential  Guidance
    be applied.



    Decision




    Appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
..........................................

                                Ms S Chana  Dated 26th day of September 2018


