
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09979/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Cardiff Civil Justice  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Centre                                   |                                  |
|by Skype for Business                    |                                  |
|On 24 September 2020                     |On 09 October 2020                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     ARA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  1  January
    1997.  He comes from Nangarhar province.

 3. The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely  and  claimed
    asylum on 27 October 2010.  On 22 December 2010, the Secretary of State
    refused  the  appellant's  application  for  asylum  but  granted   him
    discretionary leave to remain  in  accordance  with  the  Secretary  of
    State's policy on unaccompanied asylum seeking children.

 4. On 15 January 2014, the appellant applied for further leave to  remain.
    That application was refused on 2  February  2015  and  his  subsequent
    appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Rowlands) on  27
    July 2015.  Judge Rowlands rejected the appellant's claim that  he  had
    been at risk from the Taliban as a result of his  father's  involvement
    with the Taliban which had caused the appellant  to  leave  Afghanistan
    and come to the UK.  The appellant was subsequently refused  permission
    to appeal by the First-tier Tribunal on 17 September 2015.   Permission
    to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal but the appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed by the Upper Tribunal on 29 February 2016.  The appellant
    was subsequently refused permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

 5. On 29 January 2018, the appellant  made  further  submissions.   On  24
    September 2019, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 20 February 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J C  Hamilton)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Like Judge Rowlands, Judge  Hamilton
    rejected the appellant's claim that  he  had  been  at  risk  from  the
    Taliban as a result of his father's involvement with the Taliban  which
    had caused the appellant to leave  Afghanistan  and  come  to  the  UK.
    However, the judge accepted, based  upon  the  expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Giustozzi, that the appellant was at risk of forced recruitment by  the
    Taliban in his home area.  The Secretary of State  also  accepted  that
    the appellant could not return to his home area as he would face a real
    risk of serious harm arising from indiscriminate violence  contrary  to
    Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC)
    in his home area.  The central issue before Judge Hamilton was  whether
    the appellant could internally relocate to Kabul.  The judge found that
    it would not be unduly harsh for him to do  so  and  so  dismissed  his
    appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds.   He   also
    dismissed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.  On 27 March 2020 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge S P
    J Buchanan) granted the appellant permission to appeal on all  grounds.



 8. Due to  the  COVID-19  crisis,  the  Upper  Tribunal  initially  issued
    directions expressing the provisional view that it was appropriate  for
    the appeal to be determined without a hearing  in  order  to  determine
    whether the First-tier Tribunal had  made  an  error  of  law  and  its
    decision should be set  aside.   However,  the  appeal  was  ultimately
    listed for a remote hearing by Skype for Business.  That  hearing  took
    place on 24 September 2020.  I was based in the Cardiff  Civil  Justice
    Centre.  Ms Dirie, who represented the appellant, and Mr  Howells,  who
    represented the Secretary of State, took part in the  hearing  remotely
    by Skype for Business.

The Grounds of Appeal

 9. Ms Dirie relied upon her grounds of appeal which set out Grounds  1  to
    6.

10. Ground 1 contends that the judge erred in law by failing to give proper
    weight to the UNHCR Guidelines in assessing the risk to  the  appellant
    in Kabul and whether internal relocation was an option.

11. Ground 2  contends  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  treat  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018]  UKUT
    118 (IAC) ("AS1") as an extant country guidance decision as it had been
    set aside by the Court of Appeal.

12. Ground 3 contends that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    his conclusion that adequate  medical  treatment  for  the  appellant's
    mental health was available in Kabul.  In particular, it  is  contended
    that the judge failed properly to take into account the  evidence  from
    Dr Giustozzi as to the  availability  of  mental  health  treatment  in
    Kabul.

13. Ground 4 contends that the judge erred by finding  that  the  appellant
    had "exaggerated, embellished and fabricated" his account of his mental
    health symptoms".

14. Ground 5 contends  that  the  judge  inappropriately  deferred  to  the
    adverse credibility finding that Judge Rowlands made in the appellant's
    2015 appeal.

15. Ground 6 contends that the judge made a purely speculative finding  and
    failed to give adequate reasons for finding that  the  appellant  would
    have "social support" whether directly or indirectly from his family in
    Kabul.

Discussion

    Grounds 1 and 2

16. It will be helpful to take Grounds 1 and 2 together.

17. Although Ms Dirie did not abandon Grounds 1 and 2,  she  made  no  oral
    submissions in support of those grounds.  This was because of the Upper
    Tribunal's subsequent decision, following  the  setting  aside  of  its
    earlier decision by the Court  of  Appeal,  in  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 130 (IAC) ("AS2").  Both  Ms  Dirie  and  Mr
    Howells accepted that the issues under Grounds 1 and 2 was whether  any
    error by the judge was material in the light of AS2.

18. As Ground 1 makes plain, the contention is that  the  judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for rejecting, and not applying, the UNHCR's view
    in  its  document,  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  For  Assessing  The
    International Protection Needs of Asylum-seekers from  Afghanistan  (30
    August 2018) that internal  relocation  to  Kabul  was  "generally  not
    available".

19. Judge Hamilton set out the relevant parts of the  UNHCR's  document  at
    para 30 of his determination.  However, in AS2 at [152]-[193],  the  UT
    considered in detail the UNHCR's position both in its  2018  Guidelines
    and  in  more  recent  documents  in  2019.   That  evidence  was   not
    "presumptively binding" and so determinative of the judicial assessment
    of risk (see HF(Iraq) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  1276  at  [43]-[44]  per
    Elias  LJ).   It  formed  "part  of  the  overall  examination  of  the
    particular circumstances of each of the appellant's case,  no  more  no
    less" (see R(EM(Eritrea)) v SSHD [2014] UKSC 12 at [74] per Lord Kerr).
     In its findings (based on all the evidence), the UT  in  AS2  did  not
    reach the same conclusion in relation to  the  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence in Kabul or as to internal relocation.  At [209], the UT  said
    this:

         "Although violent crime is prevalent, the evidence does  not  point
         to it being at such a high level that the  appellant  would  be  at
         real risk merely on account of his presence in Kabul."

20. At [210] the Tribunal recognised its finding  was  different  from  the
    conclusion  reached  in  the  UNHCR  documents,  including   the   2018
    Guidelines.  The UT said this:

         "We recognise that we have reached a conclusion that  is  different
         from that expressed by UNHCR in the 2019  UNHCR  submissions  where
         (in contrast to the  2018  UNHCR  Guidelines  and  2019  UNHCR  COI
         Report) it is stated in terms that UNHCR believes Kabul is  not  'a
         relevant  IFA'.   We  have  based  our  assessment  on   the   same
         statistical evidence relied  upon  by  the  UNHCR  (casualty  rates
         recorded by UNAMA).  However, our approach to  the  UNAMA  casualty
         figures appears to differ to UNHCR in two significant ways.

         a.   Firstly, it appears that UNHCR have looked at the total number
             of  casualties,  compared  these  over  time,  but  have   not
             considered the casualty rate.  We note that  the  approach  we
             have adopted, of relying on the casualty rate rather than  the
             absolute number of casualties, was also used by EASO,  who  in
             the 2019 EASO Guidance contextualised the number  of  civilian
             casualties in 2018 by noting  that  the  total  of  1,866  (as
             reported by UNAMA) corresponded to 38 per 100,000 inhabitants.
              In our view, once the total number of casualties in Kabul  is
             set against the size of the population,  the  conclusion  that
             the risk is at a level where internal  relocation  is  not  an
             option (i.e. not relevant), becomes untenable.

         b.       Secondly, UNHCR appears  to  have  interpreted  the  UNAMA
             figures as showing an upward  trend,  over  the  last  several
             years, in the number of  casualties  in  Kabul.   However,  as
             explained above, we do not agree that the data supports such a
             conclusion, as it appears to us that, since  2016,  there  has
             been a relatively steady and consistent number  of  casualties
             each year".

21. Having considered the UNHCR evidence, as summarised  in  the  headnote,
    the UT did not accept that the level of indiscriminate violence engaged
    Art 15(c).  At para (ii) the UT said this:

         "(ii)     There  is  widespread  and  persistent   conflict-related
             violence in Kabul. However, the proportion of  the  population
             affected by indiscriminate violence is  small  and  not  at  a
             level where a returnee, even  one  with  no  family  or  other
             network and who has no experience living in Kabul, would  face
             a serious and individual threat to their  life  or  person  by
             reason of indiscriminate violence".

22. In the light of AS2, it  cannot  be  said  that  the  UNHCR  Guidelines
    should, and would, have driven Judge Hamilton  to  reach  a  conclusion
    that the appellant's return to Kabul would  breach  Art  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.  The UT's now country guidance in AS2 is  that
    no such risk can be established despite the UNHCR's views.

23. Likewise, to the extent that the UNHCR evidence proposed that it  would
    be unreasonable or unduly harsh, such that internal relocation was  not
    available, to return to Kabul, the  UT's  decision  in  AS2  reached  a
    different conclusion "in general".  At para (iii) of the headnote,  the
    Upper Tribunal's position is summarised that:

         "it will not, in general, be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh  for  a
         single adult male in good health to relocate to Kabul  even  if  he
         does not have any specific connections or support network in  Kabul
         and even if he does not have a Tazkera".

24. At paras (iv) and (v) of the  headnote,  the  UT  recognised  that  the
    "particular circumstances of an individual applicant must be taken into
    account in the context of conditions in the place of  relocation".   In
    this appeal it is not suggested that Judge Hamilton failed to do  that,
    Ground 1 squarely challenged his decision on the basis that the UNHCR's
    view both on the risk of indiscriminate violence  in  Kabul  and  other
    conditions made  the  appellant's  relocation  there  unduly  harsh  or
    unreasonable.

25. Given AS2, I am satisfied that, to the extent that Judge  Hamilton  did
    not fully take into account the UNHCR evidence (which it  is  far  from
    clear was the case given his extensive citation  of  it  at  para  30),
    there was no material error.  I, therefore, reject Ground 1.

26. Ground 2, in my view, misunderstands what the judge was saying at  para
    67.  There, he said that he did not find the UNHCR Guidelines:

         "to be sufficiently cogent evidence to allow me to depart from  the
         current country guidance".

27. Ground 2 contends that the judge was there referring to AS1 which  was,
    as a result of it being set aside by the Court of Appeal  ([2019]  EWCA
    Civ 873), not extant country guidance.  That is not, in my  view,  what
    the judge was saying in para 67.

28. At para 29 of his judgment the judge recognised that AS1 could  not  be
    relied upon.  He said this:

         "In respect of the case law relating to the situation in Kabul, the
         respondent's representative accepted the Court of Appeal had  found
         the Upper Tribunal's country guidance in respect of  the  level  of
         danger in Kabul to be unreliable and had remitted that issue to the
         Upper  Tribunal  for  reconsideration.   He  said  this  meant  the
         previous guidance, set out  in  the  case  of  AK  (Article  15(c))
         Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 applied and in that case the Upper
         Tribunal had concluded Kabul was 'generally safe' for living there.
          I agree that the headnote from AK is, broadly speaking, consistent
         with this submission".

29. Then at para 30 the judge quoted the appellant's submission  that  both
    AK and AS1 were now out of date in the light of the UNHCR evidence  and
    Dr Giustozzi's report which relied upon it.

30. It is clear that at para 67, when the judge referred  to  "the  current
    country guidance" he was referring to AK which,  AS1  having  been  set
    aside, was the existing country  guidance,  albeit  dating  from  2012.
    That must follow from what the judge said at para 29 about  the  effect
    of the Court of Appeal's decision on AS1 leaving AK as  the  extant  or
    current CG decision.  I do not,  therefore,  conclude  that  the  judge
    failed to recognise that the extant country guidance  was  AK  and  not
    AS1.  In any event, given AS2, and that the appellant's case was  based
    upon the UNHCR Guidelines as a basis for  departing  from  the  country
    guidance, any error by the judge cannot conceivably  be  said  to  have
    been material.

31. I therefore reject Ground 2.

    Grounds 3 and 4

32. I will also take Grounds 3 and 4 together.

33. Grounds 3 and 4 challenge the  judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim that his mental  health  problems  were  relevant  on
    return to Kabul.  The judge  essentially  made  two  findings.   First,
    whilst he accepted that the appellant  was  "likely  to  be  depressed,
    anxious and extremely stressed" (see para 58), the judge found that the
    appellant had "exaggerated, embellished and fabricated the  account  of
    his symptoms" (see para 59).   Secondly,  "adequate  medical  treatment
    would be available" to the appellant in Afghanistan (para 60).

34. Ms Dirie submitted, relying upon Ground 4, that  the  judge  failed  to
    give  adequate  reasons  for  his  finding  that  the   appellant   had
    "exaggerated, embellished and fabricated" his symptoms.  She  submitted
    that it could not really be said that the appellant had tricked all the
    doctors over an extended period of time  and  had  been  provided  with
    drugs for his treatment.  She accepted that the  medical  evidence,  in
    the form of his GP records and a counsellor's review (see, C2 and  C110
    of the bundle)  diagnosed  him  as  suffering  from  depression,  mixed
    anxiety and depressive disorder.

35. Mr Howells submitted that there was no medico-legal  report  supporting
    the appellant's mental health diagnosis.  The judge had considered  the
    medical notes at paras 51 and 52; he had noted that the  appellant  was
    not taking his medication (see para 50); he noted that the  appellant's
    history of self-harming on one occasion (see para 54),  and  had  given
    anxious scrutiny to the evidence.

36. I do not accept Ms Dirie's submissions on Ground 4.   The  judge  noted
    (at para 57) that there  was  no  medico-legal  report  concerning  the
    appellant's mental health.  The principal  medical  records  concerning
    the appellant's health,  including  his  mental  health,  were  his  GP
    records and documents relating to a mental health referral in July 2019
    (Section C of the appellant's bundle).  Those records  show  that  from
    around December 2016 that the appellant was attending his GP because he
    was, he said, suffering panic attacks and symptoms of anxiety.  He  was
    prescribed medication such  as  Mirtazapin.   They  recorded  entry  in
    February 2019 of self-harm on the appellant's forearm involving  around
    30 cuts.  He is reported to continue to have thoughts of  self-harm  in
    May 2019 but no new injuries and no suicidal intention and no plans for
    suicide.  It would appear that in July or August  2019,  the  appellant
    was seen by the Community Mental Health Team and was advised to see his
    GP for a prescription of Fluoxetin for "mixed  depression  and  anxiety
    disorder" (see Dr Dumbelton's letter dated 22 July 2019 at  C121-C123).
    He was prescribed that medication in July/August 2019 (see GP notes  at
    C32).

37. The judge dealt with the evidence  concerning  the  appellant's  mental
    health at paras 50-59 as follows:

         "50. The appellant has been  prescribed  antidepressants  for  some
             time.  However at his mental health assessment in  June  2019,
             he told the doctor that he had not taken  antidepressants  for
             over two years.  In April 2019 his GP noted that  he  was  not
             receiving his prescribed medicine (AB page C26).  In May  2019
             he said he had  stopped  taking  antidepressants  five  months
             beforehand (AB page C101).  When asked to clarify  this  issue
             the appellant gave a vague answer  and  said  he  had  stopped
             taking antidepressants because of the side effects.  I  accept
             that antidepressants can have side effects.  However  although
             the  appellant  visited  his  doctor  regularly  for   various
             physical ailments he does not appear to  have  been  proactive
             about  raising  the  issue  of   the   difficulties   he   was
             experiencing  with  his  antidepressants.   He  says  he  just
             stopped taking his medication.  Arguably his failure  to  seek
             alternative treatment for his mental  health  issues,  despite
             his frequent visits to the doctor was not consistent with  his
             claim  to  be  suffering  from  significant  or   debilitating
             symptoms.

         51.  The appellant has given  other  contradictory  information  to
             medical professionals.  In May 2019 he said that his mood  was
             so low that he was self-harming and 'only managing to  go  out
             for a walk but struggling to  do  other  activities  of  daily
             living' (AB page C131).  There are other examples of this sort
             of information being provided (e.g. AB page C30 - 'feelings of
             hopelessness, lives alone, no motivation to attend college, no
             appetite, no exercise').  However his GP notes for  June  2019
             record that he is 'still playing cricket' and was  complaining
             about a sports related injury.  Then  in  July  2019  he  told
             psychiatrists that he spent a lot of time in his  bedroom  and
             found it hard to leave the  house  and  did  not  like  others
             seeing  him.   His  only  distraction  was  said  to  be   his
             PlayStation (AB/C80).  In evidence he accepted  that  this  is
             what he had said.

         52.  When he gave  evidence  he  was  asked  about  his  day-to-day
             activities.  He said that he went out shopping, socialised and
             played cricket but that this was  just  to  distract  himself.
             When asked to clarify what it was that he could not do because
             of his mental health  difficulties  he  gave  a  vague  answer
             claiming that he was unable to do anything properly  and  just
             went out because that was what his therapist had told  him  to
             do.  I find this unlikely to be true.  His  therapy  has  only
             commenced relatively  recently.   He  was  first  referred  in
             February 2019 but did not attend and then re-referred  in  May
             (AB page C131).

         53.  The appellant has given  other  contradictory  information  to
             medical professionals.  He has said that his mental health has
             prevented him from going to college.  However at  other  times
             he has talked about funding issues.  When he gave evidence  he
             accepted that  there  were  unspecified  funding  issues  that
             prevented him going to college.  He said that he had meant  to
             say that stopping college has affected his mental  health.   I
             note his medical notes refer to him trying to get  sick  notes
             to explain why he had not been able to attend college (AB page
             C18).

         54.  The appellant claimed to have attempted to  kill  himself  and
             self-harm.  These incidents have all been self-reported.   The
             only  independent  evidence  of  self-harm  was  that  the  GP
             described in his [] as '30 superficial cuts' (AB/C24).   As  I
             understand it these superficial cuts were  all,  inflicted  on
             the same occasion and the appellant did not  seek  or  require
             medical attention at the time of the infliction.  The  medical
             notes also show that he has given various accounts of  how  he
             harmed himself.  I do not minimise the fact that the appellant
             caused himself even minor harm.  However I must consider  this
             in the light of the evidence as a whole.

         55.  The appellant has also told medical professionals that  he  is
             struggling with accommodation.  However  the  Local  Authority
             has always provided him with accommodation.

         56.  Overall, the  medical  notes  show  that  notwithstanding  his
             claimed panic attacks, anxiety and depression,  the  appellant
             has  attended  college,  plays  cricket,   has   a   long-term
             relationship with a girlfriend who he sees as a friend and  if
             his evidence to me is accurate he also goes out  shopping  and
             socialises.  There was no evidence  there  were  any  concerns
             about  his  self  care.   He    has   had   the   benefit   of
             accommodation, financial and practical support provided by the
             Local Authority.  The medical notes show that his  key  worker
             has been actively involved in providing   him  with  practical
             support and  assistance  (e.g.  driving  him  to  his  therapy
             sessions and supporting with appointments).

         57.  One reason why I  have  had  to  go  through  the  appellant's
             medical notes in some detail is because the appellant did  not
             provide a medico-legal  report  on  his  mental  health.   His
             representative argued that  the  information  in  his  medical
             records allowed me to draw a  reasonable  inference  that  his
             medical health is in a fragile  state  and  returning  him  to
             Afghanistan risks serious  deterioration  and  possible  self-
             harm".

38. Then in paras 58 and 59 the judge went on to make findings in  relation
    to the appellant's mental health:

         "58. I accept the appellant is likely to be depressed, anxious  and
             extremely stressed.  However for the reasons set out  above  I
             have concerns about the information  the  appellant  has  been
             providing to medical professionals.  An expert report may have
             addressed these issues but no such report was provided.

         59.  Looking at the  evidence  overall  I  do  not  find  that  the
             appellant []  has  been  candid  when  giving  information  to
             medical professionals.  I find he has exaggerated, embellished
             and fabricated the accounts of his symptoms.  This reduces the
             weight I can give to the  information  in  his  medical  notes
             regarding his fragile mental state.  It is reasonable to infer
             that any symptoms of anxiety or depression he  does  have  are
             attributable to the stress caused by his uncertain immigration
             status and the fact his hopes of  living  in  the  UK  are  in
             jeopardy.  As noted in the RL, this  is  consistent  with  the
             views of at least some of the medical  professionals  involved
             in his care (see for example AB page C78)".

39. In my judgment, the judge fully considered the medical  evidence  which
    was available.  The judge was not, as Ms  Dirie  submitted,  suggesting
    that the appellant had been able to 'pull the wool over  the  eyes'  of
    many health professionals.  The judge accepted, on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence, that the appellant suffered from  depression,  mixed  anxiety
    and depressive disorder.  The medical evidence  went  no  further  than
    that. The grounds rely upon the Istanbul Protocol and  a  diagnosis  of
    PTSD.  Ms Dirie accepted that the appellant had not been diagnosed with
    PTSD

40. The judge did not, therefore, reject the diagnosis made by  the  health
    professionals but rather, did not accept, that the appellant's  account
    of his symptoms arising from that condition should  be  taken  at  face
    value.  The judge was entitled to take  into  account  the  appellant's
    evidence and the inconsistencies in it and that he had not been  taking
    any medication, even if it were prescribed to him, for some  period  of
    time.  He had told his GP that he had  stopped  taking  antidepressants
    for five months in May 2019.  In June 2019, he said  he  had  not  been
    taking them for over two  years.   The  appellant  also  inconsistently
    claimed that he was both debilitated in day-to-day activities but  also
    engaged in many social activities which potentially contradicted  that.
    Whilst recognising the appellant's diagnosis, it was reasonably open to
    the judge to reach  the  conclusion  that  the  symptoms  said  by  the
    appellant to be the consequences of his  mental  health  problems  were
    "exaggerated, embellished and fabricated".

41. For those reasons, I reject Ground 4.

42. As regards Ground 3, Ms Dirie submitted that the  judge  (at  para  60)
    failed properly  to  deal  with  Dr  Giustozzi's  report  when  he  had
    summarised his views as "some level [] of  treatment  is  available  in
    Kabul".  Ms Dirie submitted, relying upon her summary in para 10 of her
    grounds of appeal, that Dr Giustozzi's view was that the  Kabul  mental
    health hospital only had 60 places and in order to be admitted  to  the
    hospital it was necessary to be accompanied by a relative at all times.
     Many patients who were not dangerous were sent  to  the  Red  Crescent
    Secure  Psychiatric  Unit  where  patients  were  kept  chained  and/or
    sedated.  There were  only  two  fully  trained  psychiatrists  in  the
    country and 101 partially trained doctors; and  the  opportunities  for
    psychosocial support was almost  non-existent  mainly  because  of  the
    extreme  shortage  of  trained  mental  health   professionals.    Most
    psychotropic drugs available were imported from Pakistan and were  only
    available illegally and it was estimated in 2014 that up to half of all
    medicines circulating in Afghanistan were Pakistani  counterfeits.   It
    was unlikely  that  the  appellant  would  receive  more  than  cursory
    attention by the medical staff at  the  country's  only  mental  health
    hospital.  Ms Dirie submitted that the judge had failed  to  deal  with
    the evidence and reach findings on whether  the  appellant  would  have
    access to his existing medications, namely Fluoxetin  and  propranolol.
    These were only available as illegal imports from Pakistan.

43. Ms Dirie submitted that it was not sufficient for the judge  simply  to
    rely upon the evidence set out in the decision letter in  the  form  of
    MedCOI responses at paras 107-137 of the decision letter.

44. Mr Howells submitted that it was open to the judge to give  substantial
    weight to the evidence  in  the  refusal  letter  about  the  available
    treatment in Kabul.  He also relied on the fact that the judge had made
    adverse findings about the appellant's evidence, including that he  had
    exaggerated his symptoms, the judge had found that  the  appellant  was
    not taking his medication and that he had only recently begun therapy.

45. The judge dealt with the  availability  of  treatment  at  para  60  as
    follows:

         "The appellant relied on Dr Giustozzi's view that for the most part
         the provision of mental health care is non-existent in Afghanistan.
          However even Dr Giustozzi accepts some level []  of  treatment  is
         available in Kabul.  This is confirmed at paragraphs 106 to 137  of
         the RL.  I found the evidence in RL sufficiently comprehensive  and
         recent for me to  give  it  substantial  weight.   Furthermore  the
         appellant has the  advantage  of  already  having  had  appropriate
         treatment identified by his doctors on (sic) the  UK.   He  already
         has a diagnosis and treatment plan.  Looking at the evidence  as  a
         whole, I find adequate medical treatment would be available to  the
         appellant in Afghanistan".

46. The appellant claim that treatment would  not  be  available  began  on
    somewhat shaky ground given that the judge's finding that the appellant
    had not previously stopped taking the medication  that  was  prescribed
    for him.

47. In my judgment, it would be wrong to assume that the judge did not take
    into account Dr Giustozzi's views on the availability of treatment  for
    mental health  set  out  in  his  report  at  B32-B39  which  Ms  Dirie
    summarised and I set out above.  Whilst it is undoubtedly the case that
    the judge did not set out, in detail,  extracts  or  references  to  Dr
    Giustozzi's report on this issue, he made  multiple  references  to  Dr
    Giustozzi's report which he had obviously read, and taken into  account
    more generally, and  at  para  40  the  judge  said  he  had  "read  Dr
    Giustozzi's report carefully".

48. I have no reason to question Ms Dirie's summary of Dr Giustozzi's views
    set out at para 10 of her grounds of appeal  which  I  have  summarised
    above.  As recently as June/July 2019 when the appellant was seen by  a
    mental health practitioner (Dr Dumbelton) the  appellant  was  for  the
    first time recommended to be prescribed Fluoxetin as an antidepressant.
     Looking at the appellant's GP notes, as the  judge  clearly  did,  the
    appellant was prescribed Fluoxetin  in  July/August  2019.   The  judge
    noted that Dr Giustozzi accepted  that  some  level  of  treatment  was
    available in Kabul.  That is undoubtedly the case.  Dr Giustozzi refers
    to the only mental health  hospital  in  Afghanistan  being  in  Kabul.
    However, he notes the limitation  on  staffing  and  places  available.
    There are now six psychiatrists (rather than two in  2010)  working  at
    that hospital.  Dr Giustozzi notes the increase in staffing at para  26
    of his report.  Dr Giustozzi also notes, in particular at para 42, that
    several "anti-psychotic" drugs are available in  Afghanistan  including
    Mirtazapin which, itself, is  a  drug  previously  prescribed  for  the
    appellant.  Dr Giustozzi notes  that  in  recent  years  "a  number  of
    psychotropic drugs have become available in Afghanistan" (see para  31)
    although he also notes that they  are  mostly  imported  from  Pakistan
    illegally (80%).

49. In the light of Dr Giustozzi's evidence,  the  judge  was  not,  in  my
    judgment, wrong to state that "some level" of psychiatric treatment was
    available in Kabul.  Indeed, the evidence set out at paras  106-137  of
    the decision letter is consistent with that.  In particular,  it  notes
    that inpatient psychiatric treatment is available in Kabul  (para  114)
    and that various medicines  for  psychiatric  treatment  are  available
    including Mirtazapin and Risperidone (para  115).   The  quoted  report
    dates from June 2018 and in relation to a more recent  report  dated  3
    March  2019,  it  is  further  noted  that  inpatient  treatment  by  a
    psychiatrist is available and outpatient treatment and follow-up  by  a
    psychiatrist is available (see paras 133 and 134).

50. The background evidence (including the expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi)
    did not preclude the judge from forming the view that it had  not  been
    established that the appellant, if he needed it,  would  be  unable  to
    obtain psychiatric treatment for his depression and anxiety,  including
    medication in Kabul, even though the level of available treatment would
    be less than is available to  the  appellant  in  the  UK.   Given  the
    judge's findings in respect of the appellant's mental health,  it  was,
    in my judgment, open to the judge to find that there would be  adequate
    medical treatment available to the appellant in Kabul  should  he  need
    it.

51. I, therefore, reject Ground 3.

    Ground 5

52. Ground 5 challenges the judge's adverse  finding  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim that he was at risk from the Taliban as a  result  of
    his  father's  prior  involvement  with  the  Taliban  before  he  left
    Afghanistan.  This claim had been rejected by Judge  Rowlands  in  2015
    and his decision had been unsuccessfully appealed.  His adverse finding
    therefore stood.  This was a distinct issue from the  one  which  Judge
    Hamilton eventually found in the  appellant's  favour,  namely  whether
    (even if his history was  not  believed)  he  was  at  risk  of  forced
    recruitment by the Taliban in his home area which Judge Hamilton  found
    in his favour (see paras 43-44).

53. At para 38, in relation to his claim based upon past  involvement  with
    the Taliban, Judge Hamilton said this:

         "Judge Rowlands found that he was not being  truthful  about  this.
         The appellant only gave very limited oral evidence  before  me  and
         none of the questioning focused  on  this  issue.   Judge  Rowlands
         heard far more extensive evidence from  the  appellant  about  this
         issue and arguably was therefore in a better position  than  me  to
         reach conclusions  about  the  credibility  of  this  part  of  his
         account.  As far as I am aware, it is not now being suggested  that
         at the time the appellant gave evidence before Judge  Rowlands,  he
         was suffering from undiagnosed mental health issues that the  judge
         was unaware of and that would have affected the judge's  assessment
         of his credibility".

54. Ms Dirie submitted that the judge had given excessive weight  to  Judge
    Rowlands'  conclusion  and  had  failed  to  take  into   account   the
    appellant's mental health which might have affected the cogency of  his
    evidence before Judge Rowlands.  However, when I enquired what evidence
    there was that the appellant had mental health problems at the time  of
    the hearing before Judge Rowlands, Ms Dirie accepted that the  evidence
    only supported the appellant having  mental  health  problems  from  31
    December 2016.

55. Judge Rowlands' adverse credibility finding was undoubtedly a 'starting
    point' for Judge Hamilton's assessment of the appellant's claim of past
    activity putting him at risk (see Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1).  It does
    not seem that the appellant sought to pursue this basis  of  his  claim
    when he made his most recent application.  At para 37,  Judge  Hamilton
    noted that in the refusal letter the Secretary of State stated that the
    "appellant was no longer claiming to be in danger  from  the  Taliban".
    However, in his most recent statement, Judge Hamilton  noted  that  the
    appellant had again made the same claim that he had been at  risk  from
    the Taliban when he came to the UK.  The reality is, however, that  the
    appellant "only gave very limited oral evidence" before Judge  Hamilton
    in relation to his claim based upon events before he left  Afghanistan.
    As the judge noted: "none of the questioning focused  on  this  issue".
    In these circumstances, Judge Hamilton was entitled  to  conclude  that
    the appellant had failed to establish  the  matters  previously  relied
    upon before Judge Rowlands and rejected by him when those  issues  were
    the central part of the appellant's claim.  There was no evidence  that
    the appellant suffered from any mental health problems  that  may  have
    affected the integrity of his evidence given before Judge Rowlands.  As
    I have said, Ms  Dirie  acknowledged  that  was  the  case.   In  those
    circumstances, it was undoubtedly reasonable  and  rational  for  Judge
    Hamilton, for the reasons he set out in para 38, to accept the findings
    made by Judge  Rowlands  adverse  to  the  appellant's  credibility  in
    relation to  the  events  he  claimed  to  rely  upon  before  he  left
    Afghanistan.

56. I reject Ground 5.




    Ground 6

57. In his decision, Judge Hamilton found that  the  appellant  would  have
    social support, in  the  form  of  his  family,  whether  "directly  or
    indirectly" in Kabul (para 63).  In the earlier appeal, Judge  Rowlands
    had found that the  appellant  had  family  in  Afghanistan  who  could
    support him.

58. Before Judge Hamilton, the appellant claimed that he had  lost  contact
    with his family and, following the hearing at  the  invitation  of  the
    judge, he produced further evidence concerning attempts  to  trace  his
    family.  At paras 61-62, the judge said this:

         "61. When considering if  the  appellant  has  shown  he  has  lost
             contact with his family, I take into account the fact that his
             home area is now too dangerous for him  to  return  to.   This
             could be consistent  with  losing  contact  with  his  family.
             Nevertheless, even on his own account he failed  to  make  any
             effort to trace them until shortly before the  appeal  hearing
             before me.  I do not find this  consistent  with  having  lost
             contact with his family.  He has had a high level  of  support
             and the evidence suggests he  is  an  intelligent  young  man.
             Looking at the evidence as a whole, making allowances for  the
             appellant's youth and claimed vulnerability  in  applying  the
             lower standard of proof, I still find myself unable to  accept
             the appellant has lost contact  with  his  family  as  he  has
             claimed.   I  do  not  find  he  has  provided   a   plausible
             explanation for his failure to try and trace  his  family.   I
             find he would have done this if they were really missing.

         62.  It is difficult to assess what the  appellant's  circumstances
             would be in Kabul because he has not been truthful  about  the
             nature  and  degree  of  his  contact  with  his   family   in
             Afghanistan.  However looking at  the  evidence  as  a  whole,
             taking into account the considerations set out in paragraph 43
             above, I find it reasonable to infer that he has chosen not to
             be candid because the truth would not assist  his  attempt  to
             remain in the UK.

         63.  Accordingly I have concluded that the appellant has not  shown
             that family support would be unavailable to him in  Kabul.   I
             find the appellant's family in Afghanistan  will  be  able  to
             offer him social support either directly  or  indirectly  that
             would include helping him access any medical treatment he  may
             require".

59.  At  paras  46-47,  the  judge  dealt  with  the  appellant's  attempts
    (including a recent attempt) to seek to trace his family:

         "46. The appellant claims that he has lost contact with his family.
              He told Judge Rowlands he had tried to trace them through the
             Red Cross but no evidence to support this claim was  provided.
             At a mental health assessment in June 2019 (AB page  C76),  he
             told the doctor that he had tried to contact  his  family  but
             they seemed to have moved or changed their  telephone  number.
             However, even on his own account, the appellant did  not  take
             steps to trace his family  until  shortly  before  the  appeal
             hearing before me.  When questioned about this, he  said  that
             his solicitor had contacted the Red Cross for him in  November
             2019.  I gave permission for him to provide evidence  of  this
             contact.   My  expectation  was  that  I  would  be  receiving
             something from his solicitors confirming what his contact with
             the Red Cross was and  what  information  the  Red  Cross  was
             given.

         47.  However, what I received was the letter  dated  10  June  2020
             from his support service (see paragraph 32 above).  I did  not
             find this evidence very satisfactory.  On my reading  of  this
             letter, the support service merely states that  it  signposted
             the appellant to the British Red Cross on 18 October 2019  and
             left it to him to contact them.  The appellant claims  he  did
             this on 22 October 2019 and is still waiting for  a  response.
             When assessing his  claim  I  bear  in  mind  Judge  Rowlands'
             findings regarding his truthfulness and must be cautious about
             accepting his  evidence  where  it  is  unsupported  by  other
             credible evidence, particularly of his reason for expecting to
             have provided such evidence.  I was not provided with evidence
             of direct contact between the appellant and the Red Cross.  In
             my view it was  reasonable  to  expect  him  to  provide  such
             evidence or explain its absence.  He has done neither.  I note
             the support service letter states that 'we are waiting  for  a
             response'.  However reading the letter as a whole, I  find  it
             highly likely that this  statement  is  based  on  information
             given by the appellant".

60. Then at para 48, the judge noted that  the  appellant  claims  to  have
    tried to trace some relatives through Facebook but unsuccessfully.  The
    judge then said:

         "However, even allowing for his vulnerability, his  evidence  about
         this was very vague and no other evidence about this was provided".

61. Then at para 49, the judge dealt  with  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant from a friend "KJ":

         "He also provided an e-mail from his friend KJ (see paragraph 28(2)
         above).  KJ visited Afghanistan last summer (AB page A23).  In  his
         e-mail, KJ says that the appellant told him that he  had  lost  his
         family.  However there was no suggestion the appellant had asked KJ
         friend to try and make enquiries about his  family  on  his  behalf
         while he was in Afghanistan.   When  the  appellant  was  asked  to
         clarify this he gave a vague answer.  KJ did not make  a  statement
         and although he attended the appeal hearing, did not give evidence.
          This reduces the weight I can give to the information  in  his  e-
         mail".

62. In my judgment, the judge gave careful consideration  to  the  evidence
    concerning the appellant's claim that he  had  lost  contact  with  his
    family.  The judge was entitled to approach the appellant's evidence on
    the basis that he had not been found credible in  his  claim  by  Judge
    Rowlands and,  in  addition,  by  Judge  Hamilton  himself.   That  was
    relevant in assessing whether the appellant had established that he had
    lost contact with his family.  The judge dealt fully with the  evidence
    relied upon by the appellant of  his  attempts  to  trace  his  family.
    There was no supporting evidence that he had even been in contact  with
    the British Red Cross, let alone that they  had  been  unsuccessful  in
    tracing his  family.   Likewise,  his  friend,  who  had  travelled  to
    Afghanistan last summer, had not given evidence at the hearing, despite
    being  present.   The  email  (at  A23)  offers  no  support  for   the
    appellant's claim that he has lost contact with his family.

63. I do not accept Ms Dirie's  submission  that  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence that he had  not  lost  contact  with  his  family
    simply on the basis of an adverse credibility finding.  The judge  also
    took into account the  absence  of  supporting  evidence  which,  might
    readily  be  available,  and  might  have  assisted  to  establish  the
    appellant's claim to have lost contact (see TK (Burundi) v SSHD  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 40).  The judge reasonably  and  rationally,  giving  adequate
    reasons, did not accept that the appellant had lost  contact  with  his
    family and that they could provide support to him (if needed) which was
    a relevant factor in considering  what  the  appellant's  circumstances
    would be, in relation to internal relocation, in Kabul.

64. I reject Ground 6.

    Conclusion

65. For the above reasons, the judge did  not  materially  err  in  law  in
    reaching his adverse findings and in dismissing the appellant's  appeal
    on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

Decision

66. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.   That  decision,
    therefore, stands.

67. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              2 October 2020

