
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09776/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2020                      |On 6 August 2020                     |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     AIA
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Somalia.  She applied  for  asylum  when
    she arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 July 2016. Her  application  was
    refused and her subsequent appeal was dismissed on 20 March  2000.  She
    made further submissions on 31 July 2019 and these were accepted  as  a
    fresh claim for asylum, but her application was refused on 18 September
    2019. She appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver in a  decision  promulgated  on  29
    January 2020.

2.   The Appellant appealed against this decision on the basis  that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had  refused  to  grant  an  adjournment  when  the
    Appellant was not able to engage with the hearing due to mental  health
    difficulties. It was also  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  not  given
    sufficient anxious scrutiny to the evidence before him.  Permission  to
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Martin, sitting as a First-tier Tribunal Judge, on 14 March 2020.

3.   As a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara  made
    further directions on 12 May 2020, having come  to  the  view  that  it
    would be appropriate to determine whether there had been  an  error  of
    law on the papers. The Appellant's counsel responded on  26  May  2020,
    stating that she continued to rely on her grounds of appeal and that it
    was her view that the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-hearing.

4.   On 9 June 2020 the Respondent wrote  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the
    Appellant's solicitors stating  that  she  considered  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver's decision did reveal material error of  law  and
    that, in particular, the Judge should have  granted  the  Appellant  an
    adjournment. She also asked the Upper Tribunal to set aside  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver's decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing. I have extended time for the Respondent
    to reply to Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara's directions in recognition  of
    the difficulties faced, as a consequence of the current pandemic.

5.   Neither party opposed the error of  law  hearing  being  heard  on  the
    papers, as they were in agreement that the decision had to be set aside
    and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Therefore, and  in  accordance
    with the overwhelming  objectives  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, as amended, I have decided that  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to have a paper error of law hearing.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   I have taken into account the Appellant's grounds of  appeal  and  also
    Abdi Abby's witness statement, dated 12 February  2020,  which  clearly
    suggested that the Appellant was not capable of  giving  the  necessary
    instructions or participating in her appeal hearing on 2 January  2020.
    The fact that she had been able to give instructions and  appear  at  a
    previous appeal was not a relevant consideration when assessing whether
    a fair hearing could be  conducted  on  that  particular  day  for  the
    purposes of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

7.   In addition, the manner  in  which  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oliver
    dealt with the application for an adjournment did not comply with Joint
    Presidential  Guidance  Note  No.  2  of  2010  Child,  vulnerable  and
    sensitive appellant guidance. In order to reach a fair decision on  the
    Appellant's appeal he needed to be  in  possession  of  expert  medical
    evidence in relation to her mental capacity and  the  impact  that  her
    mental state may have on her entitlement to international protection.

8.   Therefore, I find that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oliver's  decision
    contained material errors of law.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    Oliver or Sullivan.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 30 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


