

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/09760/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 8 March 2018                         | on 13 March 2019                 |
|                                        |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     A G
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H V McCusker, of McAuley McCarthy & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals to the UT against the decision  of  FtT  Judge  Lucas,
    promulgated on 30 October 2018,  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum and on human rights grounds.

 3. The case turned on credibility.  The complaint of the SSHD is that  the
    judge dealt with this "only by 5 short paragraphs" (page 7 of 8 of  the
    decision), and failed to engage with the reasoning in the  respondent's
    refusal  letter,  designed  to  show  "significant  discrepancies   and
    inconsistencies" (paragraphs 34 - 63, pages  7  to  16  of  29  of  the
    letter).

 4. Concision in decision-making may be considered a virtue.  Judges do not
    have to deal with every line of a party's case.   However,  the  losing
    side is entitled to know why its main contentions have  been  rejected.
    At first sight of the letter and the decision, there might be something
    in the SSHD's complaint.

 5. At [49] the decision summarises the corrupt and  oppressive  nature  of
    the regime in Rwanda.  The general background was not disputed,  so  no
    more needed to be said.

 6. At [50], the FtT recorded that it placed little or  no  weight  on  not
    immediately seeking medical attention in the UK.  Again, that is not in
    dispute.

 7. Significant consideration begins at [51], which contains two  elements.
    The FtT says it "had the  benefit  of  seeing  the  appellant  at  this
    hearing", and formed its own impression, "in so far as any tribunal can
    objectively assess these matters", that the appellant was troubled  and
    traumatised.  The SSHD does not suggest that goes any further than  the
    FtT was entitled to do.

 8. Also at [51], the FtT relies on a psychiatric report and a letter  from
    the Rape Crisis Centre  to  support  its  finding  that  the  appellant
    suffered the trauma she claimed in Rwanda".

 9. The report was from a clinical psychologist  of  Glasgow  Psychological
    Trauma Service, incorrectly described as a psychiatric  report  in  her
    inventory of productions.  The SSHD makes nothing of this slip, and  it
    is insignificant.

10. It is not disputed that the FtT was entitled  to  find,  based  on  the
    appellant's evidence and the supporting materials, that  she  had  been
    subject to serious ill-treatment Rwanda.

11. This puts a different perspective on the case from that of  the  author
    of the refusal letter, who had no such supporting  materials,  and  who
    accepted no aspect of the account.

12. At that point, the question for the FtT essentially became whether  the
    trauma was reasonably likely to  have  been  suffered  in  the  context
    related by the appellant.  The grounds do not acknowledge  that  change
    of perspective.

13. At [52] the FtT accepted that there might be "some implausible aspects"
    of the claim, but bore in mind that Rwanda was not a western  democracy
    acting by principles of due process.

14. That gives very short  shrift  to  the  refusal  letter.   However,  on
    reference the letter is a laboured insistence, point by point, that the
    appellant's account is vague, speculative and unclear.  Mr Govan, as  I
    understood his submission, acknowledged that the  letter  made  a  long
    series of rather similar points,  no  single  one  of  which  could  be
    identified as so powerful as to be anywhere near to determinative.

15. Based on his rule 24  response,  Mr  McCusker  was  ready  to  offer  a
    detailed refutation, observing that the appellant  was  criticised  for
    not narrating matters which could not reasonably have been  within  her
    knowledge, such as the motives of the authorities; the further  outcome
    of a police enquiry, after her release; or the reason she was asked  to
    help rig an election (although she had reasonably surmised  that  might
    have been because she had prior experience of electoral procedure).

16. At [53] the judge accepted evidence  that  the  authorities  froze  the
    appellant's bank accounts in  Rwanda.   Partly  the  finding  was  made
    because that would be an odd thing to fabricate, which is a  reasonable
    observation.

17. It is somewhat mystifying in this paragraph that the judge says he  has
    considered "the evidence from the solicitors in Rwanda", when there was
    none, and goes on to say it is hardly surprising  that  they  have  not
    supplied a letter or a  statement.   Unravelled  at  the  hearing,  the
    position is that the appellant said her solicitors in  Rwanda  obtained
    and supplied the copy letters from the prosecuting authorities  to  the
    bank about freezing accounts (copied and translated in her inventory).

18. Paragraph  [53]  thus  adds  two  adds  two  further  elements  to  the
    reasoning.

19. Paragraph [54]  finds  that  the  appellant  is  educated  and  bright,
    consistent with her claimed roles in Rwanda, considerations which add a
    little, but are hardly above neutral.

20. The appellant's  sister  gave  evidence  to  the  FtT,  which  broadly,
    although indirectly, supported her account.   There  is  no  reason  to
    think that evidence was not accepted, and perhaps it was, in context of
    the rest of the decision.  A finding should have been expressed.

21. A decision should not be supported by reasons  which  cannot  be  found
    within it, and it makes some slips, as  mentioned  above.   More  might
    usefully have been said about the SSHD's refusal reasons, although they
    did not demand a refutation in corresponding detail, once  the  finding
    of trauma had been made.  That said, the decision does explain why  the
    appellant was found credible.

22. Although the grounds initially look strong, on closer examination  they
    fall short of showing that the reasons given in the FtT's decision  are
    less than legally adequate.  That decision shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      11 March 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




