
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09262/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 9th April 2019                    |On 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     BS
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Johnrose, instructed by Broudie Jackson and
                    Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in  this  determination  identified  as  BS.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. For reasons  set  out  in  a  decision  dated  12  July  2018,  the
         respondent refused BS' claim for protection and  his  human  rights
         claim. His appeal against the refusal of both  claims  came  before
         the First-tier Tribunal on 7th September 2018  and  by  a  decision
         promulgated on 19 October 2018, First-tier Tribunal Juss  dismissed
         his appeal.

      2. The appellant sought and  was  granted  permission,  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Saffer,  to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  it  was
         arguable the judge had failed to have regard to or make findings on
         the relevance of or weight to be attached to an  article  which  is
         allegedly independent corroboration of his account of his detention
         by the Iranian authorities.  Judge Saffer also  granted  permission
         to pursue a ground of appeal that alleged that Judge Juss  had  not
         taken full notes but stated that this would have to be supported by
         a full witness statement from the appellant's representative.

      3. Although the appellant's solicitors submitted  what  appear  to  be
         notes taken by his representative at the hearing before the  First-
         tier Tribunal (Ms Johnrose) there was  no  witness  statement  from
         her. I also note that she appeared  before  me  and,  clearly,  she
         cannot be both a representative and a witness. In the  event,  this
         matter was not pursued, it being clear that there was a clear error
         of law by the First-tier Tribunal judge and therefore the  decision
         had to be set aside to be remade.

      4. The article in question, referred to in  the  grant  of  permission
         was, it was acknowledged by Mr Tan, a piece of evidence that was of
         some significance to the appellant's claim. Mr Tan  submitted  that
         although it could be argued  that  consideration  of  that  article
         would not have resulted in a different outcome for  the  appellant,
         it was a piece of evidence that ought to have been considered and a
         finding made as to its weight and relevance.

      5. Although a judge is not required to set out each and every piece of
         evidence that is before him/her and is not required to  explain  in
         relation to each  piece  of  evidence  why  s/he  has  reached  the
         conclusion s/he has in  relation  to  weight  and  relevance,  this
         particular piece of evidence could have had some material effect on
         the outcome of the appeal. I am satisfied that in  this  case,  the
         failure by the First-tier Tribunal judge to  address  the  evidence
         and its materiality is an error of law such that  the  decision  is
         set aside to be re-made.

      6. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
         assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper  Tribunal.
         In this appeal, all the findings are set aside, and the  facts  are
         disputed or  unclear.  I  conclude  that  the  decision  should  be
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-determined.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be re-heard, no findings preserved.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I make an order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 9th April 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
