
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09687/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 August 2019                    |On 3 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     SIJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Elaahi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, SIJ, is a citizen of Pakistan born on 25 November  1981.
    He appeals against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cameron
    promulgated on 25 January 2019 dismissing his appeal against a decision
    of the respondent dated 23 July 2018 to dismiss his claim  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and the associated human rights claim.

Background

 2. The appellant's case is that he is a  gay  man  and  cannot  return  to
    Pakistan, for if he were to do so he would feel  compelled  to  conceal
    his homosexual identity to avoid persecution.  Judge Cameron  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on credibility grounds.   Primarily,  the  judge
    based his assessment on what  he  considered  to  be  the  inconsistent
    lifestyle choices made by the appellant in this country, in  particular
    by marrying a woman, from whom he is now estranged, shortly  after  his
    arrival.

 3. The appellant claimed to have been in a relationship with a man  called
    Ali in Pakistan for around ten years, prior to moving to Kuwait age 25.
       Upon his return from Kuwait, the appellant said he was devastated to
    find that Ali had decided to marry a woman and  that  the  relationship
    could no longer continue.

 4. In 2011, the appellant arrived in this country with leave as a student.
     Shortly afterwards, he met a lady, D, through an online dating  agency
    and  they  began  a  heterosexual  relationship  later  culminating  in
    marriage.  The appellant's case was that he did so to "cure" himself of
    his homosexuality.  He  said  that  he  could  not  maintain  a  sexual
    relationship with her, and that when he tried he found it repulsive.

 5. Judge Cameron was concerned that D did not  attend  the  hearing.   The
    appellant claimed to be estranged from her, and unable to make  contact
    with her.  The judge had credibility concerns with that contention,  as
    previously the appellant's representatives had written to the  Tribunal
    to request  an  adjournment  specifically  to  secure  D's  attendance,
    writing in terms which suggested that they were in  contact  with  her,
    and it was simply the case  that  she  had  an  unavoidable  commitment
    elsewhere on the date of the scheduled First-tier hearing.

 6. Judge Cameron considered that  it  was  that  it  was  implausible  and
    inherently  unlikely  that  the  appellant  would  be  a  gay  man   in
    circumstances when he  had  enjoyed  a  heterosexual  relationship  and
    subsequent marriage with D.

 7. So much is clear from  the  following  extracts  from  Judge  Cameron's
    decision.  At [72], the judge said  that  it  was  not  clear  why  the
    appellant had sought female  company  in  this  country  shortly  after
    having ended a ten-year homosexual  relationship  before  his  arrival.
    Similarly, at [76] the judge said that it was  "surprising"  that  once
    the appellant came to this country, where he would be able  to  explore
    his homosexuality without fear, that he in fact started a  relationship
    with a woman.  At [77] the judge said that it would  be  expected  that
    the appellant would have formed a heterosexual relationship in Pakistan
    where his family would not have the same objections  to  his  sexuality
    that he now claims they do have.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on two bases.

 9. First, the judge imported submitted his own subjective  expectation  of
    the behaviour that a homosexual man would be likely  to  engage  in  in
    this country, primarily by reference to the nature of the relationships
    he  expected  the  appellant  to  form,  that  is  to  say   homosexual
    relationships rather than heterosexual relationships.

10. Secondly, the judge was said to have placed insufficient weight and not
    given sufficient reasons in relation to his  analysis  of  the  medical
    evidence which had been provided to  him.   At  [60]  to  [70]  of  the
    decision the judge outlined a medicolegal report by  a  Dr  Hussain,  a
    consultant psychiatrist.  Throughout the  course  of  that  report,  as
    noted by Judge Cameron, Dr  Hussain  surveyed  the  appellant's  sexual
    history as claimed by the appellant, culminating in  the  finding  that
    the appellant suffers from posttraumatic stress disorder and depression
    with thoughts of suicidal ideation.  This was said to have been  caused
    by the appellant's attempts to supress his homosexuality and to  "cure"
    his own condition himself, as he perceived he had to.

Discussion

11. At the hearing, it was common  ground  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    relation to his treatment of the appellant's narrative  concerning  his
    homosexuality.  The judge  did  not  address  any  of  the  established
    background materials relating to the assessment of sexual  orientation-
    based  asylum  claims.   Rather,  he  imported   his   own   subjective
    expectations of how a gay man would behave and the sort of activity  in
    which he would engage.

12. There are many background materials relating to assessing asylum claims
    based on homosexuality.  For present purposes, it  will  be  sufficient
    simply to refer to the examples given in the grounds  of  appeal.   For
    example, the UNHCR Guidelines on Sexual Orientation, 23  October  2013,
    state:

         "Some LGB individuals, for example, may harbour deep  shame  and/or
         internalised  homophobia,  leading  them  to  deny   their   sexual
         orientation and/or to adopt verbal and physical behaviours in  line
         with heterosexual norms and roles."

    Similarly, the Court of Justice of the European Union in  joined  cases
    A, B and C v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie C-148/13 to C-
    150/13, ruled that decision makers must not rely solely on  stereotypes
    when deciding a  person's  sexual  orientation.   To  the  extent  that
    stereotypes may be a useful tool for decision makers, held the Court of
    Justice, that is only a matter of  relevance  or  significance  to  the
    extent that they are applied by reference to the "individual  situation
    and personal circumstances of the applicant for asylum" (see [62]).

13. For these reasons, the judge's approach to assessing the credibility of
    the appellant's claimed sexuality was infected by an error of law.

14. The question then arises as to whether this was  a  material  error  of
    law.  The  judge  had  other  credibility  concerns  arising  from  the
    appellant's account, in particular in relation to the absence of D from
    the hearing.  The judge rightly and quite legitimately had  credibility
    concerns arising from the reasons  given  for  D's  non-attendance,  in
    light of previous correspondence between his solicitors and the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

15. At [59], Judge  Cameron  quoted  correspondence  from  the  appellant's
    solicitors which expressed in clear terms an expectation that she would
    be available for the hearing on a future  occasion,  that  she  was  in
    contact with them and that it was simply the case that she  was  unable
    to attend on that occasion.  In my view, these  were  sound  and  clear
    credibility concerns which the judge was entitled to express  in  these
    terms. However, it is  difficult  to  divorce  this  sound  credibility
    analysis from the erroneous approach the judge took to determining  the
    appellant's sexuality, which  lay  at  the  heart  of  his  credibility
    assessment.

16. There is another reason why the judge's  overall  credibility  analysis
    was flawed.  Although the judge devoted ten paragraphs  to  summarising
    the evidence provided by Dr Hussain, as well as noting the contents  of
    some of the appellant's medical records, it appears that the judge  did
    not take into account the evidence provided by Dr Hussain  until  after
    he had conducted his substantive credibility analysis.  It is trite law
    that in the context of cases before  this  Tribunal  medical  evidence,
    such as that  in  the  appellant's  case  forms  part  of  the  overall
    assessment of the appellant's evidence  and  is  not  to  be  dismissed
    simply on account of the fact that the core  account  provided  by  the
    appellant has been found by the judge to lack credibility.   The  judge
    should have taken into account the evidence of Dr Hussain in a holistic
    fashion, explaining the  significance  or  otherwise  of  the  doctor's
    findings that the appellant suffers from posttraumatic stress.

17. Drawing this analysis together, in my view it is clear that there is  a
    material error of law  in  the  judge's  approach  to  determining  the
    appellant's sexuality.

18. This then raises the question as to whether or not, were  it  the  case
    that the judge approached his analysis  of  the  appellant's  sexuality
    differently, a different outcome would have been called for.

19. The established authority for the determination of asylum claims  based
    on sexual orientation is HJ (Iran) v the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2010] UKSC 31.  The judge  addressed  only  the  first
    question enunciated by Lord Hope at [35].  The  first  question  is  to
    consider whether the applicant is gay?

20. For the reasons I have outlined, Judge  Cameron's  assessment  of  this
    issue was flawed.  Were  it  the  case  that  the  appellant  had  been
    accepted to be gay by the  judge,  he  would  then  have  had  to  have
    considered what the likely risk factors would be facing  the  appellant
    upon his return.  Central to that assessment, at [35.d] of Lord  Hope's
    opinion, is the question of whether the appellant will conceal  aspects
    of his sexual orientation if returned to Pakistan, and if  so,  why  he
    will do so?  If he would conceal his sexual orientation out of fear for
    persecution, then  he  will  succeed  in  establishing  his  claim  for
    protection under the Refugee Convention.  By contrast,  if  the  reason
    that he would conceal his sexual orientation,  or  does  not  otherwise
    live an openly homosexual life, in Pakistan is different,  perhaps  for
    cultural, religious or other personal reasons then it will not  be  the
    case that  the  individual  concerned  faces  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on grounds of sexual orientation.

21. In this respect, the way in which the appellant conducted himself  when
    living in this country is highly relevant to the assessment.  The judge
    however did not consider the reasons why the appellant had not lived an
    openly homosexual life in this country, or the fact that he had married
    someone of the opposite  sex  and  had  lived  an  openly  heterosexual
    lifestyle for a period of  time,  in  the  context  of  the  HJ  (Iran)
    analysis.

22. The judge should have addressed his analysis to this stage  of  the  HJ
    (Iran) criteria, rather than focusing on the first limb  of  the  test,
    concerning whether the appellant was gay.

23. I have considered whether it is possible to retain this matter in  this
    Tribunal in order for a remaking decision.  I have decided that that is
    not the appropriate course of action.  The judge's analysis of  whether
    the appellant is gay  was  flawed;  it  was  infected  by  the  judge's
    subjective  expectations  of  how  a  gay  man  would  behave,  without
    reference to the background materials concerning such matters.   It was
    also flawed because the judge did not consider the medical evidence  in
    the round, but rather addressed in operative terms having already found
    the appellant to lack credibility.

24. In light of the flawed approach to determining  the  primary  issue  of
    whether the appellant is a gay man, there are no findings of fact which
    I can preserve in order to conduct the  subsequent  stages  of  the  HJ
    (Iran) analysis in the Tribunal  (if  indeed  a  re-assessment  of  the
    appellant's credibility leads to a finding that he  is  a  gay  man;  a
    fresh assessment would not necessarily lead to that conclusion).

25. The appropriate course of action is for a fresh credibility  assessment
    to be conducted taking into account all the factors that were  advanced
    on behalf of the appellant, and, if necessary, for the later HJ  (Iran)
    questions to be addressed.

26. Therefore, I set aside the decision of Judge  Cameron,  and  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by any other judge,  with
    no findings of Judge Cameron preserved.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.  The decision of Judge Cameron  is  set  aside.   The
matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  any  other
judge.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed  [pic]                   Date 23 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
