
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09669/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th July, 2017                        |On 18th July 2017                 |
|Given extempore, corrected                |                                  |
|and sent to Promulgation                  |                                  |
|on 17th July 2017.                        |                                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    [s s]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C R Cole, a solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq,  who  claims  to  have  left  that
    country on 4th November, 2015, and travelled to the United Kingdom with
    the help of an agent.  He entered the United Kingdom on 29th  February,
    2016, concealed inside a lorry.  He was served with form IS96ENF as  an
    illegal entrant on 1st March, 2016.

2.   The appellant subsequently made an application to  the  respondent  for
    asylum, but that claim was refused on 26th August, 2016.  The appellant
    subsequently appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  and  his  appeal  was
    heard in Bradford on 30th January  this  year  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Spencer.

3.   At issue was the appellant's date of birth.   He  claims  that  he  was
    born on 1st October, 2000, but his date of birth is not accepted by the
    respondent.  Judge Spencer was aware of this  at  the  hearing  and  he
    noted an age assessment which had been carried out.   He  examined  the
    age  assessment  and  concluded  that  it  was  not  Merton  compliant.
    Unfortunately, the judge does not  say  whether  he  accepts  that  the
    appellant is an adult, or whether he believes him to be a minor, and in
    the event that he is a minor, then of course he should have treated him
    as such when considering his evidence.

4.   The appellant challenges the judge's decision for not making a  finding
    as to the appellant's age and not taking account of the appellant's age
    in assessing credibility.

5.   Ms Pettersen quite properly accepted that the determination  could  not
    stand and both  representatives  have  agreed  that  the  determination
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in order that  clear  and
    properly  reasoned  findings  can  be  made.    The   errors   in   the
    determination effectively mean that the appellant  has  been  denied  a
    fair hearing before the First Tier Tribunal. The appeal is remitted  to
    the First Tier Tribunal to  be  heard  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Spencer.  If the  judge  rehearing  the  appeal  is  satisfied  on  the
    evidence that the appellant is  a  minor,  then  he  should  treat  the
    appellant as a minor.  If, on the other  hand,  he  can  make  no  such
    finding or is satisfied on the evidence that the appellant is an adult,
    then he should give clear and full reasons for such finding.  Two hours
    should be  allowed  for  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  and  a  Kurdish
    interpreter will be required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

