








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09822/2016



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Manchester                         |                                   |
|On 15th April 2019                 |On 13 June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                           Mr Talal Fahd Shimmari

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer, Counsel, instructed by Adams solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup promulgated on the 8th January 2019  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection or relief otherwise on the grounds of Article 2
    and 3 of the ECHR. Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tier
    Tribunal judge Grubb on 21st February  2019.  Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

         3  The Grounds challenge various aspects of the  judge's  reasoning
         and assessment of the evidence in reaching his adverse  credibility
         finding. All  the  grounds  are  arguable.  In  particular,  it  is
         arguable that the judge failed  properly  to  have  regard  to  the
         background evidence consistent with the  appellant's  claim  to  be
         involved in a demonstration in 2011; wrongly failed  to  take  into
         account that  the  solicitors  letter  stated  that  the  screening
         interview missed a page and failed to appreciate that the appellant
         had not been asked about the Bidoon Committee at interview.

 5. Thus the appeal appeared before me to determine whether  there  was  an
    error of law in the decision of Judge Pickup.

 6. I note that there had been a previous full hearing on the 6th June 2017
    and decision in respect of this appeal, a decision by  Judge  M  Davies
    dated 9th June 2017.  That decision had been set  aside  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal with the matter to be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The appeal had been remitted for a fresh hearing and was heard by Judge
    Pickup.

Factual background

 7. The appellant, date of birth 16 July 1989, claims to be an undocumented
    Bidoon from Kuwait. The appellant has claimed  that  his  parents  were
    living in the  desert  during  the  1965  census  and  therefore  never
    registered. When the appellant's father tried to register later he  was
    turned away. As his parents were unregistered the appellant claims that
    he was also unregistered. The appellant therefore claims  that  he  not
    being registered  Bidoon  is  an  undocumented  Bidoon  emanating  from
    Kuwait.

 8. Further the appellant claims that on 18 February 2014 he  was  involved
    in protest demonstration seeking  to  promote  Bidoon  rights.  He  was
    arrested and taken to a police station. Whilst he was released after  a
    week, the Kuwaiti authorities were seeking information from  him  about
    others involved in seeking to promote Bidoon rights and  the  appellant
    was required to report back to the authorities. The appellant  did  not
    report back but hid in an area called  Al  Jahra  in  the  stables.  He
    remained in hiding for 18 months.

 9. The appellant has given an alternative version in which he claims  that
    his fear was of ISIS; that he was protesting against  ISIS;  and  as  a
    result was detained for 15 days.

10. He then left Kuwait on 1 September 2016. The appellant left  Kuwait  by
    plane travelling  on  a  passport  provided  by  an  agent.  Again  the
    appellant has given various accounts as to where he travelled  to,  how
    long he was there and how ultimately she entered  the  United  Kingdom.
    [For example the appellant has spent periods of time in France but  did
    not claim asylum there.]

Grounds of appeal

11. Whilst the leave makes reference to a demonstration in 2011, it is  not
    the appellant's case that he was involved in a demonstration  in  2011.
    Mr Greer on behalf of the appellant accepted that it was  not  part  of
    the appellant's claim that he had been involved  in  demonstrations  in
    2011.

12. The appellant's claim is  based  upon  the  appellant  attending  at  a
    demonstration, which took place on the 18th or 19th February 2014.   An
    issue which the judge had to determine was whether or not the appellant
    did participate  in  that  demonstration  in  February  2014  and  what
    happened to the appellant as a result.

13. Mr Greer made submissions raising specifically a  number  of  areas  of
    challenge.

14. With  regard  to  the  appellant's  involvement  in  demonstrations  in
    February 2014 Mr Greer asserted the decision in part was irrational and
    unreasonable and failed to take  account  of  the  background  evidence
    dealing with the 2014 demonstrations as set out in paragraph 4  of  the
    grounds. It is claimed that the judge had found on  the  basis  of  the
    background evidence that the claim  that  the  appellant  had  attended
    demonstrations in 2014 was not credible.

15. The background articles considered by the judge [pages 20 of  the  main
    bundle and page  18  of  the  supplementary  bundle]  relating  to  the
    demonstrations, it is suggested, were dismissed  as  propaganda  pieces
    issued by Bedoonrights groups and as such were  not  reliable.  It  was
    submitted that the articles were reliable and supported the appellant's
    account.

16. Also in the papers are further reports. They were attached to the  back
    of the record of proceedings of Judge Davies. The  reports  are  headed
    "BEDOONRIGHTS Defending the rights of the stateless in Kuwait" and were
    titled "10 days of  Protests,  9  Activists  in  Jail"   and  "Interior
    Ministry Threatens to Target Protesters Families" and "Bedoon Activists
    Kidnapped After His Speech".

17.  The 3 reports refer specifically to the demonstrations starting on  19
    February 2014. The reports are dated between 23 February 2014 and early
    March 2014. They indicate that water cannon and tear gas and such  were
    used upon the demonstrators in the demonstration on 19 February 2014.

18. I note in paragraph 37  of  Judge  Pickup's  decision  that  there  are
    references to looseleaf reports allegedly handed in  on  9  June  2017.
    Those reports would have been handed in at  the  time  of  the  hearing
    before Judge Davies and attached by him to the back of  the  Record  of
    Proceedings.

19. Judge Pickup appears not to have considered those reports. In paragraph
    37 he indicates that he cannot find them in the file.  As  stated  they
    were attached to the back of the record of proceedings of Judge Davies.

20. Mr Greer sought to make the point that the CPIN  report  of  July  2016
    relied on by the respondent itself relies upon the same sources as  the
    background articles submitted by the appellant. It  is  submitted  that
    the appellant's account is consistent with the news  articles  and  the
    judge should not have dismissed the reports from Bedoonrights as merely
    propaganda. In effect it was  being  claimed  that  the  news  articles
    supported the appellant's claims  as  to  what  was  happening  at  the
    demonstrations.

21.  The CPIN report appears at  page  3  appellant's  bundle.  There  when
    dealing with the riots it indicates that in 2014 February and March the
    rioters were dispersed and some were  arrested.  The  police  authority
    used teargas, smoke bombs, water: physical  violence.  Whilst  that  is
    clearly drawing upon a document emanating from  Bedoonrights,  it  does
    provide some degree of support to the appellant's  account.  CPIN  does
    rely upon the reports.

22. The judge in saying that the loose-leaf reports were not in the  papers
    before him, clearly had not considered the  three  reports  identified.
    As the judge has failed to consider all of the evidence  submitted  and
    as he has made findings of fact adverse to the appellant without  fully
    considering evidence material to the issues under consideration,  there
    is clearly an error of law in the decision of Judge Pickup.

23. The appellant's involvement and participation in the demonstration  was
    central to the credibility of the appellant's account overall.  In  the
    circumstances the findings with regard to credibility cannot  stand  as
    account has not been taken of all the evidence. The only course is  for
    this matter to be remitted back to the First-tier for hearing afresh.

24. In light of the matters set out I do not consider it necessary to  deal
    with the remaining grounds.

Decision

25. There is a material error of law in the decision.

26. The appeal is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
    afresh.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 11th June 2019



