
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09173/2019




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Birmingham                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th November 2020              |On 23rd November 2020              |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA




                                   Between


                                     RU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr A Islam, Fountain Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Although  no  anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
("FtT"), as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a  direction  is
made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, RU is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This  direction  applies  amongst
others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The hearing before me on 17th November 2020 took the form of  a  remote
    hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  Although the
    appellant did not join the hearing, Mr Islam confirmed the appellant is
    aware of the hearing and is content for the hearing to proceed  in  his
    asence.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was  addressed
    by the representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been  if
    the parties had attended the hearing together.  I was  satisfied:  that
    this constituted a  hearing  in  open  court;  that  the  open  justice
    principle has been secured; that no  party  has  been  prejudiced;  and
    that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a right or interest,
    it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was  satisfied  that
    it was  in  the  interests  of  justice  and  in  accordance  with  the
    overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing  because  of  the
    present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to
    avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing  would  ensure  the
    matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that  is  proportionate
    to the importance of the case, the complexity of the issues that arise,
    and the anticipated costs and resources of the parties.  At the end  of
    the hearing I  was  satisfied  that  both  parties  had  been  able  to
    participate fully in the proceedings.


    Background


 2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  He arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom on 11 July 2017 and claimed asylum on 13 July 2017.  The  claim
    was refused by the respondent on 6 September 2019 and  the  appellant's
    appeal against that decision was dismissed for reasons  set  out  in  a
    decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  E  Smith,  promulgated  on  2
    December 2019.


 3. The background to the claim for international protection is set out  at
    paragraphs [6] to [9] of the decision of Judge  Smith.   The  appellant
    attended  the  hearing  of  his  appeal  and  gave  evidence  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter. The findings  and  conclusions  of  Judge
    Smith are set out at paragraphs [20]  to  [40]  of  the  decision.   At
    paragraph [26] of the decision, Judge  Smith  summarised  the  findings
    upon the core of the appellant's account in the following way:


         "Taking both limbs together and factoring in the  discrepancies  in
         his account of the bombing and of those he states accused him I  am
         satisfied the appellant has not established that he  is  wanted  by
         the Taliban because his family were regarded as informants or  that
         his entire family were killed or his house  destroyed.  It  follows
         that there is no reason why the appellant could not return  to  his
         home  area  [Tagab  District  in  the  Kapisa  Province].   In  the
         alternative he could relocate to Kabul"


 4. The appellant advanced three grounds of appeal.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 28th  February  2020  on
    the third ground only.  In so doing he said:


         "It is arguable that the judge erred in his approach to the article
         15(c) risk in the appellant's home area  and/or  Kabul,  given  the
         most recent UNHCR report.  Permission  is  accordingly  granted  on
         this ground."


 5. Mr Islam relied upon the written submissions sent to  the  Tribunal  by
    Fountain Solicitors on 1st July 2020.  He submits that in reaching  the
    conclusion that the appellant can return to his home area, or,  in  the
    alternative, relocate to Kabul, Judge  Smith  failed  to  consider  the
    humanitarian and security situation  in  Afghanistan.   In  particular,
    Judge Smith failed to have  regard  to  the  background  material  that
    confirms  the  high  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence  to  which  the
    appellant would be exposed in the Tagab District,  and  in  Kabul.   He
    refers to the EASO Country of Origin Report of June 2019 that states at
    paragraph 2.17.2 that the Tagab District is currently contested between
    the Afghan government and the Taliban.  Furthermore, Mr  Islam  submits
    the appellant had  relied  upon  the  matters  set  out  in  the  UNHCR
    'Eligibility Guidelines  for  Assessing  the  International  Protection
    needs  of  Asylum-Seekers  from  Afghanistan,  August  2018',  but  the
    background  material  was  not  considered  by  Judge  Smith  when   he
    considered the Article 15(c) risk upon return to Afghanistan.


 6. The appellant acknowledges that the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT  00130  (IAC)  has  now
    been promulgated, but Mr Islam submits, Article 15(c) QD encompasses  a
    "sliding scale" whereby, the more the appellant is able to show that he
    is specifically  affected  by  reason  of  factors  particular  to  his
    personal circumstances, the lower the level of indiscriminate  violence
    required.   He  submits  the  appellant's  individual  characteristics,
    namely his poor mental health, young age at the time of  his  departure
    from Afghanistan, the lack of support upon return to Afghanistan,  lack
    of education and the lack of identification documents are sufficient to
    establish  the  threshold  to  be  met  for  the  grant  of  subsidiary
    protection.


 7. The  failure  by  Judge  Smith  to  refer  to  the  UNHCR  'Eligibility
    Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection needs of  Asylum-
    Seekers from Afghanistan, August 2018', is in my judgment immaterial.


 8. In AS (Safety of Kabul)  (CG)  [2020]  UKUT  130,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    considered a wealth of  evidence  regarding  the  Article  15(c)  risk,
    including the 2018 UNHCR Guidelines, the 2019  UNHCR  Submissions,  the
    2019 COI UNHCR Report, and EASO's Legal Analysis  and  Recommendations.
    The Upper Tribunal carefully considered the UNHCR evidence  and  agreed
    with the critique of the SSHD's counsel as set out in paragraphs  [188]
    to [193] of the decision.   The Upper Tribunal  also  addressed  EASO's
    Legal Analysis and Recommendations at paragraphs [193] to [198] of  its
    decision.


 9. At paragraph [210], the Upper Tribunal acknowledged it  had  reached  a
    conclusion that is different to that expressed by  UNHCR  in  the  2019
    UNHCR submissions where (in contrast to the 2018 UNCHR  Guidelines  and
    2019 UNHCR COI Report) it is stated in terms that UNHCR believes  Kabul
    is not an internal flight alternative.


10. Having carefully considered the claim being advanced by the  appellant,
    Judge Smith found that the appellant has not  established  that  he  is
    wanted by the Taliban because his family were regarded  as  informants,
    or that his entire family were killed or his  house  destroyed.   Judge
    Smith therefore rejected the core of the appellant's claim and  it  was
    open to him to conclude that there is no reason why the appellant could
    not return to his home area.


11. In my judgment, Judge Smith considered the evidence before the Tribunal
    and carefully considered the profile of the  appellant.   At  paragraph
    [28] of his decision, Judge Smith noted the importance of the  specific
    nature of the appellant's case.  He considered  whether  the  appellant
    would be at any greater risk than a member of the  general  public  and
    was satisfied that the appellant would not.  He noted the appellant  is
    relatively young, is not connected to the Taliban and has no reason  to
    fear the Taliban.  The appellant is, on the unchallenged findings made,
    a single man now aged 21 with no apparent health issues.  He is not  at
    risk from the Taliban or the authorities in  Afghanistan  and  he  gave
    evidence before the FtT with the assistance of an interpreter.  He  has
    been able to support  himself  in  the  UK  and  has  demonstrated  the
    personality, capacity and intelligence to manage  independently.  Judge
    Smith rejected the  appellant's  claim  that  his  entire  family  were
    killed.


12. At paragraph [41] of its decision in AS (Safety of Kabul)  (CG)  [2020]
    UKUT 130 the Upper Tribunal confirmed that whilst the  "sliding  scale"
    will clearly be relevant in a  case  concerning  subsidiary  protection
    under Article  2(e)  Qualification  Directive,  in  appeals  concerning
    internal relocation,  the  sliding-scale  considerations  are  subsumed
    within the assessment of reasonableness.


13. It is clear in my judgement that in reaching his decision, Judge  Smith
    considered the age at which the appellant  left  Afghanistan,  and  his
    personal profile and characteristics. Judge Smith noted,  at  paragraph
    [17] of his decision that the  events  referred  to  by  the  appellant
    occurred when the appellant was a minor, but he was an  adult  when  he
    arrived in the UK. I am quite satisfied that in reaching his  decision,
    Judge   Smith   carefully   considered   the   appellant's   individual
    circumstances and whether  he  would  have  support,  and  be  able  to
    navigate the challenges of Kabul should that be necessary.


14. The decision of Judge Smith is to be read looking at the  substance  of
    his reasoning and not with a fine-tooth comb in an effort  to  identify
    errors. The focus of Judge Smith was on the principal issues in dispute
    between the parties.  In my judgement the conclusions reached by  Judge
    Smith on the facts as he found them, that the appellant can  return  to
    his home area, or alternatively, that internal relocation to  Kabul  is
    available to the appellant, were conclusions  that  were  open  to  the
    Judge on the evidence and findings made.


15. It follows that in my judgement, there was no  material  error  in  the
    decision of Judge Smith capable of affecting the outcome of the  appeal
    and the appeal is dismissed.


DECISION


16. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Smith promulgated on 2nd December 2019 shall stand.



    V. Mandalia                         Date     18th November 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
