

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09163/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated  |
|On 3rd January 2018                       |On 15th January 2018             |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                    [P V]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Heller, instructed by John Street solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office  Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



   1. The appellant's claim for international  protection  and/or  leave  to
      remain on human rights grounds was  refused  by  the  respondent.  Her
      appeal, heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bird  (incorrectly
      recorded on the First-tier Tribunal decision as Beg) on  16th  October
      2017, was dismissed for reasons set out in a determination promulgated
      on 19th October 2017.


   2. The appellant sought and was granted permission to  appeal  by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson on 8th November 2017 on the grounds  it
      was arguable that the judge erred in law as follows:


                Ground 1:  Failed to  take  into  account  the  appellant's
                proffered explanation why she had delayed claiming asylum;
                Ground 2:  Made speculative, unsustainable  and  unreasoned
                credibility findings
                Ground 3:  In her assessment of sufficiency of protection;
                Ground  4:   In  her  consideration  of  the  viability  of
                internal relocation; and
                Ground  5:   By  making  contradictory  and   unsustainable
                findings with regard to her relationship with Mr Sadok (the
                human rights claim)


   3. The essential basis of her claim for international protection was that
      her step father had raped and abused her on several occasions after
      she had reported him to the police for running an illegal betting
      business. She claimed she had tried to run away but had been followed;
      her stepfather was influential and had contacts within the police and
      if she returned to Thailand he would kill her.




      International protection claim


   4. Ms Heller  amplified  the  grounds  upon  which  permission  had  been
      granted. She  acknowledged  that,  in  themselves,  each  element  she
      referred to was insufficient to found a successful conclusion that the
      judge had materially erred in law but that cumulatively they build the
      foundation to show the decision was perverse.


            Ground 1

   5. The consideration by the judge of s8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment
      of Claimant's) Act 2004 at the commencement of  her  conclusions,  the
      use of the word 'significantly' in terms of  the  undermining  of  the
      appellant's credibility and the failure to refer  to  the  appellant's
      explanation that it was the threat of removal  that  concentrated  her
      mind and caused  her  to  make  her  protection  claim  were,  it  was
      submitted, indications that the judge had placed too  great  a  weight
      upon the late claim when considering  the  credibility  of  the  claim
      overall.


            Ground 2


   6. Ms Heller referred to a number of  matters  in  connection  with  this
      ground. In particular
    . that it was speculation on the part of the judge to conclude that,  if
      the appellant had contacted the police as she claimed, her  stepfather
      would have said more to her than "don't get involved in my business";
    . that the fact that the appellant did  not  give  a  statement  to  the
      police was not the appellant's fault but rather  a  result  in  police
      inaction; the lack of evidence of police follow up  is  supportive  of
      her fear of lack of adequate protection from the police.
    . The judge failed to give any reason for finding that she did not  tell
      her friend of the rape, as she claims.
    . It was credible that the appellant,  having  undergone  the  traumatic
      experiences she claimed would be unable to recall dates and times; she
      consistently stated they occurred whilst she was at university.
    . Although the judge said she would be able to utilise her  degree,  the
      submission was that  she  would  again  be  forced  into  prostitution
      because of lack of employment.
    . It was credible that the appellant did not  tell  her  mother  because
      they were not close and that she did  not  tell  her  uncle  and  aunt
      because she did not want them to get into trouble.
    . If she returned to Thailand it was credible that her uncle would think
      she was going to report him to the police and  the  finding  that  her
      uncle would, after 7 years, consider it unlikely that she would do  so
      was inaccurate.


            Ground 3 and 4


   7. Ms Heller submitted that  more  detailed  information  and  background
      material had been provided to the Judge which she had failed  to  take
      into account in reaching her conclusions that there was sufficiency of
      protection and that internal relocation would not be unduly harsh.


            Discussion on grounds 1 to 4.


   8. The First-tier Tribunal judge has  not  made  clear  whether  she  has
      considered the timing of the appellant's asylum claim holistically  or
      whether, given the delay by the appellant in making  her  claim,  that
      has impacted  upon  her  fundamental  assessment  of  the  appellant's
      credibility. This is a protection claim and must  be  considered  with
      anxious scrutiny. The first finding by the judge is that the delay  in
      claiming asylum of  some  7  years  has  "significantly"  damaged  the
      appellant's credibility. Although of  course  in  writing  a  decision
      there is a linear process to be followed, the judge has not made clear
      that the delay is one element of  her  consideration  but  rather  the
      decision reads that the judge has viewed the appellant's claim through
      the prism of significantly  damaged  credibility.  The  findings  that
      follow cannot withstand such an error. On that basis,  the  protection
      decision cannot stand. There is a material error  of  law  and  I  set
      aside the protection decision to be remade.


            Ground 5 discussion


   9. This ground is essentially a challenge to the Article  8  findings  of
      the judge the  basis  of  which  is  that  there  is  no  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship  between  the  appellant  and  Mr  Sadok.  The
      complained of discrepancy does not sit  easily  with  a  finding  that
      there is no genuine and  subsisting  relationship  and,  although  not
      directly related to the credibility findings in the  protection  claim
      decision, I have considerable concern that  the  judge  had,  both  by
      reference to the delay/s8 and by reference to several failed residence
      card applications reached  that  conclusion  without  considering  the
      evidence as a whole  and  in  particular  the  oral  evidence  of  the
      applicant and Mr Sadok. The judge erred in finding that Mr  Sadok  did
      not have a permanent right of residence because  he  did  not  have  a
      residence card to that effect. A residence  card  is  of  course  only
      declaratory and is not compulsory  to  establish  permanent  right  of
      residence. It may also be the case that an earlier application  for  a
      residence card by the appellant was incorrectly  refused  a  right  of
      appeal although the exact details of the previous applications was not
      aired before me or the First-tier Tribunal judge. The  combination  of
      all these matters do, when considered in conjunction with my  findings
      on the protection claim, amount to an error of law  such  that  I  set
      aside the decision.


            Conclusion


  10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.


  11. I set aside the decision to be remade, no findings preserved.


  12. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.




                                    Date 10th January 2018
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
