
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09276/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th February 2020                |On 2nd March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    G S M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw, instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant claims to be a citizen of Afghanistan born  in  1998.  He
    appeals against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Louveaux,
    dated 25 September 2019, dismissing his  protection  claim  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

2.   The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim to be at risk  on  return
    to Afghanistan on the basis that the Appellant was not  a  national  of
    Afghanistan but  was  an  Indian  national.  The  Respondent  therefore
    proposed to return the Appellant to India. The Appellant's  father,  an
    Indian national, made an application for a visit  visa  to  the  UK  in
    2006. The Appellant was included in the application as an  accompanying
    child and his  Indian  passport  was  submitted  and  included  in  the
    Respondent's bundle.

3.   The Appellant appealed on four grounds: language; fraudulent  document;
    taskira and passport; and nationality. Permission was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Holmes, on all grounds, on the basis that there was
    an arguable error of law at ground 4 for the following reasons:

         "If, as the judge found, the Appellant had acquired a  taskira  and
         an Afghan passport through fraud - it is arguably  not  necessarily
         the case that he had even  voidably  acquired  Afghan  citizenship;
         merely a fraudulently obtained passport.  That begs the question of
         whether the  Appellant  had  in  fact  ever  renounced  his  Indian
         citizenship, and thus whether he remains  an  Indian  citizen  even
         now. It is arguable that TG indicates an error of law  in  approach
         to the nationality issue."


Submissions

4.   Ms Shaw relied on additional  grounds  and  submitted  the  points  she
    raised were relevant to the key issue of nationality. I  was  satisfied
    those grounds clarified the earlier  grounds  and  did  not  amount  to
    additional grounds of appeal. Ms Everett agreed and was content to deal
    with the points raised therein.

     Ground 1:
5.   Ms Shaw submitted that the Appellant speaks Kabli and it is clear  from
    the CPIN that this is an Afghan Sikh dialect and therefore  this  point
    should not have been taken against the Appellant. The  written  grounds
    submit that the judge concluded that it was implausible that  a  person
    who had lived his entire life in Afghanistan would  not  have  acquired
    some knowledge of Dari (or Pushto). It is submitted that  Kabli  is  an
    amalgamation of Persian Dari and Punjabi and therefore the judge failed
    to consider or appreciate this point.

6.   Ms Everett submitted that it  was  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he
    speaks  a  little  Kabli.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  assess   the
    Appellant's knowledge of Afghanistan and gave adequate reasons for  why
    the Appellant should know more about Afghanistan if his claim  to  have
    lived there his entire life was credible. The judge put his finding  in
    relation to the languages the Appellant  spoke  into  context  and  his
    conclusion that he would have expected the Appellant to know more about
    the language and  culture  in  Afghanistan  was  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.

     Ground 2:
7.   Ms Shaw submitted  that  it  was  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  had
    submitted  a  false  Indian  passport  in  his  application  for  entry
    clearance made in 2006. She accepted that  the  Appellant  produced  no
    evidence to support this assertion,  but  it  was  her  case  that  the
    Respondent had produced no evidence  either.  Ms  Shaw  submitted  that
    there was  evidence  within  the  Respondent's  knowledge  that  Indian
    passports could be  procured  with  the  submission  of  fake  identity
    documents. The Respondent's failure to disclose the Country Information
    and Guidance of February 2015 had resulted in the judge failing to take
    such evidence into account. In any event, given that  such  a  document
    was in the public domain, the judge  should  have  been  aware  of  the
    relative ease in which fraudulent passports could be obtained in  India
    and should have taken it into  account  in  assessing  the  Appellant's
    explanation that his Indian passport was a forgery.

8.   In the additional points raised today, Ms Shaw submitted  that  it  was
    irrational for the judge to rely on evidence in Wikipedia  with  regard
    to the Appellant's address in Delhi at Kingsway Camp.

9.    Ms  Everett  submitted  that  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the Appellant's explanation that he had used a forged  Indian
    passport to apply for entry clearance to visit the UK. Other  than  the
    Appellant's assertion that the Indian passport was a forgery, there was
    no other evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  show  that  the
    Appellant had fraudulently obtained his Indian passport.

     Ground 3:
10.   Ms  Shaw  submitted  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  show  that  the
    Appellant's taskira was not genuine because no checks had been made and
    the judge's finding at paragraph 29 was irrational.

11.  The judge stated at paragraph 29: "I accept  that  the  Taskira  itself
    may  be  a  genuine  document;  the  Afghan  Embassy  was  sufficiently
    satisfied as to the genuineness of the Taskira to issue  the  Appellant
    an Afghan passport. However, I find that it was fraudulently obtained."



12.  Ms Everrett submitted the judge  properly  applied  Tanveer  Ahmed  and
    concluded that the Appellant's taskira was not reliable  and  therefore
    he had no right to an Afghan passport.

     Ground 4:
13.  Ms Shaw submitted that the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    showed that the Appellant could  not  obtain  Indian  nationality.  The
    burden was on the Respondent to show that the Appellant could return to
    India and accordingly the judge had applied the wrong burden of  proof.
    The written grounds rely on TG (Interaction of  Directives  and  Rules)
    [2016] UKUT 00374.

14.  Ms Everett submitted the judge's conclusion that the Appellant was  not
    an Afghan Sikh but an Indian Sikh was open to the judge on the evidence
    before him. The Appellant had failed to demonstrate that he  would  not
    be able to obtain Indian nationality.

15.  In response, Ms Shaw submitted that Afghan  passports  were  issued  in
    Germany.  The Respondent had failed to show that  the  Indian  passport
    was genuine and the judge should have attached  little  weight  to  the
    Wikipedia  report.   Had  he  done  so  he  would  have  accepted   the
    Appellant's explanation that he had previously relied on a false Indian
    passport.


Conclusions and Reasons

16.  The Appellant arrived in the UK by plane from Pakistan on  16  February
    2018 and claimed asylum. He had no identity documents at his  screening
    interview. He was interviewed substantively on 14 June 2018.  He  could
    offer no explanation for why his fingerprints matched  the  visit  visa
    application made in 2006. He submitted a  copy  of  a  taskira  in  his
    appeal bundle dated 18 February 2019. His appeal on  26  February  2019
    was adjourned due to lack of court  time.  He  applied  to  the  Afghan
    Embassy for a passport on 10 May 2019.

17.  The judge did not find the Appellant to be a credible witness because:-



    (1)  He had little knowledge of Dari or Pushto.  He spoke only  Punjabi
         and had a little knowledge of Kabli, an  amalgamation  of  Persian,
         Dari and Punjabi (paragraph 18);


    (2)  He was largely ignorant of many aspects  of  life  in  Afghanistan
         which could not explain his claim to have lived  in  the  Gurdwara.
         He  had  no  knowledge  of  the  area  surrounding  the   Gurdwara,
         notwithstanding  his  father  left  the  Gurdwara  to  go  to  work
         (paragraph 19);


    (3)   The  Appellant's  account  of  having  left  the   Gurdwara   was
         inconsistent (paragraph 20) and his claim  to  have  lived  in  the
         Gurdwara was not supported by the documentary evidence he  produced
         (paragraph 22).

18.  The judge's findings were open to him on the evidence  before  him  and
    his conclusion that the Appellant was not a credible  witness  was  not
    challenged in the written grounds of appeal or in submissions before me
    today.

Ground 1
19.  The judge did not fail to appreciate that Kabli was an amalgamation  of
    Persian Dari and Punjabi.  The judge found that the Appellant's lack of
    knowledge of Pushto was one factor which undermined his credibility. On
    the Appellant's own evidence, he spoke Punjabi and a little Kabli.  The
    judge concluded that the Appellant's claim to have lived in Afghanistan
    his entire life  was  undermined  by  his  lack  of  knowledge  of  the
    languages spoken and his lack of knowledge of Afghanistan and his local
    area.  There was no material error of law as alleged in ground 1.

Ground 2
20.  Notwithstanding the  Respondent's  Country  Information  and  Guidance:
    India 2015, which states that Indian passports could be procured by the
    submission of false documents, the judge gave adequate reasons for  why
    he rejected the Appellant's explanation that his Indian passport was  a
    forgery. The information supplied by the Respondent from Wikipedia  did
    not preclude such a finding. The  judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the
    Appellant's assertion that his Indian passport was  a  forgery  on  the
    evidence in the entry clearance application, the fingerprint match  and
    the lack of evidence from the Appellant to show otherwise. The  was  no
    material error of law in the judge's conclusion that the  Applicant  is
    an Indian national.

Ground 3
21.  It was for the Appellant to show that the documents he relied  on  were
    genuine. The judge concluded that the taskira was not reliable  because
    it was issued when the Appellant was  16  years  old  and  contained  a
    photograph of the Appellant as a young boy.  There was  no  explanation
    for this or for why the Appellant's uncle  was  unable  to  obtain  the
    original taskira which was generally produced when the Appellant was  3
    or 4 years old.  There is no duty on the Respondent to check  with  the
    Afghan Embassy whether the taskira was genuine. The judge's  conclusion
    that  the  Appellant's  Afghan  passport  was  likely  to   have   been
    fraudulently obtained was open to him on the evidence before  him.  His
    finding at paragraph 29 was not irrational.

Ground 4
22.  Having found that the Appellant was not entitled to Afghan  nationality
    it was open to the judge to conclude, in the absence of evidence to the
    contrary, that the Appellant was a national  of  India  who  could  re-
    acquire Indian nationality. The judge's conclusion that  the  Appellant
    had failed to show he was a national of Afghanistan  was  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence before him. The Respondent proposed to return the
    Appellant to India. The Appellant would not be at  risk  on  return  to
    India. There was no material error of law  in  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the Appellant was a national of India and would not be at risk  on
    return.

23.  The reliance on TG (Interaction of Directives and  Rules)  [2016]  UKUT
    00374 was misplaced. In that case it was accepted  that  the  appellant
    was a Chinese national with a well founded fear of persecution in China
    and the issue was whether the appellant  could  be  returned  to  India
    where he had been living illegally. In this case, the  Appellant  is  a
    national of India and the Respondent proposed to return him  to  India.
    The Appellant did not have a well-founded fear of persecution on return
    to India.

24.  Accordingly, I find that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of 25 September 2019 and I dismiss the Appellant's  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 14 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 14 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

