
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09392/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26th October 2018                 |On 9 November 2018                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mr AAM
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo instructed by the Migrant Legal Project
(Camden)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Iraq born on 22nd January 2000.  He  was
    granted permission to appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lever, promulgated on  3rd  January  2018,  allowing  the  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  15th  September
    2017  under  Article  3,  but  refusing  the  claim  for   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection.  That decision refused the appellant's asylum,
    humanitarian and human rights claim.

 2. It was the appellant's case that he had been sexually assaulted  whilst
    in Iraq (the IKR) and was at risk from his family (who were wealthy and
    influential) on return.  He was at the date  of  the  hearing  a  minor
    which the judge took into account.

 3. The judge made the findings that:

    (i)    the appellant was at risk on return to Iraq from his  father  or
    brother who would seek to either kill him or seriously injure  him,  as
    the judge stated, because

         'They  would  regard  the  Appellant's  behaviour   in   terms   of
         drunkenness and his vulnerability to an actual  sexual  assault  as
         being a stain on their family name and character.  I also  bear  in
         mind that on the appellant's evidence which I accept, he  does  not
         have a good track record with his father and family' [19].

    And

         'Given the concessions made by the  respondent  as  to  those  core
         features and given all the other factors that I  have  referred  to
         above I find that there is to the appropriate standard of  proof  a
         risk that on return the appellant would  be  seriously  injured  or
         killed by his father and or eldest brother. That  does  not  in  my
         view place the appellant within the terms of the Geneva  Convention
         but it does mean I find that there is a risk of  a  breach  of  his
         protected rights under the ECHR.  Given the nature of the  IKR  and
         the level of influence that I accept his father has [,]  I  do  not
         find it reasonable to accept that internal relocation with  in  the
         IKR is possible'. [20]

    (iii)  the appellant was a Sunni Kurd and had no contact with  Baghdad,
    or with the rest of Iraq outside of the IKR.  There was no evidence  of
    any family or  family  connections  in  Baghdad  or  in  the  immediate
    vicinity.  As the judge decided

         'He presents as a vulnerable individual  in  terms  of  his  mental
         health and background as described by the psychiatrist.   There  is
         no evidence that he would be able to obtain a CSID either before or
         shortly after arrival within Baghdad and when looking at all of the
         factors referred to with in in [sic] AA [(Article 15(c) (Rev1) Iraq
         CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)], I do not find that relocation to Baghdad
         is an option in this case'.

    The judge dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds but allow the appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 4. The application for permission to appeal initially requested  a  review
    but in the alternative, submitted simply that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    having found that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of  being  killed  or
    seriously injured by his father and/or  brother  should  he  return  to
    Iraq, was wrong in law to fail to grant  him  humanitarian  protection.
    The findings met all four paragraphs of 339C of the  Immigration  Rules
    as well as paragraphs 2 and 3 of 339CA.

 5. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davies by subsequently granted by UT Judge Blum.

The Hearing

 6. Mrs Aboni accepted that the appeal should  have  been  allowed  on  the
    basis of Humanitarian Protection because of the findings of the  judge.
    She queried the skeleton argument which was provided.

 7. Mr Yeo made an application for costs on the basis that the Secretary of
    State should have conceded the appeal much earlier.  He  accepted  that
    he had made an application on the day of the hearing and  had  produced
    no schedule of costs.

 8. Mrs Aboni objected to any order for  costs  against  the  Secretary  of
    State.  A letter had been forwarded to the Tribunal on 4th May 2017 and
    this indicated the reasonable position of the Secretary of  State.  She
    stated that the person drafting the grounds for permission did not have
    access to the file and thus the skeleton argument.

    Conclusions

 9. As conceded by Mrs Aboni there was an error of law in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and on inspection of the file  it  is  apparent
    that the matter was raised in the grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the issue of  humanitarian  protection  should  have  been
    addressed in the decision.  The findings of the judge, and  as  I  have
    set out above, fall squarely into paragraphs of 339C of the Immigration
    Rules as well as paragraphs 2 and 3 of 339CA.

10. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) only in so far as  it  relates  to  the
    refusal on humanitarian protection grounds  and  in  that  regard  only
    remake the decision under section 12(2) (b) (ii) of the  TCE  2007  and
    allow the appeal for the reasons given above.

ORDER

The appeal of Mr AAM is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 31st October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



DECSION ON APPLICATION FOR A COSTS/EXPENSES ORDER UNDER RULE 10(3)(d)  under
The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Mr Yeo contended that the SSHD  acted  unreasonably  in  proceeding  to
    resist the application and requested for the approach of  the  Tribunal
    to be explained.

 2. Mrs Aboni clearly rejected the assertion that there should be any costs
    order against the Secretary of State.

 3. In assessing whether the SSHD acted  unreasonably  in  challenging  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision in the proceedings in the Upper Tribunal I
    have considered the decisions of Ridehalgh v Horsefield [1994] Ch  205,
    Cancino (costs - First-tier Tribunal - new powers) [2015]  UKFTT  00059
    (IAC), and Thapa & Ors (costs: general principles; s 9  review)  [2018]
    UKUT 00054 (IAC). I have additionally had regard  to  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 of 2018 (First-tier Tribunal) on  wasted  costs  and
    unreasonable costs. I note that the basic test is whether  there  is  a
    reasonable explanation for the conduct under scrutiny; the  facts  must
    be considered.

 4. The award of costs is always discretionary, even  in  cases  where  the
    qualifying conditions are satisfied, that orders for costs will be very
    much the exception rather than the rule and will  be  reserved  to  the
    clearest cases, and that any  application  for  wasted  costs  will  be
    governed in the main by the  principles  of  fairness,  expedition  and
    proportionality.

 5. I do not make a costs order in favour  of  the  appellant  against  the
    Secretary of State for these  reasons.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    promulgated on 3rd January 2018.  The  application  for  permission  to
    appeal (or review) was provided on 13th February 2018  and  refused  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on 26th January 2018.  There was  no  challenge
    to the First-tier Tribunal's lack  of  review  by  the  appellant.  The
    matter was simply appealed,  as  of  right  of  course,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  UTJ Blum granted permission to appeal on 21st March 2018.

 6. Crucially, the Secretary of State wrote to the Tribunal on 4th May 2018
    indicating that

         'the respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal if it can be shown that it was argued  at  the
         First-tier Tribunal hearing, that the appellant was entitled to  HP
         in the alternative should his asylum claim  be  rejected.   Reasons
         were not given by the judge regarding this issue'.

 7. It was the appellant's application for permission to appeal, as was his
    right, but there was no indication that this was not  referred  to  the
    appellant's  representatives  or  that  they  responded.  The  skeleton
    argument of Mr McWatters,  counsel  attending,  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did contain at paragraph 18  a  submission  that  humanitarian
    protection should be granted in the alternative to asylum.  There was a
    reasonable  explanation  for  the  Secretary  of  State's  position  in
    relation to the litigation, namely, he was  awaiting  a  response  with
    regard the litigation.  There was no indication of significant delay on
    the part of the Secretary of State.

 8. I do not find the conduct of the Secretary of State to be  unreasonable
    or without explanation and thus should be  responsible  for  the  costs
    incurred by the appellant. Even if that were  not  the  case,  a  costs
    order is discretionary, and the  costs  application  was  made  at  the
    hearing on 26th October 2018 and without notice to the Tribunal or  the
    Secretary of State.  There was no indication that such a request was to
    be made and no costs schedule produced.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 31st October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

