
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09193/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 22 February 2018                     |On 19 April 2018                   |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     S G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection and  child  welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is
appropriate to continue the order. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.



Representation:
For the appellant:           Ms S. Anzani, Counsel instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is an unaccompanied asylum-seeking  child  from  Turkey.
    He appealed the respondent's decision dated 05 September 2017 to refuse
    a protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 23 October 2017.

3.     The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
following grounds:

      i) The judge failed to give sufficient weight to the  appellant's  age
         and background in assessing the credibility of his account.


     ii) The judge erred in a series of findings relating to the appellant's
         credibility.


    iii) Insufficient reasons were given for some of the judge's findings.


     iv) The judge erred in his findings relating to risk on return in light
         of the evidence of torture and ill-treatment in detention.

Decision and reasons

4.     Having  considered  the  First-tier   Tribunal   decision   and   the
    submissions made  by  both  parties  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of errors of law.

5.    The respondent accepted that the appellant was beaten  by  the  police
    at a demonstration in  Gaziantep  in  February  2015.  The  appellant's
    account was that the  police  gave  him  a  warning  while  he  was  in
    hospital, but by his own admission, the respondent found  that  he  was
    not formally arrested. The appellant was only 15 years old at the  date
    of the incident.

6.    The judge accepted this concession on the part of the respondent,  but
    went on to reject the second aspect of the appellant's  account,  which
    involved his claim that he was approached to assist members of the  PKK
    when he was in the mountains. He returned  to  the  village  to  obtain
    supplies. When he returned to the mountains with the  supplies  he  saw
    gendarmes. He abandoned his donkey, which he  says  was  found  by  the
    gendarmes who tracked it to his home. His father was arrested and  take
    to the police station for two nights. They told him that  his  son  was
    helping the PKK.

7.    The judge made reference to the appellant's age and took into  account
    the need for flexibility in assessing the credibility of his claim  [21
    & 25]. It cannot be said that the judge did not take into  account  the
    appellant's young age as part of his overall assessment.

8.    The judge provided a  series  of  reasons  for  rejecting  the  second
    aspect of the appellant's account. Some findings were open  to  him  to
    make,  but  others  relied  wholly  on  his  own  assessment   of   the
    plausibility of the account without putting the claim in the context of
    the appellant's background or the background evidence relating  to  the
    conflict between the government and the PKK in Turkey.

9.    Mr Bramble accepted that the judge's finding at [27]  amounted  to  an
    error, but asserted that it did not make a material difference  to  his
    overall assessment. The judge reasoned that  the  appellant  would  not
    assist the PKK because "he knows the consequences of assisting  members
    of the PKK. It is unlikely  the  Appellant  would  assist  them.".  The
    consequence of such reasoning is that no one would assist  the  PKK  if
    they knew it could put them at risk. The reasoning is  irrational.  The
    background evidence shows that the PKK operates in south  east  Turkey.
    When placed in the proper context of the background  evidence  the  PKK
    enjoys some support amongst local Kurds and/or some Kurds might  assist
    them through fear. The appellant's evidence was that he feared the PKK,
    which is why he agreed to do as they asked. There is nothing inherently
    implausible about the fact that a young  man  might  acquiesce  to  the
    demands of members of an armed group.

10.   Ms Anzani criticised other  aspects  of  the  judge's  reasoning.   In
    several  paragraphs  the  judge  makes  statements  relating   to   the
    credibility of the appellant's account without giving reasons  for  his
    conclusions. For example,  at  [20]  the  judge  thought  that  it  was
    unlikely that the appellant would have been able to  raise  funds  from
    family members to buy supplies for the PKK, but  gives  no  reasons  to
    explain the finding. If the appellant's age was considered, it  is  not
    inherently implausible that the only way  he  could  obtain  the  funds
    would be through family members. At [33] the judge  said  that  it  was
    difficult to conceive how the gendarmes could  identify  the  appellant
    without giving further reasons to support the finding. In  the  context
    of a rural area of south east Turkey, it is not all that  difficult  to
    conceive that the local police could make enquiries in  local  villages
    to identify the owner of the animal. At [38] the judge stated  that  it
    was unlikely that the appellant would have managed to escaped detection
    for 2-3 months in the home of his father's friend, but gave no  reasons
    to explain how or why he came to that conclusion.

11.   The final point made by Ms Anzani  related  to  risk  on  return.  The
    judge found that, even if the claim  was  taken  at  its  highest,  the
    appellant  faced  prosecution  rather  than  persecution.  Although  he
    referred to some of the background evidence at this point, he failed to
    consider the fact that there is a risk of torture and ill-treatment  in
    detention even if the Turkish authorities have a legitimate interest in
    prosecuting suspected members of the PKK. Having decided to assess  the
    claim at its highest, it was incumbent on the judge  to  consider  such
    evidence. The fact that the appellant had come to the attention of  the
    authorities in  the  past  following  the  demonstration  in  2015  was
    accepted. Even if the appellant was not formally arrested, this  was  a
    matter that might be relevant to a proper  assessment  of  future  risk
    (see paragraph 339K immigration rules). The judge failed to consider  a
    material issue.

12.   Although many of the points made by the judge  were  open  to  him  to
    make, and none of the points outlined  above,  if  taken  individually,
    might justify setting aside the  decision,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    combination of points undermines the safety of the overall  credibility
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal. Given that  an  asylum  claim
    requires anxious scrutiny, I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error of law and that  the  decision
    must be set aside. The parties agreed that the  appropriate  course  of
    action is to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside and remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date    18 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








