
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/09880/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 November 2017                    |       On 16 November 2017           |
|Extempore                              |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                    ARMM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Aghayere, Counsel instructed by Lawland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    Judge S J Clarke promulgated on 12 June 2017 in which she  allowed  the
    appeal of Mr ARMM in respect of whom an anonymity order is made.    For
    the sake of convenience I refer to him  as  the  appellant  as  he  was
    below.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose case is  that  he  is  at
    risk on return on account  of  being  perceived  to  have  assisted  or
    continuing to assist the LTTE and that there is a warrant out  for  his
    arrest such that he faces arrest and ill-treatment on  return.   It  is
    also his case that he has been subjected to  serious  ill-treatment  in
    the past including beatings and sexual assault.

 3. The judge did not hear evidence from the appellant who was not  present
    at the hearing.  Judge Clarke did however, despite the existence of  an
    application for an  adjournment  made  by  the  appellant,  proceed  to
    determine the  case  in  the  appellant's  absence  and  made  positive
    findings in respect of those  matters  which  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered undermined the appellant's credibility and indicated that he
    was not at risk on return.

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission on the basis that the decision
    of the judge was in effect perverse and irrational in  that  the  judge
    had, as Mr Wilding submitted, failed to appreciate properly her role in
    determining the appeal.

 5. I am satisfied that the decision in this case made by Judge Clarke  was
    perverse and irrational for the reasons to which  I  now  turn.   While
    there may be circumstances in which it would be open to a judge in  the
    face of, for  example  uncontroverted  facts  and  a  relevant  country
    guidance decision to allow an appeal, that is not the case  here.   The
    judge does not appear to have appreciated that it was for the appellant
    to prove his case and in a number of positions appears to have  reached
    conclusions favourable to the appellant in the absence of evidence.

 6.  At  paragraph  10  the  judge  noted  an  apparent  inconsistency  but
    disregarded it on the basis  that  the  appellant  may  well  not  have
    appeared in court himself.  That is a conclusion which, contrary to  Mr
    Aghayere's submission, was reached on the basis of no evidence.   There
    was in this case no  witness  statement  from  the  appellant  and  the
    grounds were at best generic.

 7. Further, at paragraphs [11] and [13] the judge sets out differences  in
    the evidence given by the appellant but again does not properly explain
    why in the absence of any evidence from the appellant she  reached  the
    conclusions made resolving the discrepancies in the appellant's favour.
     Similarly, at paragraph [14], the  judge  speculated  as  to  apparent
    differences in the evidence.  This was as  the  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Briant had, as recorded at paragraph [13], identified as a  significant
    inconsistency.

 8. It is not, in these circumstances, in the absence of evidence from  the
    appellant,  for a judge simply to  say  "the  impression  I  form  when
    reading the interview record is  that  the  appellant  gave  a  hurried
    synopsis of his case in answer to question 16".  Similarly, it was  not
    open to the judge to attach  weight  to  a  medical  report  which  she
    accepted was not in conformity with the Istanbul Protocol and where  at
    paragraph 16 she appears to have considered, again,  on  an  evidential
    basis, which is far from clear that the fact that the appellant  played
    cricket was a possible alternative cause for the injuries  set  out  in
    the medical report.

 9. Finally, at paragraph 18,  the  judge  states,  "I  conclude  that  the
    appellant is a credible witness, I have given by reasons for  accepting
    his account".  Given that the appellant had not actually been a witness
    at all I am at a loss to understand how the judge could rationally come
    to a conclusion that the appellant was credible witness.

10. For these reasons I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was perverse and irrational, the judge having failed  properly
    to appreciate her role or that the burden of proof was on the appellant
    and having failed to  give proper and rational reasons  for  concluding
    matters of fact on the appellant's favour.

11. For these reasons the decision involved the making of an error  of  law
    and I set it aside.  In the circumstances the  only  course  of  action
    which I consider is open is for me to remit the decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all  issues,  the  matter  to  be
    considered by a judge other than Judge S J Clarke.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on
    all issues.

 3. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal


Signed                                  Date: 16 November 2011
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





