
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/09584/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                |             Decision & Reasons       |
|                                |Promulgated                           |
|On 4 May 2017                   |             On 16 May 2017           |
|                                |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     B I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr S Martin, of Jain Neil & Ruddy, solicitors
For the Respondent:         Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity order made  by  the  first-
tier tribunal.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge AMS Green promulgated on 18 March 2017, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal




Background


3. The Appellant was born on 25 August 1992 and is a national  of  Iran.  On
26 August 2016 the Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge AMS Green ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  6  April  2017  Judge  M  J
Gillespie granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      Proposed grounds of appeal raise arguable points which if  established
      might constitute material errors of law. In particular the averment in
      paragraph 4 of the grounds that  the  learned  Judge  misunderstood  a
      submission for the appellant  concerning  sur  place  activities,  has
      apparent arguable merit. Further, the  remaining  averment,  that  the
      learned Judge erred in dismissing the claim of the appellant solely on
      the grounds of immigration history  and  without  examination  of  the
      central core of his claim  of  past  persecution  and  without  giving
      adequate reasons for failing to address the central  core,  is  fairly
      arguable.

The Hearing

5. Mr Martin moved the grounds of appeal. He told me  that  he  had  already
had discussions with the Senior Home  Office  presenting  officer,  and  was
optimistic that the appeal was no longer opposed.

6. Ms O'Brien, for the respondent, told me that she could no  longer  insist
on the terms of the rule 24 note and now accepts  that  the  Judge  did  not
deal with the core aspects of the appellant's claim. Instead he  relied  too
heavily on the  provision  of  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
(Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.

7. I was invited by both representatives  to  set  the  decision  aside  and
remit this case to the First-tier to be considered of new.

Analysis

8. At [1] of the decision the Judge sets out the background to  this  appeal
and summarises the appellant's position. At [2]  the  Judge  summarises  the
respondent's decision. At [3] the Judge summarises the  grounds  of  appeal.
At [4] the Judge succinctly summarises the sources of evidence.

9. At [5] and [6] the Judge summarises the law relevant to this  appeal.  At
[7], [8] & [9] the Judge summarises the evidence and  submissions.  At  [10]
the Judge carries out a brief analysis of  the  evidence  before  concluding
that the  appellant  has  fabricated  his  claim,  and  at  [11]  the  Judge
considers whether the appellant can safely return to Iran.

10. [10] does not contain adequate findings of  fact  nor  does  it  contain
adequate reasons relating to the core  aspects  of  the  appellant's  claim.
There are no findings in fact about  the  reasons  the  appellant  left  his
country of origin. The appellant's claim focuses on what  he  says  happened
to him in Iran. The Judge has not analysed the evidence. The Judge  has  not
made findings of fact about core issues in the appellant's claim.

11. Instead, the Judge has focused on the appellant's attempts to enter  the
UK and his failure to claim asylum in European countries before arriving  in
the UK. The Judge has focused on section  8  of  the  Asylum  &  Immigration
(Treatment  of  Claimants  etc)  Act  2004  only.  That  is   not   adequate
consideration of the appellant's claim.

12.  In JT (Cameroon) v SSHD 2008 EWCA Civ 878  the  Court  of  Appeal  said
that  section  8  factors  should  be  taken  into  account   in   assessing
credibility and were capable of damaging it but the section did not  dictate
that the relevant damage to section 8 inevitably results.  It  was  possible
to  read  the  adverb  "potentially"  into  section  8(1)  before  the  word
"damaging".  In that case the Court of Appeal concluded  that  there  was  a
real risk that section 8 matters were given a statement and  compartment  of
their own and were not taken into account as part of a global assessment  of
credibility.

13. In SM (2005) UKIAT 00116, the Tribunal said section 8 should not be  the
starting point for the assessment of credibility.  The behaviour  identified
in that section is a  factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  overall
assessment of credibility and its importance will vary from  case  to  case.
Although section 8 required the deciding authority to treat certain  aspects
of the evidence in a particular way it was  not  intended  to  and  did  not
otherwise affect the general process of deriving facts from evidence.

14. In MT, Petition for Judicial Review of a decision of the Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2013] CSOH 93 it  was  said  that  Section
8(1) provided that a deciding authority should take account as damaging  the
claimant's credibility, of any  behaviour  to  which  the  section  applied.
Where no reason was given for the conclusion  that  the  Claimant's  actions
had  "seriously"  damaged  credibility  as  opposed   to   simply   damaging
credibility this amounted to an obvious error of law.

15. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

16.  I therefore find that the decision is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

17. I have already found material errors of law in the fact-finding  process
carried out by the First-tier in the decision promulgated on 18 March  2017.
I therefore find that I cannot substitute my own  decision  because  of  the
extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach  a  just  decision  in
this appeal.


Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

20. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Glasgow  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Green.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

22. I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on  18  March  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 8 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



