
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09406/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford (via Skype)        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2021                     |On 30 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            REZIN GARIB MAMKADIR
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith instructed by Broudie Jackson & Canter
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 9 January 2020 a panel of the First-tier  Tribunal  composed  of
        Judge  Hussain  and  Judge  Kelly  ('the  Panel')   dismissed   the
        appellant's appeal on all grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal, the operative part of the grant being  in  the  following
        terms:


          1. The appellant seeks permission to appeal out of time,  against
             a decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judges A K  Hussain)  dated
             09/01/2020,  whereby  it  dismissed  the  appellant's   appeal
             against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  his
             protection claim. The application is out of  time  by  several
             months but the appellant's representative has stated that  the
             decision was not received until  13/07/2020,  some  four  days
             after the representative sent a chasing email to the Tribunal.
             In the circumstances it would be unjust and/or unfair  not  to
             extend time and time is extended.
          2. It is arguable that the Tribunal may have  erred  in  applying
             the new country guidance of SMO & Ors  (Article  15C  Identity
             documents) CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC), promulgated  after  the
             date of the hearing, but before  the  date  of  the  decision,
             without  giving  the  Appellant  the   opportunity   to   make
             submissions on the case, in particular as to redocumentation.
         3.   The remaining grounds are not arguable. There is  an  arguable
             material error of law.


3. In the respondents Rule 24 response dated 14 October 2020 it is written:


         3.   The respondent accepts that the effect of  the  way  that  the
             permission has been given in this  case  does  not  limit  the
             grounds.
         4.   It is not accepted the judge has erred respect of the findings
             on the appellant's  family.  The  judge  is  not  required  to
             address every aspect of the appellant's evidence in this  case
             they reached properly reason findings that were open  to  them
             on the evidence.
         5.   The respondent does consider, however, that the  Judge  should
             not have gone on to apply the findings in SMO  without  giving
             the parties the opportunity to make submissions. On that basis
             the respondent considers that this part of  the  determination
             should be set aside and remade.


     4. The Upper Tribunal gave directions as to the conduct of the appeal,
        directing that the error of law hearing  be  listed  for  a  remote
        hearing, to enable it to establish whether error of  law  had  been
        made on all grounds, the operative part of those  directions  being
        in the following terms:


         7.   Whilst Mr Avery accepted in the Rule 24 Reply that  the  panel
             erred by failing to provide the parties with an opportunity to
             make submissions on the country guidance in SMO,  he  did  not
             accept that the panel erred in making its findings in  respect
             to the appellant's family. Accordingly, it is clear  that  the
             respondent does not accept the panel erred,  as  contended  in
             ground one.



Error of law


     5.  Ground  1  asserts  the  Panel  erred  in  law  in  rejecting  the
        credibility of the appellant and finding that he is in  touch  with
        his family.
     6. The Panel set out their findings from [38] of  the  decision  under
        challenge. In [39] the Panel write:


         39.  He claims that he is not in touch with his family  and  it  is
             for him to show that this is the case. He has made no attempts
             to contact his family since at least 2016 and it was  only  on
             24 September 2019 that he first  made  contact  with  the  Red
             Cross, with a view to initiating the family  tracing  process.
             We are satisfied the Secretary of State is right to  draw  the
             negative inference that the appellant is  in  touch  with  his
             family, not least because he was inconsistent about  the  male
             members of his family who could assist him  in  re-documenting
             himself  in  the  patrilineal  system  of  registration   that
             operates in Iraq, but also because anyone who has  lost  touch
             with their family would  not  wait  three  years  to  initiate
             efforts to trace them. Unless, that is,  he  has  remained  in
             contact with  them  with  the  family  tracing  process  being
             engaged in to bolster the false claim that he has lost contact
             with them.


     7. The submission in the grounds that as the appellant  had  given  an
        otherwise credible account that should have been considered by  the
        Panel when considering whether he has contact with his family, does
        not establish arguable legal error. The Panel was aware of  aspects
        of those appellant's case that were accepted but that does not mean
        they had to accept all the evidence as being truthful.  It  is  not
        made out when assessing the weight to  be  given  to  the  evidence
        relating to  contact  with  family  members  the  Panel  discounted
        matters that they should have taken into account.
     8. The Grounds also assert it was agreed the appellant will be treated
        as a vulnerable witness as a result of his mental health and allege
        the Panel had not demonstrated consideration of this when assessing
        the weight to be given to the evidence and the adverse  credibility
        findings. This is made out. The  record  of  proceeds  noted  Judge
        Kelly specifically asking at the beginning of the hearing  if,  due
        to the appellants mental health, there was a need for him  to  give
        oral evidence. It was agreed he would as  there  was  only  limited
        cross examination. The Panel were clearly aware this was  an  issue
        yet there is no reference in the decision to the Joint Presidential
        Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 or the Court of Appel  guidance  in  the
        assessment of the evidence of vulnerable witness, or any indication
        as to how the Panel factored the appellants vulnerability into  the
        weight they gave to his evidence.
     9. There is also an assertion in the decision that the  appellant  was
        inconsistent in his evidence about his brothers that was not put to
        him during the hearing.  While the author of the grounds  tries  to
        minimise, what  is  a  clear  inconsistency  in  the  evidence  the
        appellant was not given the opportunity to comment  upon  the  same
        which, in any event, resulted in his disclosing  he  had  two  male
        relatives rather than the original claim to only have one.
    10. It is also claimed the appellant was not asked for  an  explanation
        about the delay in contacting the  Red  Cross  upon  which  adverse
        finding were made.  The  fact  the  appellant  was  in  immigration
        detention and then awaiting the outcome of his application does not
        appear to have been factored into the  decision-making  process  in
        relation to this issue.
    11. I find Ground 1 made out for the reasons set out above.  Procedural
        unfairness sufficient to amount to a material error of law is  made
        out.
    12. In relation to Ground 2, the error is conceded by the respondent in
        the Rule 24 Response. That concession is properly made. In SA  (Sri
        Lanka) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department   [2014]
        EWCA  Civ  683  it was held that there was no error of law  by  the
        Upper Tribunal in deciding an  asylum  claim  on   the   basis   of
        the  country  guidance  then   in   force.   The   correct   remedy
        where   the   country   guidance   had   changed   was    for    an
        applicant   to   make   further   submissions    under    paragraph
        353   of   the   Immigration  Rules  based  on  the  new  guidance.
        However, where the new CG decision is promulgated before the First-
        tier Tribunal's decision is promulgated it is an   error   of   law
        not  to  follow  that   new   CG   decision   as   the   First-tier
        Tribunal remains  seized of the case until promulgation  -  see  NA
        (Libya) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 143.
    13. The determination in set aside with no preserved findings.  It  was
        agreed the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at
        Braford to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge  Hussain  or
        Judge Kelly.


Decision

    14. The Panel materially erred in law. I set the decision  aside.  This
        appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
        Bradford to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Hussain  or
        Judge Kelly.

   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 23 March 2021












