
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/09887/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2020                 |On 29 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               LANKIE SESEMANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                              DETERMINATION (P)

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 24 December 1952.  By a
    decision promulgated on 3 December 2019,  FtT  Judge  Rea  allowed  his
    appeal on  human  rights  grounds,  but  dismissed  it  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds.

 2. The SSHD does not challenge the outcome on human rights grounds.

 3. This determination is to be read  along  with  my  decision  issued  to
    parties on 6 July 2020, setting aside the decision of  Judge  Rea,  and
    directing any further submissions to be made within 14 days.

 4. Submissions from the appellant were received on 17  July  2020.   There
    are no submissions on file from the respondent.

 5. The appellant has shown that on applying RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]  UKSC  38
    and CM  Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC), as headnoted at  3(1)  and
    3(2), to the facts found by Judge Page and by Judge Rea, he is entitled
    to be recognised as a refugee on the hypothesis of return to  his  home
    area.

 6. Applying the undisputed findings of Judge Rea on article 8, and in  the
    absence of any submission to the contrary, it would be unduly harsh  to
    expect the appellant to relocate within Zimbabwe.

 7. The UT substitutes a decision that the appeal, as brought to  the  FtT,
    is allowed both on refugee protection and on human rights grounds.

 8. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman
      28 September 2020







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.




