










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10076/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 3 May 2017                    |On: 21 June 2017                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                                   Mr K R
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mrs J Rothwell, counsel (instructed by Jein
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   2. On 6 March 2017 the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set  aside
      on the basis that the Judge did not properly consider the evidence  of
      the appellant's sur place activities in the UK, and in particular  the
      appellant's association with the TGTE.  I directed that I would remake
      the decision.


      Remaking the decision


   3. The appellant has produced several very substantial bundles which have
      been identified as bundles A, B, C, D, F, X and Y.


   4. I was also referred to the report from Dr Keefe, Director of  National
      Clinical Services.  He stated that in his  professional  opinion,  the
      appellant would find it very difficult to give evidence in  Court.  He
      continued to see  him  once  weekly  for  psychodynamic  psychotherapy
      regarding his trauma, depression, grief and  suicidal  thinking  which
      will continue into the foreseeable future.


   5. The appellant was not present at the hearing.


The evidence


   6. Mr Graham Keith Williamson attended the hearing and gave evidence.  He
      adopted his statement and opinion dated 19 August 2015 at B30-32.


   7. He is the chairman of a self-determination  pressure  group  known  as
      Nations Without States (NWS). He is a member of  the  ruling  National
      Council of the National Liberal Party. He is also a  local  councillor
      for the London Borough of Havering.


   8. He is a Director of the Human Rights Campaign group, Act Now, which he
      founded with aid workers who had been based in  Sri  Lanka,  following
      alleged human rights violations and mass killings directed towards the
      Tamil population. He developed a strong relationship  with  the  Tamil
      community in Britain. He persuaded Tamils and  other  ethnic  minority
      people to join and contest elections for the national party.


   9. He has known the appellant since 2011 as  an  ethnic  Tamil  from  Sri
      Lanka. He has seen the  appellant  at  a  number  of  Tamil  political
      events. He was introduced  to  him  as  an  active  volunteer,  by  Mr
      Sockalingam Yogalingam (who has been referred to as 'Yogi'), a  member
      of parliament  of  TGTE.  He  has  advocated  the  principle  of  self
      determination. He has publicly  expressed  his  desire  to  fight  for
      justice and the independence of the ethnic minorities in Sri Lanka.


  10. He also claimed to have  reliable  information  that  the  Sri  Lankan
      intelligence services have deeply penetrated  the  Tamil  diaspora  to
      gather information about key activists.


  11. He said that on 18 May 2011 a freelance  photographer,  Sandra  Rowse,
      spoke to him in person, admitting that she had been hired by  the  Sri
      Lankan Commission in London  to  take  photos  at  a  Tamil  rally  in
      Trafalgar Square. Her colleague,  Mr  Tim  Martin,  had  a  17  minute
      recording which explained in detail how the Sri Lankan High Commission
      in London had contacted her and requested that she "spy" for them.


  12. He further stated that in an interview which was posted on  'US  Lanka
      Online' on 1 February 2011, the head of the International  Centre  for
      Political Violence and Terrorism Research stated that the  Sri  Lankan
      government has one of the most effective intelligence services working
      abroad.


  13. Thirdly, he referred to a statement made by the Defence Secretary  and
      posted on 21 May 2017 on the government website stating  the  need  to
      strengthen Sri Lanka's intelligence abroad to prevent the  re-grouping
      of the LTTE.


  14. In the International Analysis Network there is  also  a  biography  of
      Glen Jenvey, stating that  he  worked  for  the  Sri  Lankan  National
      Intelligence Bureau  in  London  to  spy  on  Tamil  officers  and  at
      demonstrations.


  15. Mr Williamson asserts that the appellant's activities in the UK in his
      role goes far beyond mere attendance and he has been outspoken in  the
      media.


  16. In his oral evidence he  stated  that  Sandra  Rowse  is  a  freelance
      photographer. He has known her from his local area. He has  no  reason
      to disbelieve  what  she  told  him.  She  has  taken  photographs  at
      Trafalgar Square.


  17. He last saw the appellant at an event held a few days earlier, on  the
      previous Sunday, which was a conference to discuss self determination,
      which included Sri Lankan separatism.


  18. He referred to a photograph  at  F10  of  the  bundle  taken  at  that
      conference in the Northolt Village  Centre,  dated  Sunday,  30  April
      2017. Mr Yogalingam was in attendance.


  19. He referred to the report of that conference at F44,  which  has  been
      placed on his website, 'namathueelanadu.com'. There  is  reference  in
      the report to Mr Graham Williamson's having chaired the event.


  20. In the report, the appellant is refereed to and identified as a person
      who has suffered torture for supporting the freedom  struggle  of  the
      Tamils in Sri Lanka. He has played a key role  in  making  this  event
      successful. He is one of the prominent young Tamil activists currently
      volunteering as the head of Admin  of  the  International  Centre  for
      Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide (ICPPG). He is a coordinator of
      the Transitional Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE).


  21. There is also a  photograph  of  the  appellant's  attendance  at  the
      conference in which his name is printed.


  22. In cross-examination, Mr Williamson said it is not common practice  to
      request permission to publish quotations in the articles. The  meeting
      had been a public event.


  23. He said he  did  not  have  a  transcript  of  Mr  Martin's  recording
      regarding  Ms Rowse. He said that Mr  Martin  told  him  that  he  had
      phoned her to discuss this. This was confirmation of what  he  himself
      already knew. He does not know whether Mr Martin's evidence  has  ever
      been used.


  24. He does not remember the event  where  Mr  Yogalingam  introduced  the
      appellant to him. He was introduced as an active volunteer. This might
      have included the TGTE.


  25. He  said  that  the  appellant  organised  a  TGTE  sports  event.  He
      marshalled people on the day. He, Mr Williamson, was a  guest  of  the
      TGTE at that event, which took place in 2016.


  26. In re-examination he said the appellant had  been  a  speaker  at  the
      event. He had agreed to pay for the stall at the sports event.


  27. Mr Sockalingham Yogalingam attended the hearing and gave evidence.  He
      adopted his statements at pages 34-36 of bundle B. He is a TGTE MP and
      assistant director of "Act Now" and an  executive  member  of  Nations
      Without States.


  28. He stated that he had been  requested  to  "confirm"  the  appellant's
      involvement with TGTE activities in the UK. His statement  is  written
      on a document, the letterhead of which refers to the TGTE, setting out
      the website and email addresses.


  29. He described the TGTE as based on the principles of the right to  self
      determination. The Sri  Lankan  government  is  strangling  the  Tamil
      people's aspirations and their political rights. The TGTE  was  formed
      by unification of the Sri Lankan Tamil diaspora, which aims to  create
      Tamil Eelam, a state which TGTE aspires to create  in  the  north  and
      east provinces of Sri Lanka.


  30. He asserted that  the  appellant  is  "a  victim"  who  works  at  the
      organisation. He joined as a volunteer and has since 'volunteered'  at
      public events in the UK. He has attended meetings, events  and  public
      demonstrations. He contributes to the  best  of  his  ability  to  the
      campaign.


  31. Mr Yogalingam produced his Tamil Eelam card, a copy of which is  found
      at B36.


  32. In his oral evidence he said that he is Deputy Minister for Sports and
      Community Health. The TGTE was set up on 18 May 2010 at the end of the
      civil war in 2009. The organisation seeks a separate state for Tamils.
      The appellant joined as a volunteer on 10 March 2015.


  33. They do not have official membership  as  such.  The  appellant  is  a
      volunteer. The organisation  formed  'a  government  in  exile  in  10
      countries'. They meet each other each month, on "a link."


  34. There are records of the appellant's attendance in November 2013.


  35. It would not make a difference if the appellant were only a volunteer.
      This is because the TGTE is a proscribed organisation  in  Sri  Lanka.
      Anyone working for a separate state in Sri Lanka would be arrested and
      dealt with. He referred to the  constitution  of  Sri  Lanka,  and  in
      particular the 6th amendment in that regard.


  36. Mr Singh noted that his letter at B34 is  dated  10  March  2015.  The
      appellant has a specific role. There are events and projects to  which
      he has been committed to work. There are over 1.6 million  signatories
      in the campaign. He also  coordinated  the  sports  meeting.  All  the
      events are in public. He has attended many  protests  including  those
      held at 10 Downing Street and at the Sri Lankan High  Commission.  The
      appealant was a coordinator for Children's Sports.


  37. Last Sunday, 120 people attended a meeting to discuss events.  He  was
      referred to F10 regarding the meeting at Northolt Village on 30  April
      2017. There were other organisations in  attendance  including  Nation
      Without State.


  38. The website at F44 is a website which "takes our messages  around  the
      world."


  39. He referred to text messages sent to various members and volunteers as
      part of the organisation of events  and  meetings.  Examples  of  such
      messages including that produced at F22, sets out the dates and  times
      of scheduled events, including demonstrations. The appellant's contact
      number is openly provided. He is described as 'K'. He  said  that  the
      appellant coordinates such events with him. The messages go to various
      volunteers and supporters.


  40. He referred to texts sent relating to last Sunday's conference at  F27
      . These contain the appellant's details including his name as well  as
      his details, in which he is referred to as "Yogi".


  41. He asserted that the appellant will have come to the attention of  Sri
      Lankan authorities as photographs are taken regularly.  This  includes
      those taken by a member of staff from the Sri Lankan High  Commission.
      He is aware that a member of staff has taken photographs, for  example
      at a demonstration held in July 2016.


  42. In cross examination he said that the telephone  number  contained  in
      the text messages at F27 is the appellant's mobile number.


  43. He and Mr Williamson are founder members. There are others,  including
      Jugdish Singh and Doris Jones. The latter is a  secretary.  These  are
      all hard working volunteers.  Mr Williamson also attends TGTE  events.
      He has volunteered to speak at such events.  He  has  'done  this'  on
      three or four occasions.


  44. The appellant helps organise the  sports  events.  This  was  a  "MAP"
      project - the "Monitoring Accountability Panel". He also  helped  with
      the  signature  campaign,  which  has  asked  for  the  human   rights
      violations to  be  taken  to  the  ICC.  The  resulting  petition  has
      generated over one and a half million signatures.


  45. The appellant has volunteered to  text  and  coordinate  such  events,
      which he does  by texting.


  46. He, Mr Yogalingam, was elected in May 2010 'by Tamil people around the
      world' to the position of Deputy Minister.  There  are  ministers  all
      over the world. The Prime Minister is located in the USA. He said that
      he is shown as a deputy minister on TGTE-US.com.


  47. The officials are elected to government posts. Those who  wish  to  be
      volunteers must be  of  Tamil  ethnicity.  The  appellant  is  only  a
      volunteer. His name will not appear on the document as a member of the
      TGTE. There would however be information identifying projects. He  has
      his own website which will refer  to  volunteers  by  name  and  which
      includes their photos. The appellant is on some of the  documents  and
      photographs.


  48. He said that the TGTE booklet was printed  last  September,  2016.  It
      went around the world. The  coordinators  and  their  photographs  are
      contained in the booklet.


  49. He produced a coloured pamphlet regarding  the  scheduled  protest  at
      Downing Street from 26 February 2017 until 22 March 2017.


  50. There was no re-examination.


  51. Ms Ambihai Seevaratnan, the ICPPG Country  Coordinator  and  Executive
      Member, attended the  hearing  and  gave  evidence.  She  adopted  her
      statements at B40-41 and B192-4. She adopted a further statement at C8-
      14 referred to as an updated supporting statement and opinion.


  52. She is a life member of the BTF. She is an  executive  member  of  the
      ICPPG.  The  primary  objective  is  to   collect   evidence   against
      perpetrators  of  genocide  and  work  towards  justice,   peace   and
      reconciliation.


  53. The ICPPG took the opportunity and responsibility to assist and gather
      the required documentary  witness  statements  from  war  victims  and
      witnesses around the world. Submissions were then made to the  UNHRC's
      investigations on Sri Lanka -  the  IOSL  commission.   The  ICPPG  is
      located in the same building as the TGTE.


  54. She claimed that one of the TGTE volunteers from  the  UK,  a  British
      citizen, who has visited Sri Lanka, has in the past been  detained  by
      the TID for several months despite British authorities intervention.


  55. During October 2014 whilst evidence collection was actively under way,
      the ICPPG computers were "infected  by  a  virus."  She  claimed  that
      people attended the premises that morning and two of them were noticed
      being in the vicinity of a computer.


  56. She said that the appellant approached the  organisation  in  2014  to
      give evidence to be  submitted  to  any  international  investigations
      against  the  Sri  Lankan  government.  He  was  interviewed.  He  was
      recognised as a key  witness  in  the  war  crimes  committed  by  the
      government  of  Sri  Lanka.  His  evidence  corroborated   claims   of
      detention, torture and abuse.


  57. The appellant had joined  ICPPG  as  a  volunteer  and  has  completed
      evidence collection training. He managed London NW Region as  well  as
      being a team leader of SW Region. He also managed their  main  office.
      He was promoted to Deputy Head of  Admin  in  2015.  He  is  currently
      acting Head of Admin  with  the  responsibility  of  organising  their
      meetings and evidence collecting training,  scheduling  UN  interviews
      and liaising with witnesses and victims.


  58. He has introduced a few other key witnesses who provided their witness
      statements.


  59. She said that she has seen the appellant at public demonstrations  and
      protests against the Sri Lankan government in the UK.  He  is  also  a
      front line volunteer for certain events.


  60. She 'believes' that he is genuinely a vital witness and a high profile
      activist. She is prepared to give evidence on his  behalf.  As  acting
      Head of Admin, he will put the ICPPG's operations at risk.


  61. She was referred to B 192 which contains a  document  referred  to  as
      "Victims' Testimonies". The appellant's names and date  of  birth  are
      set out. The document is signed on 23 September  2014.  This  includes
      the appellant's consent  to  ICPPG  to  record  his  statement  to  be
      submitted. He asked for his identity to be kept confidential. As  part
      of his detention the appellant referred to the  incident  in  December
      2008 -B197.


  62. Ms Seevaratnan  said that  the  appellant  manages  four  other  admin
      officers. He delegates himself. The organisation took his evidence  in
      October 2014. This has been audio recorded and was then reduced to  an
      affidavit which was submitted to the OSL.


  63. She said that she knows that he is an active member of TGTE as well as
      BTF.


  64.  She  'certainly  thinks'  he  will  come  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities in Sri Lanka. She claimed that one of her volunteers whose
      name and number had been published  in  their  records,  went  to  Sri
      Lanka.  He was  a  research  worker  there.   He  was  "abducted"  and
      tortured. He was  asked  for  details  of  other  volunteers  and  key
      witnesses when he was interviewed.


  65. In  cross-examination  she  said  that  official  documents  from  her
      organisation are published in newspapers in London.


  66. The appellant gave evidence to human  rights  organisations  including
      Trust International and the UNHRC itself.  They  are  advised  not  to
      produce their documents, including affidavits anywhere else.  She  has
      seen his affidavit. This is subject to confidentiality. There is  also
      an audio recording. A person needs to request a copy.  The  UN  stated
      that such statements are to be kept confidential.  She would  know  if
      the volunteer's evidence has been in any way leaked.


  67. She referred to the "hacking" of her computers by "infiltrators".  She
      saw evidence of this because there were official photographs of people
      who were in Sri Lanka, which were published.  She was referred to  his
      activities on behalf of the TGTE. She said she was at the  sports  day
      event.


  68. In  re-examination  she  was  taken  to  C20  which  contained  colour
      photographs of those present on behalf of the  TGTE  at  the  TGTE  UK
      Sports Event. The photographs relate to  the  2016  Coordinators.  The
      appellant's photograph is one of several published in  colour  at  the
      foot of B20.


      Submissions


  69. Mr Singh very properly referred me to independent  evidence  contained
      in the Tamil Guardian relating to a British citizen who was beaten and
      arbitrarily detained in Sri Lanka. This  was  reported  in  the  Tamil
      Guardian on 9 June 2016. He was accused of assisting  LTTE  activities
      in the UK. There was reference to an independent researcher,  Mr  P  P
      (his full name is set out  at  page  149).  He  works  for  the  Tamil
      Information Centre and was  abducted  and  severely  tortured  by  Sri
      Lanka's intelligence outfit before being deported to the  UK.  He  had
      been asked to provide details of witnesses and volunteers  in  the  UK
      and was  working  with  the  organisation,  documenting  human  rights
      violations.


  70. There was also reference to a document from an attorney in  Sri  Lanka
      dated 8 June 2016 referring to the arrest of persons who  visited  Sri
      Lanka. This included a person who had been granted asylum  in  the  UK
      and who subsequently came to Sri Lanka to see his elderly  mother  and
      to marry his girlfriend. Reference is made to his arrest,  and  aiding
      and abetting LTTE activities from the UK. He was slapped, punched  and
      beaten up in the presence of his mother and sister  when  he  resisted
      arrest. He was dragged and bundled into a motor vehicle.


  71. There is further reference to a similar incident on 2 May 2016. Mr  PP
      had been arrested, detained and subjected to mistreatment.


  72. In his submissions, Mr Singh relied on the reasons  for  refusal.  The
      question relates to the appellant's diaspora activities. The issue  is
      whether he would be perceived by the Sri Lankan government as a threat
      to the integrity of a unitary state.


  73. He referred to  the  headnote  in  GJ  and  Others  (Post  Civil  War:
      Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319. Categories  of  persons  at
      risk of persecution or serious harm are individuals include those  who
      are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as
      a single  state  because  they  are,  or  are  perceived  to  have,  a
      significant role in relation to post conflict Tamil separatism  within
      the diaspora.


  74. He submitted that the Tribunal there noted that the authorities in Sri
      Lanka are aware that Tamils have  travelled  abroad,  contending  that
      they have associations with  the  LTTE  in  the  past.  They  are  not
      regarded as a present risk.


  75. He submitted that the appellant's credibility has been damaged. He has
      had two asylum claims dismissed. He  has  thus  joined  and  become  a
      member of the TGTE in the UK 'in order to bolster his claim'.


  76.  He  referred  to  the  evidence  of  his  sur  place  activities.  Mr
      Williamson's as well as Mr Yogalingam's evidence must  be  considered.
      Mr Williamson stated that he knew the appellant to be a  volunteer  at
      the TGTE in 2011. Mr Yogalingam  however  stated  that  the  appellant
      joined only in 2013. Mr Williamson saw him at  events  in  the  latter
      part of 2011. Accordingly, Mr Williamson was under the impression that
      the appellant was a member of the TGTE since 2011.


  77. Mr Yogalingam went into detail as  to  the  roles  in  the  TGTE.  The
      appellant is 'in admin'. The appellant was  a  volunteer.  Whilst  the
      appellant therefore had involvement with Tamil groups, this would  not
      per se result in adverse attention from the Sri Lankan authorities.


  78. Mr Singh referred to paragraph 351 of GJ where the Tribunal held  that
      attendance at one or even several demonstrations in  the  diaspora  is
      not itself evidence that  a  person  is  a  committed  Tamil  activist
      seeking to promote Tamil  separatism  within  Sri  Lanka.  That  is  a
      question of fact, dependent upon any diaspora activities  carried  out
      by such an individual.


  79. The appellant is said to be a coordinator in the TGTE and was recently
      involved in a sports event  in  2016.  His  role  was  in  respect  of
      children's sports. There were about 25  coordinators  and  volunteers.
      The appellant is described in the photograph as a coordinator  working
      in "admin".


  80. If the appellant had  a  significant  role,  Mr  Yogalingam  could  be
      expected to know what that had been. He did not know.  In  the  event,
      these were not particularly significant events. The  appellant  cannot
      be described as being a committed activist.


  81. With regard  to  the  evidence  of  the  photographer,  Ms  Rowse,  Mr
      Williamson claimed that he saw her take photographs at  an  event  and
      that there was a conversation with her.   She  claimed  to  have  been
      employed by the Sri Lanka  High  Commission  to  photograph  them.  He
      submitted that the further evidence introduced regarding  her  alleged
      recorded interview with Mr Martin, was simply hearsay.  No  transcript
      was produced.


  82. He accordingly submitted that Mr Williamson is not in  a  position  to
      give evidence on this point. It might well be that he is mistaken.


  83.  In  GJ,  the  Court  was  aware  that  the  technology  is  used   at
      demonstrations   and   meetings.   Nevertheless,    the    appellant's
      participation amongst these groups does  not  constitute  activity  of
      particular significance.


  84. As regards the evidence given to  the  ICPPG,  Mr  Singh  referred  to
      paragraph [53] of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  He  noted
      that no copies were produced of any affidavits or other evidence which
      the appellant is said to have provided. Accordingly, there would be no
      report before the Sri Lankan authorities either.  The appellant  would
      accordingly not have a significant profile, so that his  return  would
      constitute a real risk.


  85. Mr Singh referred to the recent decision from the court of  Appeal  in
      UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 85. At paragraph  24  the  Court
      considered the risk to the appellant. There was no suggestion that the
      appellant there was on any list of  individuals  of  interest  to  the
      authorities in Sri Lanka. Any activity by the  appellant  in  the  UK,
      even if observed or recorded, was low level and did not  likely  carry
      any risks. That activity itself would not  demonstrate  membership  of
      the TGTE. The appellant had claimed to be a member  of  the  TGTE  and
      relied on his membership being detected on arrival in Sri Lanka.


  86. In UB, the appellant had been associated  with  the  LTTE.  Here,  the
      appellant was not associated. He would not be on a list.


  87. Mr Singh referred to paragraph [30] of UB, where the Court  considered
      two letters from the British High Commission in  Sri  Lanka  dated  25
      July 2014. The text read that returnees may be questioned  on  arrival
      by immigration, CID, SIS and TID.  This  was  a  normal  practice  for
      returnees to be asked about their activities in the country they  were
      returning from.


  88.  The  Court  in  UB  could  not  in  the  circumstances  preclude  the
      possibility that these "letters" might affect  the  outcome  and  were
      thus material to the decision in that sense. There will  be  questions
      about their overseas  activities  including  whether  they  have  been
      involved  with  one  of  the  proscribed  organisations.  Members   of
      organisations are not banned from returning to Sri Lanka but they will
      be questioned on arrival and may be detained.


  89. On behalf of  the  appellant,  Ms  Rothwell  relied  on  her  skeleton
      argument and the schedule of diaspora activities.


  90. She referred to as part of the evidence presented, the appellant's own
      witness statement dated 16 November 2015  at  A28-43.   He  stated  at
      paragraph 14 that he strongly believes that a separate Tamil  home  is
      the only solution for Tamils in Sri Lanka. Since 2009 he continued  to
      express   his   political   opinion   by   attending   protests    and
      demonstrations. He  attended  Remembrance  Day,  commemorated  by  the
      British Tamil Forum,  on  18  May  2010.  He  regularly  attends  this
      Remembrance Day on 18 May of each year.


  91. He has volunteered in a campaign organised by  Amnesty  International,
      known as Justice for Sri Lanka. He volunteered with the TGTE  and  the
      ICPPG. He attended more than 250 events since he came to the UK.


  92. He continues to assist Mr Yogalingam, an MP of the  TGTE.  He  attends
      meetings at TIC and became a life member of the BTF.  He  was  elected
      as a coordinator for SW London. He officially represents  the  BTF  in
      the Tooting area where he  lived.  He  arranges  meetings,  recruiting
      members and raising funds in the area.


  93. He became involved with the TGTE in 2013.  He  does  not  just  attend
      protests and meeting. He also assists with the set up and preparation.
      His participation has been set out at paragraph 28. He  has  given  an
      open interview on behalf of the TGTE which is available on YouTube.


  94. He referred to meeting Mr Graham Williamson, director of NWS,  who  is
      also involved with the TGTE.  He currently works with the ICPPG.  That
      organisation works alongside the TGTE in collecting evidence  for  the
      UN Inquiry against  Sri  Lanka.  He  has  given  evidence  to  the  UN
      investigations against crimes committed by the Sri  Lankan  government
      via BTF and ICPPG. Sworn statements were submitted via  BTF.  He  also
      consents to attend any legal proceedings against Sri Lanka to  prevent
      ongoing genocide and make them accountable for war crimes committed.


  95. Ms Rothwell referred to the evidence that he has become a key activist
      and an organising member of the organisation. Many of the  photographs
      of him are published in websites and news media.


  96. She also referred to the statement of Mr Sathiyaseelan, the founder of
      the Tamil Student Union. He has attended diaspora activities with  the
      appellant since 2009 (respondent's bundle, A71-78).


  97. She submitted that he falls within the risk categories in  GJ,  supra.
      He is likely to be detained at the airport because of  his  sur  place
      activities. Accordingly, he will face serious harm as confirmed by the
      most recent background evidence. He cannot relocate within Sri  Lanka,
      which is accepted by GJ.


  98. It has been accepted that he suffers from PTSD and depression.


      Assessment


  99. I have had regard  to  Mr  Singh's  submissions  that  in  effect  the
      appellant is an  'admin  coordinator'.  This  he  submitted  does  not
      constitute evidence of his being a committed activist or that he would
      be of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities  on  return.  The
      appellant's participation in these various groups is at a low level.


 100. I have also taken into account his  submissions  that  the  First-tier
      Judge had referred to the fact that no copies have  been  provided  of
      his evidence under oath which was submitted to the UNHCR. Accordingly,
      there is no evidence that the affidavit would be in the possession  of
      the Sri Lankan government.


 101. I have also taken into account Mr Singh's  submissions  regarding  the
      decision in UB (Sri Lanka), supra, where the Court of Appeal  referred
      to the text of two letters from the British  High  Commission  in  Sri
      Lanka.


 102. The first letter relates to proscribed  terrorist  groups.  Among  the
      organisations proscribed are the TGTE, the UK based Global Tamil Forum
      and the British Tamil Forum. When making his announcement on  1  April
      2014, Brigadier Wanigasooriya said that individuals belonging to those
      organisations would face arrest under anti- terrorism laws. As at  the
      date of the letter, 16 April 2014, there had been no known arrests.


 103. There is also the later letter dated 25 July 2014. The spokesman  from
      the DIE  stated  that  returnees  may  be  questioned  on  arrival  by
      immigration, CID, SIS and TID. The spokesman from the  SIS  said  that
      people being "deported" will always be questioned about their overseas
      activities including whether they have been involved with one  of  the
      proscribed organisations. Members of the organisations are not  banned
      from returning to Sri Lanka. They are allowed to return  but  will  be
      questioned on arrival and may be detained.


 104. Ms Rothwell submitted that the appellant  therefore  is  bound  to  be
      questioned. He cannot be expected to lie.   The  most  recent  country
      guidance information from the Home Office post dates GJ. It  is  dated
      August 2016 at bundle H.


 105.  I  found  the  evidence  of  Mr  Williamson,  Mr  Yogalingam  and  Ms
      Seevaratnam to be essentially credible.


 106. I have no reason to doubt  Mr  Williamson's  evidence  that  Ms  Rowse
      admitted to him that she  had  been  hired  by  the  Sri  Lankan  High
      Commission in London  to  take  photographs  at  the  Tamil  rally  in
      Trafalgar Square on 18 May 2011. He has given unchallenged  background
      evidence of his association with Ms Rowse.


 107. I accept that the transcript of a 17 minute recording, referred to  by
      Mr Williamson, which she gave to Mr Tim Martin explaining how the  Sri
      Lankan High Commission contacted her and requested her to act as a spy
      for them, has not been produced.


 108. Quite apart from his evidence in that respect, however,  I  have  also
      had regard to the evidence that employees of the Sri Lankan Commission
      have taken photographs of those persons on demonstrations  at  various
      rallies and at demonstrations, including those taken in front  of  the
      Commission.


 109. I have already referred to the country guidance decision in GJ setting
      out the categories of individuals  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or
      serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.  This  includes  individuals  who
      are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as
      a single  state  because  they  are,  or  are  perceived  to  have,  a
      significant role in relation to post conflict Tamil separatism  within
      the diaspora. In addition, human rights activists  who  criticise  the
      Sri Lankan government and in particular its human  rights  record  are
      also at risk.


 110. I have also had regard to Mr Singh's submission that the  Tribunal  in
      GJ observed that the Sri Lankan authorities are aware that many Tamils
      travelled abroad as economic migrants and  that  almost  everyone  had
      some level of involvement with the LTTE during the civil war. In  post
      conflict Sri Lanka, an individual's past history is relevant  only  to
      the extent that it is perceived by the  authorities  as  indicating  a
      present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state or government.


 111. Mr Singh has submitted that the appellant  is  at  best  a  low  level
      supporter, worker or volunteer on behalf of the organisations  and  in
      particular the TGTE. Accordingly, he will not be of  adverse  interest
      to the Sri Lankan authorities on return.


 112. However, the appellant has produced a substantial amount  of  evidence
      including  from  witnesses,  relating  to  his  participation  as   an
      administrative coordinator for the TGTE.  There are also articles  and
      reports produced containing  his  photographs  as  part  of  the  TGTE
      Parliamentary organising team in 2015.


 113. I have also had regard to  a  transcript  of  a  speech  made  by  the
      appellant on the International Day of  the  Disappeared  at  the  TGTE
      protest in front of Downing Street on 28 August 2016. The  translation
      of the transcript presented has not been challenged. The speech is  on
      a YouTube video. Amongst the demands made by the  appellant  that  day
      are the demand for a proper investigation as to the  "disappearances".
      They want these cases to be solved. They want to raise awareness about
      the ongoing human rights violations and  genocide  against  the  Tamil
      people by the Sri Lankan authorities.


 114. There are also photographs produced which have been  published  on  12
      September 2015 showing the appellant's presence at that meeting - C76-
      77.


 115. The First-tier Judge accepted the appellant's claim that  he  and  his
      parents were detained and that at some point during that detention his
      parents were shot.


 116.  I  have  referred  in  some  detail  to  evidence  presented  of  the
      appellant's participation in diaspora activities on behalf of the TGTE
      and other organisations in the UK. During the evidence it emerged that
      the appellant's name as well as his mobile telephone  number,  appears
      in several publications relating to diaspora events  linked  to  Tamil
      separatist operations within Sri Lanka.


 117. There are also attendances shown at such demonstrations  contained  in
      publications in which there is reference to participation on behalf of
      Justices  for  Victims  of  Genocide.  These  are  contained  in   the
      respondent's bundle at pages 402-426.


 118. I have already referred to the messages sent by the appellant to other
      members and volunteers regarding the events he organised on behalf  of
      the TGTE. As already noted, the appellant's contact details, including
      his mobile telephone number, are contained in the text  messages  sent
      by such members on various occasions. There are  also  various  tweets
      from the appellant set out from pages 453 of the respondent's bundle.


 119. The appellant's name and  mobile  phone  number  appear  on  documents
      advertising the ICPPG. An example of this is at Bundle C,  14-A.  This
      is an ICPPG flyer setting out the appellant's name and contact details
      as a contact person.


 120. His photograph and his name  as  well  as  mobile  phone  number  also
      appears  in  documents  associated  with  TGTE  events  as   well   as
      publications by the TGTE. Examples of these are contained at C, 17-18,
      20 and 23. There is a photograph of the TGTE sports day held at Morden
      on 26 September 2016. This is a photograph of the appellant  with  one
      of the organisers at that event.


 121. As noted by Mr Singh, he was referred to  as  a  person  involved  'in
      admin'. However, these photographs as well as other documents put  out
      by and on behalf of the organisations do appear in the public  domain.
      He is referred to as one of the coordinators at the TGTE sports  event
      in 2016. His photograph and his name referring to him as  "admin"  was
      produced at C20. He also appeared on a Tamil news item at B24-26.


 122. There is a photograph of the appellant at a demonstration and  protest
      at C16 on 27 November 2015. Some of his  photographs  have  also  been
      published on the internet - C41, 47-48.  They  include  a  protest  in
      front of the Sri Lankan Embassy on  4  February  2016  and  a  protest
      against the Sri Lankan government in respect  of  those  who  remained
      detained in Sri Lankan army camps  which  took  place  at  10  Downing
      Street on 20 December 2015. This was organised by the appellant.


 123. I have referred to the evidence of the Tamil  Guardian  dated  9  June
      2016. A researcher, Mr PP, who works for the Tamil Information  Centre
      was abducted and tortured by the Sri Lankan intelligence outfit before
      being deported to the UK. He was asked to provide details of witnesses
      and volunteers in the UK  who  were  working  with  the  organisation,
      documenting human rights violations.


 124. There is also reference to the arrest of  Mr  V  R,  a  British  Tamil
      citizen who arrived in Sri Lanka to visit his mother.  He  was  beaten
      and arrested by two men who raided his family home on 2 June 2016.  He
      had been arrested on suspicion of assisting LTTE activities in the UK.
      There was no arrest warrant, nor identification provided  by  two  men
      who dragged him out of the house.


 125.  Ms  Seevaratnam  in  her  evidence  referred  to  the  abduction  and
      interrogation of one of her key witnesses' husbands who is employed by
      the UN. He  was  abducted  and  interrogated  about  his  wife  giving
      evidence through ICPPG to the UN's OISL  Commission  by  CIDs  in  Sri
      Lanka - C10.


 126. She also referred to the independent researcher, Mr  PP  who  went  to
      carry out research on behalf of her organisation and the TIC  who  was
      abducted and tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  -  C11.  The
      incident was reported to the police but no action was taken.


 127. The appellant was interviewed by her organisation and he was  regarded
      as a key witness to war crimes said to  have  been  committed  by  the
      government of Sri Lanka. He  joined  the  ICPPG  as  a  volunteer  and
      completed the evidence collection training. He was promoted to  Deputy
      Head of Admin in 2015. He is currently the Acting Head of  Admin  with
      the responsibility  of  organising  volunteer  meetings  and  evidence
      collecting training. He also schedules  UN  interviews,  liaises  with
      witnesses and victims in addition to data control and  management.  He
      has introduced a few other key witnesses who have provided  statements
      against successive governments in Sri Lanka.


 128. Ms Seevaratnam confirmed that she, too,  has  seen  the  appellant  at
      public demonstrations and protests against the Sri  Lankan  government
      in the UK.


 129. I have also had regard to the COI report dated August 2016: Sri Lanka:
      Tamil Separatism. I have had regard to paragraph 2.3.8.  Persons  with
      perceived  sympathies  for  the  LTTE  continue  to  be   intimidated,
      harassed, arrested, detained and tortured. At 6.1.2, the Freedom House
      Report on Sri  Lanka  dated  19  June  2015  stated  that  authorities
      reportedly monitor  the  personal  communications  and  activities  of
      individuals known to be critical of the  government,  particularly  in
      the Tamil populated North and East. That paragraph refers to the  fact
      that former LTTE  fighters  and  their  social  circles  face  special
      scrutiny. Although the appellant is not amongst the  latter  category,
      it is evident that the authorities monitor activities  of  individuals
      known to be critical of the government.


 130. I have also had regard  to  further  paragraphs  in  the  2016  report
      referred to at paragraph 20 of Ms Rothwell's skeleton.


 131. I find, from the substantial body of evidence presented and which post
      dated the First-tier Tribunal's decision, that the appellant is likely
      to be of interest if returned  to  Sri  Lanka.  There  is  substantial
      evidence of his association with the ICPPG including his attendance at
      demonstrations which he organised on behalf of the TGTE. He  has  also
      been photographed  at  such  public  meetings  and  demonstrations  by
      employees of the Sri Lankan High Commission.  On several occasions his
      photograph relating  to  his  attendance  at  such  events  have  been
      published in the public domain, including the TGTE website,  and  will
      be accessible to the Sri Lankan authorities.


 132. Although it is not evident that his name appears on a stop list  or on
      a watch list, I find  on  the  evidence  presented  that  he  will  be
      interviewed at the airport on return. As noted by Ms Rothwell he  will
      not be expected to lie about his diaspora activities. of his sur place
      activities.


 133. It is evident that the letters produced to the Court of Appeal  in  UB
      (Sri Lanka) v SSHD, supra, were not produced  to  First-tier  Tribunal
      nor was the Home Office policy guidance dated 2014.


 134. There is thus evidence that a person returned to  Sri  Lanka  will  be
      questioned on arrival and may be detained. In addition to that,  there
      is also the evidence produced in this appeal  regarding  a  number  of
      persons who having returned to Sri Lanka,  were detained and subjected
      to ill treatment.


 135. Having regard to the  circumstances  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the
      appellant has shown to the lower standard that there is a real risk of
      his being ill treated if  he  were  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.  In  the
      circumstances the appellant should be admitted to asylum.






      Notice of Decision


      The appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights (Article 3)  grounds
      is allowed.


      An anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date:   12 May 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









