
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10190/2019 (A)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 3 August 2020                     |On 10 August 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     ATS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Shore promulgated on 2  February  2020  in  which  the
       Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection and human rights
       grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the  First  Tier
       Tribunal on 3 April 2020, the operative part of the  grant  being  in
       the following terms:

             "2.   The  lengthy  grounds  seeking  permission  assert,   in
                  summary, that the Judge erred in misdirecting  himself  on
                  the plausibility aspects of the Appellant's account,  that
                  he made  inadequate  findings,  that  he  failed  to  give
                  adequate consideration to the best interests of the child,
                  he failed to follow the recent country guidance in  SMO  &
                  Others and that  he  failed  to  adequately  consider  the
                  experts  report,  or  the  evidence  of  the   Appellant's
                  witnesses.


             3.   As is frequently the case, some of the grounds raised are
                  stronger than others. Arguably, however, the Judge  failed
                  to give adequate consideration to the  expert  report.  He
                  makes no reference to it in his findings. He makes a brief
                  reference to the best interests of the child, but arguably
                  fails to identify precisely what they were, and  how  they
                  were  met.  Significantly,  there  was  an   issue   under
                  Paragraph 276 ADE as the Appellant's child had been in the
                  UK for over 7 years. Arguably, the  Judge  has  failed  to
                  determine why it would, or would  not,  be  reasonable  to
                  expect the child to leave the UK. It is also arguable that
                  the Judge failed to explain how the Appellant will be able
                  to return to Iraq without a CSID.


             4.   In these circumstances, I  grant  permission  to  appeal.
                  Although I have highlighted those which I consider  to  be
                  the stronger grounds, I should  make  it  clear  that  all
                  grounds are open for argument."

    3. As a result of the Covid-19 pandemic  directions  were  sent  to  the
       parties indicating a provisional view that the  question  of  whether
       the Judge had made a material error of law and whether  the  decision
       should be set aside could be made without a hearing and providing  an
       opportunity for the parties to comment upon both this proposal and to
       file any further submissions they would seek to rely upon in  support
       of their respective cases.
    4. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing   with   a   case   fairly
       and   justly   includes:   dealing  with   it   in   ways  that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.
    5. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.
    6. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

        34.-


        (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may make
             any decision without a hearing.


        (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
             party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any
             matter, and the form of any such hearing.


        (3)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
             must hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes of
             proceedings.


        (4)  Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper  Tribunal
             to-


             (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)  or
             8(2);


             (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


             (c)  determine an application for permission to bring judicial
                  review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


             (d)  make a consent order disposing of  proceedings,  pursuant
                  to rule 39, without a hearing.

    7. The only party  to  have  responded  to  the  direction  is  Fountain
       Solicitors on behalf of the appellant. I am satisfied there has  been
       proper service upon the Secretary of State's representative,  but  no
       response has been received from them within the permitted time.
    8. I consider it is appropriate in all the circumstances to exercise the
       discretionary power contained in rule 34 to determine the question of
       whether the Judge has made an error of law material to  the  decision
       to dismiss the appeal on the papers without a hearing.  No  prejudice
       is made out to either party in  doing  so  and  no  objection  to  so
       proceeding has been received.

Background

    9. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born in January  1975.  The  Judge
       refers to the background of the appellant's case and  the  nature  of
       the documentary and oral evidence before setting out findings of fact
       from [67] of the decision under challenge.
   10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on five grounds.  Ground  1
       asserts a material misdirection in the Judge finding  it  implausible
       the appellant would have been issued  with  an  arrest  warrant  four
       years after he left Iraq without providing any  explanation  for  why
       this should be so.  Ground  2  asserts  the  Judge  made  a  material
       misdirection in finding the appellant had not shown he has a  genuine
       and subsisting relationship with his partner, a British citizen,  and
       in failing to give reasoned and adequate findings in this  regard  in
       light of the evidence that was before the  Judge.  Ground  3  asserts
       material misdirection in the  Judge  failing  to  consider  the  best
       interests of the appellant's child as a  primary  consideration.  The
       child had been in the United Kingdom since 2013, over 7  years,  more
       than half of its life, yet  the  Judge  failed  to  explain  why  the
       requirements of paragraph 276ADE were not met or why there would  not
       be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant  and  his  child
       returning to Iraq; especially given the fact the child has a  medical
       problem. Ground 4 asserts the Judge erred  in  failing  to  correctly
       apply the country guidance case of SMO or to  adequately  assess  the
       risk the appellant faces on return in light of  the  fact  he  has  a
       child with medical difficulties and is a Sunni Muslim and in  failing
       to address adequately whether the appellant  or  his  daughter  would
       have the necessary identification documents such as a CSID  in  order
       to return. Ground 5 asserts the Judge failed to take into account  or
       to explain why weight was not attached to an expert report of Dr Alan
       George, or to make findings  in  relation  to  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant's witnesses said to relevant to the article 8 ECHR claim.
   11. In relation to Ground  2  it  is  also  now  the  position  that  the
       appellant and his partner have a second  child  born  in  the  United
       Kingdom on 16 May 2020 who is a British citizen.  The  appellant  and
       his partner have Parental Responsibility for the second  child  which
       is said to further demonstrate the genuineness and subsistence of the
       relationship between them.

Error of law

   12. Although the presence of the child born on  16  May  2020  is  a  new
       matter there is arguable merit in the assertion  the  child  who  had
       been born at the date of the hearing and who had been in  the  United
       Kingdom for more than half their life meant there was  an  obligation
       upon the Judge to consider not only what was in the best interests of
       the child but also the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  and  the
       question of whether there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
       appellant and child returning to Iraq. Failure to do  so  amounts  to
       legal error.
   13. The failure of the Judge to properly address  whether  the  appellant
       and his daughter would have the  necessary  identification  documents
       such as a CSID is also a material error.
   14. Also of concern is, despite  a  reading  of  the  determination,  the
       inability to  properly  identify  whether  the  Judge  gave  adequate
       consideration to the report of Dr George. It is  accepted  the  Judge
       was not required to set out findings in relation to  each  and  every
       aspect of the evidence but it  is  necessary  for  a  reader  of  the
       decision to understand what evidence was taken into account and  what
       findings were made upon it. There was no dispute that the issues that
       Dr George indicated would create an elevated risk exist.  There  also
       appears to be merit in the challenge to the Judge's failure  to  make
       findings in relation to the evidence  of  the  appellant's  witnesses
       said to be of particularly relevant to the article 8 ECHR claim.
   15. I find in light of the significant errors  that  the  submission  the
       appellant has not received a proper assessment of the merits  of  the
       appeal  and  is  unable  to  understand  why  he  failed  has  merit.
       Significant factual findings still need to be made both  in  relation
       to the matters that were before the Judge and the impact of  the  new
       child. Accordingly, I consider it is appropriate for the appeal to be
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham to be heard
       afresh by a judge other than Judge Shore. There shall be no preserved
       findings.




Decision

   16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I remit the decision to the First-
       tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham to be heard  afresh  by  a  judge
       other than Judge Shore.

  Anonymity.

   17. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 August 2020
