
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
pa/10369/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 March 2019                         | On 13 March 2019                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                  ms G K K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw, Counsel, London Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Error of Law Decision

1.   The appellant seeks permission to appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge P S  Aujla  (FTT),  who  in  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on  21  December  2018  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  her  claim  for
    international protection and on human rights grounds.  The  matter  was
    first heard and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Afako  on  4  December
    2012.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan and was born on  22  November
    1955.  She presently lives with her daughter and family.  It is claimed
    that she has strong family ties with her daughter and in particular her
    grandson. The First-tier Tribunal in 2012 found that the appellant  had
    established family life with her family in the UK.

3.    The grounds of appeal argued firstly that the FTT failed to take  into
    account the  finding of family life made by the  FTT  in  2012  and  in
    addition  the new documentary evidence  submitted  in  support  of  the
    fresh asylum claim.  The grounds of  appeal  asserted  that  the  judge
    erred in failing to follow Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  0072.  The  second
    ground argued that the FTT made material  errors  with  regard  to  the
    assessment of the appellant's family and  private  life  in  concluding
    that the appellant did not enjoy family  life  with  her  daughter  and
    grandsons.  It was further submitted that  material  factors  were  not
    considered. The FTT further failed  to  approach  the  best  interests'
    consideration in the correct way.

4.   At the hearing before me this morning  Mr  Walker  for  the  respondent
    agreed that there  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision as per the grounds  of  appeal.  In  addition
    there was concern that the findings in  paragraph  [39]  were  recorded
    incorrectly.

         "I have no reason to doubt that the appellant would not be able  to
         cope on return to Uzbekistan where she spent the first fifty  years
         of her life.  She had no  physical  health  problems.   The  mental
         health problems identified were not, in  my  view,  serious  enough
         when taken in the context of what the appellant was able to  do  in
         connection with her grandchildren.  I therefore find that Article 3
         would not be engaged on  medical  grounds  if  the  appellant  were
         removed from the United Kingdom." [39]

     Mr Walker submitted that the FTT  erred  with  reference  to  the  word
    "not"(my underlining) "be able to cope" as this  was  contrary  to  the
    conclusion reached and was in likelihood a typo. The  FTT  referred  to
    the absence of physical  health  problems,  where  there  were  clearly
    physical health problems identified. In light of  the  evidence,  which
    was accepted, the appellant had made at least two attempts at  suicide,
    her mental health issues must be considered as serious.

5.   Ms Shaw relied on the grounds of appeal and confirmed that she  and  Mr
    Walker had reached an agreement that there were material errors of  law
    and the proposed disposal was a hearing de novo at  Taylor  House.   Ms
    Shaw  submitted  the  new  Tribunal  should  have  the  benefit  of  an
    independent social worker's report which considered the relationship of
    the grandchild with his grandmother/the appellant and highlighted  this
    would take three months to obtain.

Notice of Decision

6.   I am satisfied that the two grounds of appeal as set out  in  paragraph
    3 above, are made out and that there are material errors of law in  the
    determination which I set aside.  The FTT failed to properly assess the
    family and private life having regard to the previous finding  made  in
    2012 and the evidence before the FTT.  There was no consideration  made
    of the new material in support of the asylum claim.

7.  The appeal is allowed.  The decision set  aside.   The  matter  will  be
    remitted for rehearing (not before Judge Aujla) at Taylor  House  on  a
    date not before three months.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 11.3.2019
G A Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.






Signed                                  Date 11.3.2019

G A Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

