

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/10846/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 March 2019                       |    On 13 March 2019               |
|                                      |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               LINDAH CHENYAMA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Haddow, Advocate, instructed by Brown & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  FtT  Judge  McGavin,
    promulgated on 22 June 2018, dismissing her appeal on asylum and  human
    rights grounds.  She does not challenge the findings on asylum grounds.
     Her grounds are set out as 1, failure of anxious scrutiny; 2, onus  on
    respondent  to  verify  availability  of  medical  treatment;  and   3,
    consideration of the best interests of the  children.   She  no  longer
    advances ground 4.

 2. Ground 1 is directed against what the  judge  at  [65-70]  made  of  an
    "expert report" by Professor Ferrand of the London School of Hygiene  &
    Tropical Medicine, dated 17 November 2017, item K  of  the  appellant's
    1st inventory of productions in the FtT.

 3. As I observed when referred to this item in course of  submissions,  it
    is not in the format of an expert report.  The inventory refers  to  it
    as a "letter", as does  the  judge.   The  author  says  in  her  first
    sentence, "Thank you for your request to provide a report", but  it  is
    far from clear that her letter is intended as  a  fully  formed  expert
    report.

 4. What is clear from the  letter  is  that  the  author  has  outstanding
    qualifications  and  experience   in   the   subject.    However,   the
    deficiencies of  the  "report"  are  not  just  formal.   Although  the
    appellant's case, both in the FtT and in the UT, has  been  extensively
    and clearly prepared and presented, in this respect there has not  been
    compliance with Practice Direction 10 on expert evidence.  There is  no
    statement from  the  author,  or  in  accompanying  materials,  of  the
    instructions and information provided to her - PD 10.1,  10.9(c).   The
    "report" contains no verifying statement of truth - PD 10.10-11.

 5. The ground says that the judge's reasons for giving the report "no real
    weight" are "inadequate or irrational" and "unfair", and that  she  had
    no reason for preferring evidence from the respondent.

 6. The judge noted that the report was  written  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was "at high risk of mental health problems", but  there  was
    no report from a mental health expert to support that.

 7. The appellant argues that the choices for the judge were (i) to   infer
    that the expert had material to support what she said, (ii)  to  direct
    further submissions or a supplementary report, or (iii) "to infer  from
    the lack of detailed reasoning that  notwithstanding  her  credentials,
    experience and duty to the tribunal ... [the expert's]  clearly  stated
    conclusion was entirely baseless and ... it was legitimate for the  FtT
    to draw an entirely contrary conclusion".

 8. I do not think that the criticism of the judge for taking option  (iii)
    is a fair representation of her decision.  After noting the absence  of
    a report from a mental health expert, the  judge  considers  the  other
    evidence before her.  A fortnight before the date of  the  letter,  the
    appellant told her GP she did not  wish  to  commence  antidepressants.
    The appellant produced a considerable body of evidence  about  herself,
    but there has been no reference  to  anything  about  a  mental  health
    condition, apart from the apparent assumption by Professor Ferrand.

 9. The furthest the judge took this matter, at [66], was that she was  not
    satisfied that a particular medication would be inappropriate  for  the
    appellant.

10. My conclusions on this ground are reinforced by the fact that what  was
    before the judge was a letter, requiring evaluation, but not an  expert
    report.

11. In that evaluation, the judge (i) was  not  bound  to  take  everything
    mentioned at face value, (ii) did not come under a  duty  to  give  the
    appellant an opportunity to improve her  case,  and  (iii)  came  to  a
    conclusion which did not involve the making of an error on a  point  of
    law.

12. Ground 2 overlaps with ground 1.  It contends that applying  Paposhvili
    v Belgium ECtHR 4173/10, the  judge  erred  by  treating  the  onus  as
    remaining on the  appellant,  when  she  had  produced  evidence  which
    obliged the respondent to verify  that  care  would  be  available  and
    appropriate.

13. Paposhvili at [185] says  that  appellants  have  to  "adduce  evidence
    capable of demonstrating ... substantial grounds for believing that ...
    they would be exposed to a real risk  of being subjected  to  treatment
    contrary to article 3"; qualified by the remark that  some  speculation
    is inherent, and the obligation is not to "provide clear proof".

14. Applying that to the facts of the present case, on failure of ground 1,
    the onus had not shifted.

15. Mr Haddow said that there is no domestic authority on transfer of  onus
    since Paposhvili, the point not  being  dealt  with  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)
    [2018] EWCA Civ 64.  Although Paposhvili was founded upon in  the  FtT,
    that was on level of risk, and not on  transfer  of  onus.   Mr  Haddow
    submitted that the point was obvious enough for this to be an error  of
    law, even in absence of submission.

16. I doubt whether a judge would  be  obliged  to  consider  this,  unless
    raised explicitly. However, there is nothing in Paposhvili to  put  the
    respondent (who did produce evidence) under further obligation, on  the
    facts of this case, so the matter is academic.

17. Ground 3 founds in part on evidence that unemployment  in  Zimbabwe  is
    around 90%, with particular difficulties for women and for  those  with
    HIV.  Mr Haddow pointed to the observations of  Professor  Ferrand  and
    said that while not an expert on employment or  the  economy,  she  was
    well placed to know, which  I accept.

18. This ground is advanced as if it must be  assumed  that  the  appellant
    will return with her children to face abject destitution.  It overlooks
    that the children's father (working in the Falklands at the time of the
    hearing) has supported them throughout  their  lives.   The  judge  was
    sceptical of what she was told about the breakdown of the  relationship
    between the appellant and her husband, but even  if  that  was  so,  it
    would not follow that he has abdicated  responsibility  for  his  three
    sons.  The judge found at [56] that the appellant failed  to  show  she
    would be returning without family, friends or  means  of  support.   No
    error has been asserted in her findings, yet ground 3 is advanced as if
    they had not been made.  No error is disclosed.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

20. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]
      11 March 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
