
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10922/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30th August 2017                        |On 8th September 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     EG
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Kumi, instructed by Templeton Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Guyana born on [date]  and  she  appealed
    against the Secretary of State's refusal dated 10th  November  2015  of
    her claim for asylum, humanitarian protection and protection under  the
    Human Rights Act.  The matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Kainth on 10th February 2017.  He identified  that  the
    appellant's appeal, by the time of the hearing, was  restricted  solely
    to paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  The judge nevertheless dismissed the appellant's appeal  in  a
    decision  promulgated  on  1st  March  2017.   The  appellant  made  an
    application for permission to appeal on the following grounds.

Ground (i)

 2. It was  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  applying  the  test  of
    'insurmountable obstacles' [paragraph 32 of the decision].   The  judge
    applied a higher threshold than 'very significant obstacles' which  was
    the test the judge should have applied at the date of the hearing;  the
    test was not 'insurmountable obstacles'.  It  was  submitted  that  the
    test applied by the judge posed a higher threshold.

Ground (ii)

 3. Submissions were placed before the judge as to  the  circumstances  the
    appellant would face on return to Guyana and  in  particular  the  high
    incidence of crime against returnees and to which  the  judge  had  not
    referred.  Although the asylum element of the appeal was withdrawn  the
    issue of conditions upon return should  have  been  considered  in  the
    assessment of 'very significant obstacles'.

Ground (iii)

 4. The  judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the  issue  of  compassionate
    circumstances and the Article  8  balancing  exercise.   In  brief  the
    appellant was brought to the UK as a minor  having  been  a  victim  of
    sexual abuse as a minor in Guyana and she shared a  close  relationship
    with her mother who was going through a divorce.   Although  the  judge
    expressed sympathy at paragraph 26 of his determination, he nonetheless
    concluded that such sympathy should not be allowed to have a bearing on
    the consideration and, that, it was submitted, was in error. The Asylum
    Policy Instructions  were  referred  to  and  indeed  the  respondent's
    position was that compassionate circumstances may  be  a  cause  for  a
    grant of Article 8.

The Hearing

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Kumi  relied  on  the  grounds  which  were
    submitted in the application and it was submitted  that  insurmountable
    obstacles  denote  a  more  exacting  burden  than   very   significant
    obstacles.

 6. Mr Kumi noted that the respondent resisted the grant of permission  and
    relied inter alia on  Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -
    compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) but  there  were
    significantly differing factual matrices.  The family in Treebhawon was
    dependent on public funds, which was not the case for  this  appellant.
    There were assumptions made by the judge in this particular case  about
    the availability of employment in  Guyana.   The  judge  erred  in  his
    assessment in relation to employment at paragraph 23. The facts in  the
    instant case were also very different from those in  Agyarko  &  Ors  v
    SSHD [2017] UKSC 11.  No proper balance had been struck with regard  to
    proportionality.  At the hearing before me Mr Kumi  advanced  that  the
    brother and sister were in the UK and had full residence. The judge had
    not  taken  into  account  the  very  significant  obstacles   to   the
    appellant's return or the compassionate circumstances  in  relation  to
    Article 8.

 7. Mr Bramble resisted the application.  The judge had set out  the  facts
    at paragraphs 14 to 19 and  had  taken  them  all  into  account.   The
    appellant had spent her formative years in Guyana.  The judge had taken
    into account the relationship between the mother and daughter  and  the
    appellant and brother from whom she  derived  financial  support.   The
    judge  had  specifically   taken   into   account   the   compassionate
    circumstances and the  medical  evidence.   I  was  reminded  that  the
    appellant had withdrawn her asylum and humanitarian and Article 2 and 3
    protection claims. Clearly the judge addressed all the factors and  the
    appellant could not have succeeded  in  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE
    either in relation to 'insurmountable obstacles' or  'very  significant
    obstacles'.

Conclusions

Ground (i)

 8. At both the date of the hearing and at the date of decision it is clear
    that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) required an applicant to  show  that  they
    were aged 18 or  above  and  that  there  would  be  "very  significant
    obstacles to their integration into the country  to  which  they  would
    have to go if required to leave the UK".

 9. Mr Kumi submitted with reference to Agyarko at paragraphs  16  and  18,
    that 'insurmountable obstacles' denoted a more exacting burden  and  in
    any event 'insurmountable obstacles' as defined was limited to EX.1(b).



10. I am not persuaded that  there  is  anything  to  be  derived  from  an
    analysis of the difference between the words "hurdles" and  "obstacles"
    and "difficulties".

11. It has long been established that  'insurmountable'  obstacles  do  not
    mean literally obstacles that cannot be overcome. The Court  of  Appeal
    in  MF  Nigeria  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  addressed  the   meaning   of
    'insurmountable obstacles' albeit in the  context  of  deportation  but
    observed that

          '...We would observe  that,  if  "insurmountable"  obstacles  are
          literally obstacles which it is  impossible  to  surmount,  their
          scope is very limited  indeed.  We  shall  confine  ourselves  to
          saying that we incline to the view that, for the  reasons  stated
          in detail by the UT in Izuazu at paras 53 to 59, such a stringent
          approach would be contrary to article 8'.

    and as stated in Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC)
    at paragraph 58

          'It has been repeatedly stated  in  national  jurisprudence  laid
          down by the higher courts in the UK that in none of  these  cases
          was Strasbourg laying down a test for engagement of Article 8  as
          opposed  to  reaching  a  decision  on  proportionality  in   the
          particular case. The requirement for exceptional circumstances or
          insurmountable obstacles has been authoritatively declared to  be
          an erroneous one in the Article  8  immigration  context  by  the
          House of Lords in Huang [2007] UKHL 11 at [20], EB Kosovo  [2008]
          UKHL 41 at [8] [12] [18] [20] [21] and by the Court of Appeal  on
          innumerable occasions including LM (DRC) [2008] EWCA Civ  325  at
          [11] and [13]; VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5 at [19] and [24]; JO
          Uganda [2010] EWCA Civ 10 at [14] to [15] and [23] to [26]'.

12. I was referred to paragraphs 16 and 18 of Agyarko  which  consider  the
    legal terms in respect of Appendix FM  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Instructions (effective from 9th  July  2012)  directing  the  decision
    maker in relation to 'insurmountable obstacles' to consider the

         "Seriousness of the difficulties which the applicant and his or her
         partner would face in continuing their family life outside the  UK,
         and 'whether they entail something that could  not  (or  could  not
         reasonably be expected to) be  overcome,  even  with  a  degree  of
         hardship for  one  or  more  of  the  individuals  concerned'.  ...
         relevant factors are said to include the ability of the parties  to
         enter and stay lawfully in  the  country  concerned;  cultural  and
         religious  barriers;  and  the  impact  of  a  mental  or  physical
         disability.  In relation to the second of these,  the  instructions
         reiterate that the barrier must  be  one  which  either  cannot  be
         overcome or  which  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  a  person  to
         overcome".

13. As indicated at paragraph 44, however, the Supreme Court also opined

         "The  expression  'insurmountable  obstacles'  is  now  defined  by
         paragraph EX.2 as  meaning  'very  significant  difficulties  which
         would be faced by the applicant  or  their  partner  in  continuing
         their family life together outside the UK and which  could  not  be
         overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or
         their partner'.  That definition appears to  me  to  be  consistent
         with the meaning which can be derived from the Strasbourg case law.
          As explained  in  paragraph  16  above,  paragraph  EX.2  was  not
         introduced until after the dates of the decisions  in  the  present
         case.  Prior  to  the  insertion  of  that  definition   it   would
         nevertheless  be  reasonable  to  infer,  consistently   with   the
         Secretary  of  State's  statutory  duty  to  act  compatibly   with
         Convention rights, that the expression was  intended  to  bear  the
         same meaning in the Rules as in the Strasbourg case law from  which
         it was derived.  I would therefore interpret it as bearing the same
         meaning as is now set out in paragraph EX2".

14. I find that, therefore, the definition  of  'insurmountable  obstacles'
    can now be equated with the test  of  "very  significant  difficulties"
    and, as I have indicated, the term obstacles, difficulties  or  hurdles
    are not significantly different.  I am  not  persuaded  therefore  that
    insurmountable obstacles can be differentiated from  'very  significant
    obstacles' and that  the  judge's  use  of  'insurmountable  obstacles'
    cannot be interchanged with 'very significant  obstacles'  or,  in  the
    light of the caselaw, that one denoted a more exacting burden than  the
    other to discharge.  Indeed, the judge reasoned that he had derived the
    meaning for insurmountable obstacles and the  test  from  the  case  of
    Agyarko.  That the references in Agyarko are to Appendix FM and EX1  to
    my mind adds nothing as the reasoning at paragraph 44 of Agyarko can be
    extended to paragraph 276ADE by  the  court's  reference  to  the  'the
    Rules'. As has been held in caselaw the use of 'very'  denotes  a  high
    threshold in addition to the use of the term 'significant'.

15. Even if that  were  incorrect,  I  am  persuaded  that  the  judge  has
    identified the  test  of  very  significant  hurdles,  as  set  out  in
    Treebhawon, and directed himself in law in accordance  with  Treebhawon
    recording as he did at paragraph 22(3).

           "mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval and
           mere inconvenience,  even  where  multiplied,  are  unlikely  to
           satisfy the test of  'very  significant  hurdles'  in  paragraph
           276ADE of the Immigration Rules".

16. I find that overall the  judge  was  guided  by  that  definition,  and
    proceeded between paragraphs 23 and 30(1) to make findings  in  respect
    of the Immigration Rules.  The judge  addressed  the  relevant  factual
    issues and set out the evidence between paragraphs 14 to 19.  There was
    no question that the judge did not understand the factual matrix of the
    case. The judge for example identified that the appellant was  no  more
    than 17 when she first entered the United Kingdom and  having  recorded
    her age was aware of the length of  her  residence.   Specifically  the
    appellant had spent her formative years in Guyana, had been resourceful
    in the UK, achieved numerous qualifications during her time in the  UK,
    and there was no reason why she should not put  her  skills  learnt  to
    good effect in Guyana.  The judge identified that she had  the  benefit
    of financial support from her mother and also her brother and there was
    no reason to suppose that this could not continue overseas.  The  judge
    also recorded that the appellant relied on her family for emotional and
    financial support and that she had returned back to Guyana in  2006  to
    look after cousins in her family.  She has lived continuously with  her
    mother, save for a period of four years when she  lived  with  her  ex-
    partner and noted that the mother had returned to Guyana in 2016  where
    her stepfather and  sister  lived.   The  judge  clearly  recorded  the
    repeated sexual assaults said to be perpetrated on  the  appellant  and
    that the mother was going through a divorce and  the  appellant  relied
    upon her and her mother relied on the appellant for emotional support.

17. The judge dealt with the evidence from the brother who did  not  attend
    court and returned to a consideration of the lack of accommodation  and
    limited finances and no job  but  clearly  did  not  accept  that  they
    amounted to 'insurmountable' or 'very significant' obstacles.

18. The judge noted that the appellant's mother's evidence was  clear  that
    in 2015 she returned  to  Guyana  with  a  view  to  establishing  what
    arrangements could be made for her daughter should she have to  return.
    The judge at this point also looked at the integration of the appellant
    within the UK and her links with her  mother,  applying  Beoku-Betts  v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 39 and further addressed the matter that there was  no
    witness statement from the appellant's sister or stepfather, concluding
    that although there would be some  impact  on  the  appellant's  family
    based in the United Kingdom its extent would not come close to invoking
    Article 8 in the appellant's favour.

19. The judge addressed the report of Frances Harry (Counsellor) dated 31st
    January 2017 and the medical issues of the appellant but concluded that
    the report was limited  assistance  as  it  did  not  comply  with  the
    Istanbul Protocol and it was unclear whether the  author  was  approved
    under Section 12 of  the  Mental  Health  Act  1983.   The  judge  also
    attached little weight to the report of Dr Georgia Whyte provided in  a
    letter because it was over two years old and noted that  the  GP  notes
    concluded in October 2015 which as the judge stated  were  of  'limited
    assistance'. Those findings were reasoned and open  to  the  judge.  As
    such the judge did not accept that the relationship between the  mother
    and her daughter was anything other than  over  and  above  the  normal
    emotional ties.

20. To my mind the judge went beyond that required of him in assessing  the
    difficulties which were to  be  found  in  relation  to  the  appellant
    relocating to Guyana and it was  open  to  him  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant did not fulfil the threshold  or  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE.

21. As set out in Agyarko at [48] even an  acceptance  that  the  appellant
    does not meet the Rules is not necessarily the end  of  the  matter  in
    article 8 terms and the question of proportionality must be  determined
    independently by the court.


           'If the  applicant  or  his  or  her  partner  would  face  very
           significant  difficulties  in  continuing  their   family   life
           together outside the UK, which could not be  overcome  or  would
           entail  very  serious   hardship,   then   the   "insurmountable
           obstacles" test will be met, and leave will be granted under the
           Rules. If  that  test  is  not  met,  but  the  refusal  of  the
           application would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences,
           such that refusal would not be proportionate, then leave will be
           granted  outside  the  Rules  on  the  basis  that   there   are
           "exceptional  circumstances".   In   the   absence   of   either
           "insurmountable obstacles"  or  "exceptional  circumstances"  as
           defined,  however,  it  is  not  apparent  why  it   should   be
           incompatible with article 8 for leave to be refused.  The  Rules
           and Instructions are therefore compatible with article  8.  That
           is not, of course, to say that decisions applying the Rules  and
           Instructions in individual cases will necessarily be  compatible
           with article 8: that is a  question  which,  if  a  decision  is
           challenged, must be determined independently  by  the  court  or
           tribunal in the light of the particular  circumstances  of  each
           case'.

      It is clear, however, that  the  judge  also  made  a  proportionality
      assessment outside the Rules and addressed the  question  at  [38]  of
      'whether there is anything  the  appellant's  personal  circumstances,
      which includes those of other family members, as to whether there  are
      sufficient to outweigh the public interest  considerations  justifying
      the  refusal'  but  concluded  that  the  decision  was  'in  all  the
      circumstances' proportionate.


Ground (ii)

22. I am not persuaded that the  failure  or  otherwise  of  the  judge  to
    consider conditions in Guyana undermined the decision  or  flagged  any
    error of law.  There was no specific evidence to that effect put before
    the  judge  and,  as  acknowledged,  the  appellant  had   specifically
    withdrawn her claim in respect of asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
    protection under Articles 2 and 3.  As such there can be  no  criticism
    of the judge in his treatment of conditions in Guyana.  It is incumbent
    on the appellant to put specific evidence before the judge in  relation
    to that matter and there is no material error of  law  in  the  judge's
    conclusions thereon.

Ground (iii)

23. Nor am I persuaded that the judge erred in law in his consideration  of
    proportionality. The  judge  clearly  made  a  finding  in  respect  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  proceeded  to
    consider "proportionality" with reference to Article 8 at paragraph  33
    and separately from the consideration under paragraph 276ADE.  He  made
    a finding on the appellant's immigration status  and  applied  Sections
    117B(4) and (5), as he was obliged to do. Little weight should be given
    to an individual in respect  of  family  or  private  life  when  their
    immigration status is precarious, and  the  judge  concluded  "this  is
    precisely the position the appellant finds herself in", [paragraph 35].



24. The judge directed himself correctly and lawfully citing Huang  v  SSHD
    [2007] UKHL 11 and identified that it  was  "only  where  there  is  no
    reasonable  alternative  (such  as  the  presence   of   insurmountable
    obstacles)" that the state may have to relax its normal requirements. I
    repeat, the judge rightly addressed the concept that the  law  requires
    him to consider whether "there is anything in the appellant's  personal
    circumstances which includes  those  of  other  family  members  as  to
    whether  they  are  sufficient  to   outweigh   the   public   interest
    considerations justifying the refusal".  The judge clearly factored  in
    family life but considered it was not sufficient to outweigh the public
    interest   considerations   and   that   overall   the   decision   was
    "proportionate in all the circumstances".

25. The judge took into account  all  relevant  factors,  directed  himself
    lawfully and the conclusions were open to  him.   I  find  no  material
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  decision  and  therefore  that
    decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 6th September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
