
                                    [pic]
IAC-BFD-MD-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10908/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 January 2017                       |On 6 February 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                    M S I
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolahi, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 23 February 2011 as a Tier 4 Migrant and was granted leave until  31
    October 2012. He was granted no further leave  since  then  but  on  31
    October 2012 applied for leave to remain as a student; his  application
    was refused:  found  on  appeal  to  be  not  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules, reconsidered and refused again on  25  August  2015.
    There was an issue between the  parties  as  to  whether  there  was  a
    further Tier 4 application on 21 March 2014 as to whether  the  refusal
    dated 25 August 2015  was  properly  served.  On  5  October  2015  the
    Appellant applied for leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  family  and
    private life; his application was  refused  on  29  February  2016  and
    certified so that he only had an out of country appeal.

 2. On 8 April 2016 the Appellant claimed asylum based on his marriage to W
    J, a woman of the Ahmadi faith who has been recognised as a refugee  in
    the United Kingdom. He claimed that he  would  be  at  risk  of  honour
    killing by her family and his were he  to  return  to  his  country  of
    origin.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application. The Respondent  did
    not accept the relationship between the Appellant and his wife to be  a
    genuine and subsisting one or that they  were  married  and  had  lived
    together for more than two years. It was also not accepted  that  there
    were very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  reintegration  in
    Pakistan or that there were exceptional  circumstances  justifying  the
    grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.

 4. The Appellant appealed and following a hearing at Hatton Cross Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal R Sullivan, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  2
    December 2016, dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and in a  decision  dated  22
    December 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison gave her
    reasons for allowing that application. They are:-

         "The Appellant  seeks  permission  in  time  to  appeal  against  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge R Sullivan)  promulgated
         on 2 December 2016 whereby  it  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
         against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse his application
         for asylum.

         It is arguable that the Judge  misdirected  herself  in  law  which
         could make a material difference to the outcome (a) by  failing  to
         consider that the Appellant as a Sunni Muslim by  entering  into  a
         religious marriage with a woman of the Ahmadi faith who has refugee
         status in the UK as a result of her religion could be  at  risk  of
         persecution by the Secretary of State on return to Pakistan because
         such a marriage contravenes paragraph 289C of the  Pakistani  Penal
         Code (reference is made to MN [2012] UKUT389); (b)  by  relying  on
         her own personal knowledge in forming material conclusions  on  the
         Appellant's wife's faith; (c) although the  Appellant's  wife  only
         has refugee status until 2 February 2017 it was  not  open  to  the
         Judge to suggest that she could relocate to Pakistan  and  continue
         her family life there and (d) by failing to apply anxious  scrutiny
         to the facts and circumstances as a result".

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. Ms Saifolahi relied on all four  grounds  of  appeal  albeit  that  she
    explained that ground one contained the "main  issue"  as  to  why  the
    Appellant now sought permission to appeal. The nub of it  is  that  the
    Judge failed to  carry  out  an  assessment  of  the  exposure  of  the
    Appellant, if returned, to his country of origin to risk from the State
    consequent upon his interfaith marriage. In particular  the  impact  on
    him from the "blasphemy laws". She referred me to paragraphs 3 and 6 of
    the Judge's decision which state:-

         "3. The Appellant claimed asylum on  8  April  2016  based  on  his
             marriage to [WJ], a woman of the  Ahmadi  faith  who  has  been
             recognised as a refugee in the United Kingdom. He says that  he
             would be at risk of honour killing by her family and his.

         6.   The grounds of appeal allege that the  Appellant  is  at  real
             risk of persecution in Pakistan because his wife is  an  Ahmadi
             Muslim; he will be subjected  to  honour  killing  by  his  own
             family and has been threatened by  his  wife's  family  in  the
             United Kingdom; his removal would breach Article 2, 3 and 8  of
             the 1950 Convention for the  protection  of  Human  Rights  and
             Fundamental Freedoms ("the 1950 Convention")."

    She argued that having there summarised the core claim of the Appellant
    the Judge had failed to take  into  account  this  central  issue.  She
    acknowledged in dealing with the other three  grounds  upon  which  she
    relied that were I to conclude that the Judge had materially  erred  in
    respect of ground one then they became  redundant  as  her  application
    would be for the case to be remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a de novo hearing albeit with some preserved findings.

 8. Ms Ahmad referred me to the Appellant's Counsel's skeleton argument  in
    the First-tier and argued that the Judge's findings could stand  as  by
    reason of the evidence the Appellant's wife will not be perceived as an
    Ahmadi in her country of origin. However, she acknowledged by  me  when
    asked where  in  the  decision  the  Judge  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    "interfaith marriage" she was unable to say that he had.

 9. I find that this is a core issue of the Appellant's claim  and  impacts
    on its  totality.  The  absence  of  consideration  of  it  along  with
    resulting findings amounts to a material error of law which affects the
    totality of the decisions in relation to whether or not  the  Appellant
    is at risk if returned to his country of origin.

10. However, by consent of both representatives I preserve the finding that
    the Appellant's wife is an Ahmadi and that both the Appellant  and  his
    wife are in a subsisting marriage.

11. For the reasons put forward by Ms Saifolahi there is no need for me  to
    give any further consideration to the balance of  grounds  put  forward
    seeking permission to appeal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside  subject  to  the
above mentioned preserved findings. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh, pursuant to Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of
the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  of  Practice  Statement
7.2(b), before any Judge aside from Judge R Sullivan.



Signed                              Date 3 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 3 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard









