
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10821/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 May 2019                     |On 06 June 2019                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                    S A Q
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the anonymity direction deemed necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judges Chambers & Lang  promulgated  on  27  November  2018,  which
dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

3. The Appellant was born on 1 July 1978 and is  a  national  of  Iraq.  The
appellant arrived in the  UK  on  3  March  2018.  On  26  August  2018  the
Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judges Chambers & Lang ("the  Judges")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  26  March  2019
Judge Loke granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

         "It is arguable that the Judges were mistaken in their findings  at
         [14] where they stated that the appellant's mother  and  uncle  met
         Ali. I can see no reference in the asylum interview or  the  record
         of proceedings to support this. This fact was relied upon in  their
         conclusions  at  [18],  and  therefore  it  appears  to  have  been
         material."

The Hearing

5. The appellant was present but  was  unrepresented.  She  spoke  with  the
assistance of a court interpreter. I  remain  satisfied  that  there  is  no
difficulty with linguistic interpretation or  comprehension.  The  appellant
moved the grounds of appeal. She confirmed that her hometown is  Erbil,  and
that prior to coming to the UK she had  lived  all  her  life  in  IKR.  The
appellant told me that she does not have a CSID, and has no  Iraqi  identity
documents. She told me that the decision is  wrong  in  fact  and  law.  She
rehearsed her reasons for claiming asylum and told me that since  coming  to
the UK she has married. Her family found out about her marriage and  do  not
approve. She told me that she cannot return to IKR and cannot relocate as  a
lone woman with no family support.

6. For the respondent Mr McVeety told me that the lack of documentation  has
not previously been argued. He told me that the Judges'  decision  does  not
contain  an  error  of  law.  He  told  me  that  the  Judges  rejected  the
appellant's account, and that their decision turns on  credibility.  As  the
appellant's account of fear of her own family  is  rejected,  then  she  has
family to return to in Erbil, which is not in a contested area. He urged  me
to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. The Judges' findings lies between [9]  and  [18]  of  the  decision.  The
Judges' findings of fact are intermingled with an analysis of the  evidence.
At [12] and [13] the Judges find that the appellant  does  not  face  forced
marriage at the  insistance  of  her  brother;  the  Judges  find  that  the
marriage has been suggested but  the  appellant's  refusal  to  consent  was
supported by her mother, by her uncle & by  the  local  Imam.  At  [14]  the
Judges consider the appellant's relationship with a man of her  choice.  The
Judges summarise what the appellant says in her asylum interview.

8. The problem is that at [14] the Judges' summary of the  contents  of  the
asylum interview is inadequate, and inaccurate. The Judges record  that  the
appellant's mother and uncle  met  her  boyfriend.  That  is  not  what  the
appellant said. The appellant said that her family only  met  her  boyfriend
when her boyfriend asked for their permission to marry the appellant.

9. The appellant participated in asylum interview on 23 July 2018.  In  that
interview the appellant goes into detail  about  the  relationship  she  had
with her boyfriend, and says she lost her virginity  to  her  boyfriend.  At
[15] the Judges record the appellant's evidence of losing contact  with  her
boyfriend.  The  appellant  produces  evidence  of  attempts  to  trace  her
boyfriend through the Red Cross family tracing service, but the Judges  draw
no findings from that evidence.

10. Although [9] to  [18]  of  the  decision  is  prefaced  by  the  heading
"Findings" - there are no real findings of fact in  the  decision.  If  [9],
[10] and [11] of the decision are  findings  of  fact,  then  the  appellant
would have succeeded. It is the opening sentence of [12] the decision  which
tells the reader that [9], [10] & [11]  are  rehearsal  of  the  appellant's
evidence. [14] of the decision implies  that  the  appellant's  claim  falls
into two separate parts. It does not. The appellant's claim  is  that  while
her profoundly religious  brother  has  spent  years  trying  to  arrange  a
marriage, she has pursued a relationship with a man  she  loved.  Those  two
elements to the one account should not be separated.

11. At [16] the Judges  are  correct  to  note  that  corroboration  is  not
necessary, but then throughout [16] to [18] the Judges embark  on  a  search
for corroboration.

12. The result is that the Judges' findings are inadequately  reasoned.  The
conclusion that the Judges reach is influenced by misinterpretation of  what
is said in the asylum interview.

13. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

14. The decision is therefore tainted by material error of law .  I  set  it
aside. There is sufficient material before me to enable me to substitute  my
own decision.



ASYLUM

15. The appellant is unrepresented. Her evidence comes  from  the  screening
interview, the transcript of asylum  interview  and  her  witness  statement
dated 3 October 2018. The respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application
because the respondent says that  the  appellant  gives  an  internally  and
externally inconsistent account. The respondent accepts that  the  appellant
is an Iraqi Kurd from  Erbil,  but  rejects  the  rest  of  the  appellant's
account.

16. The appellant participated in a screening interview  on  3  March  2018.
When the appellant was asked to summarise her reason  for  claiming  asylum,
she immediately says that she had a relationship with a man  for  one  year,
when her brother found out he threatened to kill her. She clearly says  that
the crisis point was reached just a few days before she arrived in the UK

17. The appellant participated in a substantive interview on 23  July  2018.
In that  interview  the  appellant  gives  a  full  account  of  defensively
avoiding an arranged marriage and pursuing a relationship, which  culminated
in the loss of her virginity. The  appellant  gives  details  of  times  and
places that she met her boyfriend. When asked to, she specifies  dates.  She
gives a clear account of the help that she had from her mother to  avoid  of
vengeful brother and leave Iraq.
18. The appellant did not produce background materials, but I know  that  In
2008, the United Nations Assistance Mission for  Iraq  (UNAMI)  stated  that
honour killings are a serious concern in Iraq, particularly well  documented
in Iraqi Kurdistan.  The  Free  Women's  Organization  of  Kurdistan  (FWOK)
released a statement on International Women's Day 2015  noting  that  "6,082
women were killed or forced to commit suicide during the past year in  Iraqi
Kurdistan, which is almost equal to the number  of  the  Peshmerga  martyred
fighting Islamic State (IS)," and that a large number of women were  victims
of honour killings or enforced suicide - mostly self-immolation or  hanging.
 Background materials also record that about 500 honour  killings  per  year
are reported in hospitals in Iraqi  Kurdistan,  although  real  numbers  are
likely much higher. It is speculated  that  alone  in  Erbil  there  is  one
honour killing per day. It is claimed  that  many  deaths  are  reported  as
"female  suicides"  in  order  to  conceal  honour-related  crimes.   Honour
killings and other forms of violence against women have increased since  the
creation of Iraqi Kurdistan, and "both the KDP and PUK claimed that  women's
oppression, including 'honour killings', are part  of  Kurdish  'tribal  and
Islamic culture'".
19.  All of the evidence provides support for the appellant's  account.  The
appellant's  history  of  travel  supports  the  appellant's  account.   The
background materials tell me that honour crimes are a fact of life  in  Iraq
& the IKR.  The appellant comes from Erbil,  where  honour  killings  happen
daily. The background materials  also  tell  me  that  honour  crimes  occur
throughout Iraq.

20.  The  only  reasons  that  the  respondent  gives  for   rejecting   the
appellant's claim is that the appellant has been vague and  inconsistent  in
her account. When I consider each strand of  the  appellant's  evidence  and
place that evidence against readily available background materials,  I  find
that  the  appellant's  account  is  neither  vague  nor  inconsistent.  The
appellant gives a detailed account which is consistent with  the  background
materials. The appellant's recollection of dates and  places  is  clear.  In
reality the appellant gives an account in which the core aspects  are  clear
and consistent. The areas in which the appellant fails to give  a  perfectly
crisp account lend credence to the account & demonstrate that this is not  a
story that has been carefully rehearsed.  The  appellant  gives  an  account
which is redolent of her lifetime experience.

21. I therefore find that the appellant faces the threat of  honour  killing
by her brothers. I find that she is a member of a particular social group.

22. I must consider whether the  appellant  can  find  safety  elsewhere  in
Iraq. There is no evidence to suggest that the appellant  has  any  form  of
documentation. The weight  of  evidence  indicates  that  the  appellant  is
undocumented, and does not have access to her original ID card.  The  weight
of reliable evidence  indicates  that  the  appellant  has  never  lived  in
Baghdad. There is no evidence to  suggest  that  the  appellant  has  family
members or friends in Baghdad. The appellant is therefore a Kurd  who  is  a
Sunni Muslim, and does not have an ID card  or  a  passport.  The  appellant
does not know anybody in Baghdad.

23. Paragraph 6 of the annex to AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944  says  that
no Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad  if  not  in  possession  of
either a current or expired Iraqi passport  or  a  laissez  passer.  Country
guidance  tells  me  that  the  appellant  is  not  returnable  to  Baghdad.
Paragraphs 9 to 11 of the annex to AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA  Civ  944  deals
with the importance of, and  availability  of,  a  CSID.  As  the  appellant
cannot provide details of the CSID card she left in Erbil,  and  as  I  find
that the appellant fears her male relatives, she cannot  make  a  successful
application to the central  archive  in  Baghdad.  It  is  argued  that  the
appellant could petition the  national  status  court  in  Baghdad,  but  AA
(Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944 tells me that the operation of  the  court  is
unclear. If the appellant was to petition the court she would have to do  so
with only her personal details, and no details of  the  registration  number
of his previous CSID card. Petitioning the national status court  is  not  a
realistic option for the appellant.

24. Paragraph 9 of the annex to AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ  944  tells  me
that the appellant faces a real risk of  destitution  amounting  to  serious
harm because she does not have family members or other  support  in  Baghdad
and because she has no realistic chance of obtaining a CSID reasonably  soon
after arrival in Iraq. Paragraphs 14 to 16 of the  annex  to  AA  (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944 deal  with  the  viability  of  internal  relocation  to
Baghdad city or the southern governorates of  Iraq.    The  appellant  is  a
Kurd. She speaks Kurdish Sorani.  The  background  materials  indicate  that
there are so many internally displaced persons in Iraq that UNHCR refers  to
the plight of internally displaced people there as  a  humanitarian  crisis.
The simple question  that  I  have  to  answer  is  whether  or  not  it  is
reasonable to make the appellant a displaced person anywhere in Iraq.

25.  I take the following guidance from AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944

    "D.    INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


    14.    As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:


          (a)     whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);


          (b)     whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


          (c)     whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


          (e)     whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


          (f)     whether P is from a minority community;


          (g)     whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


    16.    There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).

26. On the facts I find them to be, the appellant will stand out as  a  lone
Kurdish female with no protection or support. and so will  be  viewed  as  a
member of a minority community. The appellant no  longer  has  a  CSID;  she
does not have family members or friends in Baghdad able to accommodate  her;
there is no suggestion that the appellant can find a  sponsor  to  access  a
hotel room or rent accommodation; She has no network  of  support  in  Iraq.
The seven factors set out in paragraph 15 of  the  annex  to  AA  (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944 count against her. On the facts as I find  them  to  be,
and placing reliance on the guidance given in AA (Iraq) CG [2017]  EWCA  Civ
944, I find that  the  appellant's  profile  indicates  that  it  cannot  be
reasonable to return the appellant to Iraq. Internal  relocation  is  unduly
harsh.

27. If returned to Iraq the appellant would be  treated  as  a  lone  female
Kurd. It is most likely that she will not have access to  accommodation  and
employment within Iraq. She therefore faces the prospect of  destitution  if
returned to Iraq. Internal relocation is unduly harsh.

28.  In AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT  212
section C of the guidance given in AA [2017] is supplemented  with  guidance
about the factors to consider when considering whether it  is  possible  for
the returnee to obtain a CSID or obtain it within a reasonable  time  frame.
Section E of the country guidance is replaced - the new guidance  explaining
that all returns are currently to Baghdad but a returnee of  Kurdish  origin
in possession of a valid CSID  or  passport  can  journey  by  land  or  air
practically and affordably without real risk and  without  relocation  being
unduly harsh.  Domestic flights to the IKR cannot be boarded without  either
a CSID or a valid passport but if the returnee has neither, there is a  real
risk of his being detained at a checkpoint if  he  travels  by  land  (other
ways  of  verifying  identity  at   checkpoints   such   as   calling   upon
"connections" were discussed). Because I find that the appellant has a well-
founded fear of persecution in Erbil, she cannot return there.

29. Given these conclusions, I find that the Appellant  has  discharged  the
burden of proof  to  establish  that  she  is  a  refugee.  I  come  to  the
conclusion that the Appellant's removal would cause the  United  Kingdom  to
be in breach of its obligations under the 2006 Regulations.

Humanitarian protection

30. As I have found the appellant is a refugee, I  cannot  consider  whether
she qualifies for humanitarian protection. Therefore, I find  the  appellant
is not eligible for humanitarian protection.

Human rights

31. As I have found the appellant has established  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution, by analogy I find her claim engages  article  3  of  the  Human
Rights Convention because she would face a real risk of torture, inhuman  or
degrading treatment if she were returned to her country of origin.

Article 8 ECHR

32.  The appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of  appendix  FM  of  the
immigration rules.  Because of a combination of her age and  the  length  of
time the appellant has  been  in  the  UK  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(i) to (v). To meet the requirements  of
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), the appellant has to establish that there are  very
significant obstacles to re-integration into Iraqi society.

33. I have found that the  appellant  cannot  return  to  Iraq  because  she
establishes a well-founded fear of persecution for a  convention  reason.  I
have found that removal from the UK and  return  to  Iraq  will  breach  the
appellant's rights on article 3 ECHR grounds. For the same reasons,  I  find
that there are very significant obstacles to the  appellant's  reintegration
into Iraqi society.  The  appellant  therefore  meets  the  requirements  of
paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of the rules.

34. In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD   [2016] UKSC 60  it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

35.  Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that immigration  control  is  in
the public interest.   In AM (S 117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

36.  The appellant has no family members in the UK.       After  considering
all of the evidence I still know little of the appellant's home, her  habits
and  activities  of  daily  living,   her   significant   friendships,   any
integration into UK society, or any contribution to their  local  community.
There is no reliable evidence of the component parts of private life  within
the meaning of article 8 of the 1950 convention  before  me.  The  appellant
fails to establish that she has created article 8 private  life  within  the
UK.

37.  I therefore find that this appeal succeeds on article 3 and article  8
(private life) ECHR grounds.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 27 November  2018  is
tainted by material errors of law. I set it aside.    I  substitute  my  own
decision.

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The appellant is not entitled to Humanitarian Protection.

The appeal is allowed on article 3 & 8 ECHR grounds.





Signed
              Date 3 June 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

