
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10565/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 April 2019                     |On 30 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     B K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as a citizen of Iran and  as  a  Kurd.
    His date of birth is variously recorded in the papers on file as 1 or 3
    March 1992.  He says that he arrived in the UK on  9  March  2016.   He
    sought asylum on 23 March 2016.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's  claim  by  a  letter  dated  16
    September 2016.  The respondent did not accept that  the  appellant  is
    Iranian, that he left Iran illegally, or that he or his father had  any
    connection to the Komala party.

 3. FtT Judge Grace dismissed the appellant's  appeal  by  a  determination
    promulgated on 27 December 2017, on an adverse view of his credibility,
    apart from finding at [20] that he is from Iran.

 4. The appellant's grounds of appeal  to  the  UIT  are  set  out  in  his
    application filed on  19  February  2018.   In  summary,  they  are  as
    follows:

         1.  Failure to consider country information.

         The FtT's position was that it was not credible the appellant would
         be of interest to the Iranian authorities.  That was not supported,
         or  not  adequately  supported,   by   country   information   (the
         respondent's Country Information  and  Guidance,  Iran:  Kurds  and
         Kurdish parties at 2.3.5 and section 11, produced by the  appellant
         in the FtT) which confirmed that family members of those  suspected
         of supporting Kurdish parties could be of  interest  and  could  be
         detained with serious repercussions.

         2.  Failure to give any, or sufficient, reasons.

         The FtT erred at [23 - 25] by failing to give weight to corrections
         made after interview, or  by  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons.
         Simply  because  the  appellant  signed  the   interview   is   not
         determinative that the record is accurate, otherwise there would be
         no need to give an appellant an opportunity to outline  any  errors
         once the record is read over to him.   Further,  and  appellant  is
         unlikely to be aware of any errors or omissions as he will be under
         the apprehension that his answers have  been  correctly  translated
         and recorded.

         3.   Findings  not  supported,  or  adequately  supported,  by  the
         evidence and / or falling into speculation.

         The findings at [32] ... are not  supported  by  the  evidence  ...
         there was no evidence ... that neighbours would phone the appellant
         directly.

 5. Mr Winter submitted along the lines of the grounds.  The  main  further
    points which I noted were these:

      i) The judge in finding that the appellant would not be targeted as  a
         family  member  overlooked  the   background   evidence   of   that
         possibility.  The finding that the incident did not happen  at  all
         was based on a false premise.

     ii)  The  oversight  was  not  rendered  irrelevant  by   the   adverse
         credibility findings, because it played a part in those findings.

    iii) The inconsistency about whether his father put the blame on him was
         the only inconsistency found by the judge.  Her other findings were
         all on plausibility.

     iv) The correction to the interview was tendered very promptly, and not
         only after receipt of a refusal letter.

      v) Grounds 1 and 2 together showed material error.

     vi) Ground 3 might  be  of  lesser  force,  but  the  grounds  together
         required a remit to the FtT.

 6. Mr Govan in his submissions drew attention  to  the  specific  passages
    from the interview on 12 September 2016 which are relevant to ground 2.

 7. At Q/A 44, the appellant set out his claim that the Etelaat raided  the
    shop where he worked with his father on a day when  the  appellant  was
    not present.  They seized  material  belonging  to  the  Komala  party,
    detained the appellant's father and two workers and tortured  them.   A
    neighbour telephoned the appellant's uncle, who telephoned  him.   Part
    of the information relayed to the appellant was that:

         ... during the torture my father confessed that  all  the  material
         belonged to his son and that is why the workers  were  released  as
         innocent ... my uncle told me that ... I have been accused  that  I
         am the one to distribute the material for the party.

 8. At Q/A 64, the appellant was asked why his father would blame  him  for
    having the materials.  Having asked for the question to be repeated, he
    replied:

         Because I was very young and had just got married.   Also,  my  dad
         knew it was a dangerous thing.

 9. Asked to explain that, the reply recorded at Q/A 65 is:

         Why my father didn't blame me? (No  why  he  did?)   They  did  not
         belong to me all the materials belonged to my dad.  Because I had a
         vehicle and the shop the authorities would not believe  I  was  not
         involved, and they are very harsh when it comes  to  this  kind  of
         accusation.

10. At Q/A 66 - 68 the appellant  said  that  his  father  confessed  under
    torture that the materials were his,  not  the  appellant's,  that  his
    father would not have given him up even if he had a link, and  that  he
    had not known that his father supported Komala.

11. In a letter from his solicitors dated 14 September 2016  the  appellant
    seeks to identify errors in recording his answers.  He  says  that  the
    passage at Q/A 44 should read:

         ... my father confessed that all the material belonged to my father
         and that is why the workers were released ...

12. Mr Govan submitted that:

      i) The judge carefully analysed the sequence of questions and answers,
         and was entitled to find that the appellant was  caught  out  in  a
         major inconsistency.

     ii) The judge's further analysis was  that  within  the  terms  of  the
         claim, even as amended by the appellant, the authorities "had their
         man"  and  had  no  reason  to  pursue  the  appellant.   That  was
         specifically  reasoned  on  the  case  before  her,  and  was   not
         undermined by the evidence founded upon in ground 1.

    iii) The judge's more general finding was that the incident did not take
         place at all.  Ground 1 showed no error in that.

     iv) The finding challenged by ground 3 might be "slightly speculative",
         but the point was minor and not material.

13. In reply  to  the  submissions  for  the  respondent,  Mr  Winter  drew
    attention to the CIG:

         2.3.4 ... even a person speaking out about Kurdish  rights  can  be
         seen as a general threat.  If the ... regime  catches  a  perceived
         sympathiser carrying out an activity perceived to  be  against  the
         government, the consequences for him and  his  family  can  be  ...
         arbitrary arrest, detention and  possible  ill-treatment  ...  [see
         section 11]

         2.3.5   Family  members  of  persons  associated  with  a   Kurdish
         political group are also harassed and detained ... [see section 11]

14. Section 11,  "Treatment  of  Kurdish  political  activists  and  family
    members", cites examples.  It is suggested that family members  may  be
    arrested, but freed on bail after a while.  Instances are  given  where
    family members are detained or punished in order to pressurise a wanted
    person to appear, or to divulge his  whereabouts.   However,  the  gist
    appears to be that family members  are  not  targeted  exclusively  for
    those purposes, but more generally.

15. Mr Winter further submitted:

      i) The correction to the interview was  consistent  with  the  replies
         recorded at Q/A 66 - 68.

     ii) The low threshold for suspicion of Kurds  and  the  likely  extreme
         reaction of the authorities is further  reinforced  by  HB  (Kurds)
         Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430.

16. I reserved my decision.

17. The potential for risk to extend to family members of Kurdish political
    activists is a major theme of the background evidence  and  of  country
    guidance.  It is well known to judges.

18. The appellant placed before the FtT 3 inventories of productions,  plus
    further separate items.  The item founded upon in ground 1 is one of 13
    in a "bundle" running to 257 pages, followed by a "key  passage  index"
    running from pages  258  -  294.   That  is  a  deplorable  surfeit  of
    material.  The key passage index itself is far too  long  and  contains
    many matters irrelevant to this  appeal.   It  includes  but  does  not
    highlight section 2.3.5 of the CIG, and it does not include section 11.

19. I find on the file a skeleton argument provided for  the  appellant  to
    the FtT.  It is vague, and makes no reference to the  passages  founded
    upon in ground 1.

20. It has not been suggested that those passages were referred to  in  the
    oral submissions for the appellant as requiring specific evaluation.

21. The judge cannot reasonably  be  criticised  for  not  selecting  these
    passages for comment.

22. Ground 2 correctly states that signature of the interview record is not
    determinative, but the judge did not think that it was.

23. It is also correct that an appellant may not be aware of an error until
    a transcript is translated back to him on a later  occasion,  but  that
    has nothing to do with this case, where the  discrepancy  was  an  open
    issue at the interview.

24. At [22] the judge finds that 3 further statements at  interview  -  (a)
    the warning to the workers to notify the authorities if they heard news
    about the appellant, (b) the raid on the appellant's house, and (c) the
    accusation that he was the distributor of subversive materials  -  were
    all consistent with his initial version  not  the  later  (  and  hence
    against the explanation of an error in recording his answer).  No  flaw
    has been suggested in that analysis.

25. At [23] the judge finds the answer at Q/A 64 weak and evasive.   Again,
    no error has been suggested.

26. At [24] the judge finds that only when pressed did the appellant change
    his story, and at [25] that the purported amendment was "an attempt  to
    distance himself from his earlier evidence that he  subsequently  found
    to be inconsistent with his later account".

27. The force of tendering an early correction is very much  lessened  when
    the inconsistency was one of the main topics of the  interview,  not  a
    surprise waiting to be revealed.

28. The appellant has not shown that  judge  failed  to  give  reasons,  or
    adequate reasons, for her finding about the "correction".

29. The judge at [26] found that if the authorities were quick  to  release
    the workers in the shop where materials were found, that indicated  the
    confession was believed and there was no interest in innocent  parties.
    That is a reasonable view of the internal logic of the claim, which  is
    not shown to be flawed by the generality of the evidence  founded  upon
    in ground 1.  The judge makes similar points at [27] and [28].

30. At [29], the judge finds it incredible that on the limited  information
    available the appellant's uncle could or would within  an  hour  and  a
    half arrange for the appellant, his wife  and  his  child  to  go  into
    hiding and to flee, and curious that the appellant's uncle  would  feel
    no need to hide.  Such  points  are  further  developed  at  [30].   No
    criticisms have been made.

31. At [31] the judge makes the point challenged in ground 3.  It is not  a
    strong point, but  it  is  within  the  realm  of  reason  rather  than
    speculation.

32. At [32 - 33] the judge sums up that even applying the lower standard of
    proof, the implausibilities  and  inconsistencies  are  such  that  the
    appellant has not established that there was any such raid as  claimed.
    The grounds do not show that conclusion should be set aside for  having
    involved the making of any error on a point of law.  They resolve  into
    no more than insistence, and selective disagreement on the facts.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

33. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  There does not appear to  be  any
    real need for one, but as the matter  was  not  addressed  in  the  UT,
    anonymity is maintained herein.

      [pic]
      24 April 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
