
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10907/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 May 2019                  |On 19 June 2019                 |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. Y.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered the UK unlawfully on a  date  unknown.  He
           made a protection claim in 2011, but this was  refused  for  his
           failure to engage with the  process.  He  then  offered  further
           representations on 1 October 2013, which was accepted as a fresh
           claim, but refused on 24 August 2018.
        2. The Appellant's appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  and
           dismissed on asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds,  but
           allowed  on  human  rights   grounds   as   a   disproportionate
           interference in Article 8 rights, by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Hands in a decision promulgated on 11 February 2019.
        3. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal the decision  on
           Article 8 grounds, by decision of 13 March 2019  of  First  tier
           Tribunal Judge EB Grant. It was  considered  arguable  that  the
           Judge's approach had failed to follow the guidance to  be  found
           in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40. There was no cross appeal.
        4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further evidence.
        5. Thus the matter came before me.


      The challenge
        6. When the appeal was called on for hearing Ms Pettersen  accepted
           that the Judge had overlooked  no  material  evidence,  and  had
           included no irrelevant evidence. The reasons that had been given
           for the decision were  adequate,  and  the  Respondent  had  not
           asserted that the decision was perverse. It  was  accepted  that
           the Judge's decision was  one  that  was  open  to  her  on  the
           evidence before her.
        7. Ms Pettersen advanced the complaint that the Judge had  elevated
           one part of the evidence over all the rest. Thus it  was  argued
           that the Judge had taken  the  difference  in  education  within
           China and the UK, and  that  this  had  been  the  determinative
           factor in her decision. I am not satisfied that this is  a  fair
           reading of the decision as  a  whole,  and  to  be  fair  to  Ms
           Pettersen this argument lost any force as we  went  through  the
           Judge's decision together.
        8. It was accepted that the  Appellant's  eldest  child  is  now  a
           qualifying child; section 117D. There are two, Et and  Ev,  both
           have significant medical and educational needs. In addition  the
           Appellant also has significant medical needs.
        9. It was accepted that the Judge was correct to conclude that  the
           Article 8 rights of the  Appellant,  his  partner  and  his  two
           children were all engaged by the decision  under  appeal,  as  a
           result of the "private  lives"  established  in  the  UK.  Their
           removal would be together, so the Judge was correct to  identify
           that this would have no  impact  upon  their  ability  to  enjoy
           "family life" together.
       10. In my judgement, when the decision is read as  a  whole,  it  is
           quite clear that the Judge's decision was one that was well open
           to her on the evidence, and that it was adequately reasoned.  In
           the  circumstances,  and  as  indicated  at  the  hearing  I  am
           satisfied that the Judge did not fall into any material error of
           law when she allowed the Article 8 appeal,  notwithstanding  the
           terms in which permission to appeal was granted. In my judgement
           the grounds fail to disclose any material error of  law  in  the
           approach taken by the Judge to the public interest that requires
           her decision to be set aside and remade.



   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 11
   February 2019 contained no material error of  law  in  the  decision  to
   allow the Appellant's human rights appeal which requires  that  decision
   to be set aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him, his partner,
        or his children. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
        to the Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead
        to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 14 June 2019




