
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10278/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 March 2018                     |On 5 April 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    D. H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, who entered the UK illegally,  and
    then claimed asylum on 24 March 2016. That protection claim was refused
    on 16 September 2016.  His appeal against that refusal came before  the
    First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 8 June 2017, when it was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope. The  appeal  was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds in a decision promulgated on 13 July 2017.

 2. The Appellant's application for permission to  appeal  was  refused  by
    First tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro on 6 October  2017.  The  application
    was renewed to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that the Judge had erred
    in his approach to the evidence of the posts that had  been  made  upon
    the Appellant's Facebook page. It  was  asserted  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to engage with the evidence before him. Permission  was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 4 January 2018 on the single  complaint
    that it was arguable the Judge may have  misapprehended  the  evidence,
    concluding that the Facebook page was not publicly available  when  the
    evidence arguably showed that it was. The other complaints advanced  in
    the grounds were dismissed as unarguable. Thus the matter comes  before
    me.

 3. When the hearing of  this  appeal  was  called  on  before  me  it  was
    confirmed that the Appellant did not seek to renew the  other  grounds,
    and, that no application had been made to introduce evidence under Rule
    15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.

 4. As Upper Tribunal Judge Gill identified, it cannot be argued  that  the
    Judge failed to engage with the evidence that was placed before him  in
    relation to the Facebook page said to have been opened and operated  in
    the Appellant's name. Indeed it is plain that the Judge did engage with
    the argument that the content of the posts upon the Facebook page  left
    the Appellant exposed to a real risk of harm upon return to  Iran.  The
    Judge noted the Appellant's claim to be illiterate, and his claim  that
    this was a Facebook page set  up  by,  and  operated  by,  unidentified
    friends in his name [30, 63-5, 75-91]. Thus, if true, the Appellant was
    unable to give evidence about how  the  account  was  set  up,  or  its
    settings. He could  of  course  have  given  evidence  as  to  his  own
    understanding as to why it was set up given the very  limited  use  the
    site has had, but as the Judge noted, under cross-examination he  seems
    to have sought to evade doing so.

 5. In the circumstances I am satisfied that it is fair  to  say  that  the
    Judge was not assisted with reliable evidence as to  why  the  Facebook
    page was created, or who physically created it, or, maintained it,  or,
    chose what material to post upon it.

 6. Although, if he were indeed illiterate, the Appellant would plainly  be
    unable to read anything  that  had  been  posted  upon  it,  the  Judge
    nevertheless correctly identified the Facebook page  as  providing  the
    potential basis for a sur place claim. Thus he considered  whether  the
    existence of the  Facebook  page  in  the  Appellant's  name,  and  its
    content, would give rise to  a  risk  of  harm  upon  return  to  Iran,
    notwithstanding his dismissal of the Appellant's evidence  as  to  what
    his experiences were within Iran as untrue.

 7. In  my  judgement  the  findings  summarised  [69-72]  dispose  of  any
    suggestion that the Appellant held a genuine fear of harm at the  hands
    of the Iranian authorities whenever he did in truth leave Iran. On  the
    Judge's findings he had no reason to leave  illegally,  and  the  Judge
    certainly did not accept his claim  to  have  done  so.  Indeed  in  my
    judgement, read as a whole, the decision also rejects that  element  of
    the Appellant's evidence.

 8. The evidence before the Judge did  not  suggest  that  the  Appellant's
    Facebook page had been used for blasphemy, or indeed for  the  ridicule
    of any member of the Iranian regime, or indeed the regime  itself.  The
    video posts shared from  other  sites  were  not  put  in  evidence  or
    translated, and nor  was  any  of  the  Farsi  titles  to  any  of  the
    photographs shared from other sites. The highest the  Appellant's  case
    appears to have been capable of being put was that the mere presence of
    the two photographs of flags posted [24, 25] or the two photographs  of
    the Appellant holding a placard of the KDPI posted  [20,  21],  or  the
    unspecified posts shared from the Pdki-UK [16, 17] were  of  themselves
    sufficient to mean that there was a real risk that the Appellant  would
    have attracted adverse attention from the Iranian authorities,  and  be
    perceived  as  an  Kurdish  opposition  activist.  If  that   was   the
    Appellant's case, then for the following reasons, the Judge was correct
    to reject that, and gave adequate reasons for doing so. On the face  of
    the evidence that was placed before the Judge the Appellant had done no
    more than share links and photos that showed that he was a  sympathiser
    with, or supporter of, the PDKI-UK. There was no reliable  evidence  to
    show that he had ever held any office within that organisation, or  had
    ever organised any protest or demonstration.  Thus  his  case  did  not
    amount to a claim that he was whilst  living  in  the  UK  a  political
    activist.

 9. The complaint set out in the grounds is that the  evidence  before  the
    Judge showed (i) that a member of staff at the  Appellant's  solicitors
    had been able to access the Facebook page, (ii)  print  off  the  pages
    placed in evidence before the Judge [ApB p15-25], and, (iii) that  this
    was therefore a publicly accessible webpage without  privacy  settings,
    that was, and would remain, accessible at any time to anyone who  cared
    to search the Facebook website for the Appellant's  name.  The  grounds
    assert that  the  Judge  failed  to  engage  with  that  evidence.  The
    difficulty with such a complaint  is  that,  for  whatever  reason,  no
    witness statement from  the  member  of  staff  in  question  was  ever
    prepared or filed in evidence for the hearing of  the  appeal.  As  the
    Judge noted, these were assertions offered  not  by  the  Appellant  in
    evidence, but by Ms Brakaj, in the course of her  submissions  made  at
    the conclusion of the hearing [87].

10. Before me Ms Brakaj accepts that  the  issue  of  privacy  settings  in
    operation from time to time on the relevant Facebook  account  was  not
    addressed in the Appellant's evidence, or in the evidence of any  other
    individual. She argued that the  content  of  the  screenshots  of  the
    Facebook account [ApB p15-25] were enough. I do not agree.  Judges  are
    not expected to be experts in, or even  users  of,  all  the  different
    social media platforms that are available. It is unreasonable to expect
    inferences to be drawn about the privacy  settings  in  operation  from
    time to time upon a particular site. Whether or not it is  possible  to
    discern from the icon at the header of p15 that "Penny" is  the  member
    of staff who created  the  screenshots,  I  note  that  the  Judge  was
    prepared to accept that this was the case [89]. What the screenshots do
    not themselves provide is cogent reliable evidence upon who could  from
    time to time access the Facebook page, and what they would be  able  to
    see if they sought to do so. Again,  even  if  the  Facebook  page  was
    publicly accessible for a time on 2 June 2017 (the date on  the  header
    to the screenshots) it  did  not  follow  that  it  had  been  publicly
    accessible on any other date, or, that it would be  publicly  available
    in the future.  The  Judge  had  taken  on  board  the  fact  that  the
    screenshot recorded that the Appellant's Facebook page did  have  on  2
    June 2017, 517 "friends", [87]. It did not  however  follow  from  this
    that each of these 517  "friends"  represented  517  different  people,
    indeed there was no evidence as to who these  "friends"  actually  were
    beyond the nine names provided on the screenshot. The Appellant was not
    asked  to  identify  any  of  them,  or  explain  who  they  were.  The
    screenshots show very few "likes" from these "friends" of  any  of  the
    material shared by the Appellant with them; the highest any gets on his
    site is 11, with others getting, 5,  4,  3,  2,  and  1.  None  of  the
    "friends" liking such posts were identified.

11. Of course it also has to be borne in mind  that  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence was that as an entirely illiterate man he was unable  to  shed
    any  light  upon  the  Facebook  page  in  his  name.  Thus,   in   the
    circumstances of the damage that had been sustained to the  Appellant's
    general credibility, it was in my judgement entirely open to the  Judge
    to conclude that he was not satisfied that anything  posted  upon  this
    site would come to the attention of the Iranian  authorities  upon  his
    return to Iran [91]. That finding was properly reasoned,  and  did  not
    conflict with the country guidance to be found in BA (demonstrators  in
    britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36. In my  judgement  the
    Judge's findings were consistent with the guidance to be found  in  BA,
    they were open to him on the evidence, and  were  adequately  reasoned.
    They were in summary that the Appellant was not a man who had  acquired
    at any stage any form of political  profile,  and  that  there  was  no
    reliable evidence that would allow him to  conclude  that  the  Iranian
    authorities would trigger an enquiry into  him  upon  return.  That  is
    sufficient to dispose of the ground upon which permission to appeal was
    granted.

12. In the course of argument before me Ms Brakaj  made  reference  to  the
    decision in AB (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT
    257. As I understand her argument, it went well beyond the grounds, and
    the grant of permission, and as such I reject it.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    has stated expressly that AB does not  provide  country  guidance  upon
    Iran - it is not permissible to ignore that, and to treat that decision
    as if it did provide country guidance. In any  event,  I  am  satisfied
    that the Judge's decision is not inconsistent with the decision in  AB.
    It was open to him to conclude, for the reasons that he gave, that  the
    Appellant would not attract any adverse attention or enquiry  from  the
    Iranian authorities upon return to Iran.

13. In the circumstances, and notwithstanding the terms in which permission
    to appeal was granted, I therefore dismiss the  Appellant's  challenge,
    and confirm the decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

14. The anonymity direction previously made is continued.

Notice of decision

The decision promulgated on 13 July 2017 did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law sufficient to  require  the  decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision of the First tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal  is  accordingly
confirmed.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 27 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

