
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10579/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 November 2018                |On 28 November 2018                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                Mohammed [I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R. Kotak, Counsel instructed by Pickup Scott,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was born on 18 May 2000. He
         is now 18 years old. He appeals against the determination of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Andrew whose determination was  promulgated  on
         14 September 2018. The principal issue in the appeal is whether the
         judge provided adequate reasons  for  departing  from  the  Country
         Guidance set out in AA (non-Arab Dafuris  -  relocation)  Sudan  CG
         [2009] UKAIT 00056 (IAC).  In AA, the Tribunal stated that all non-
         Arab from the Dafur region would be at real risk.  The risk was not
         limited to their home area but was expressed to cover the  entirety
         of Sudan.

      2. It is common ground that the appellant is a non-Arab Dafuri.

      3. The Judge declined to follow the Country Guidance  and  found  that
         the appellant was note at risk in Khartoum, the place to  which  he
         would be returned. In paragraph 24 of her determination, the  judge
         asks herself the question whether there were good reasons to depart
         from the Country Guidance. Thereafter, in paragraph 25, she  stated
         by way of a conclusion:

             "It is clear from several  sources  that  people  of  non-Arab
             Dafuri tribes in Khartoum are likely  to  face  discrimination
             but  not  persecution  unless  they  are   perceived   to   be
             politically active against the regime."

      4. Her reasons, limited as they are, are found in  paragraphs  26  and
         27. In paragraph 26, the Judge  speaks  of  'significant  objective
         evidence in the appellant's Bundle' none of which details any  harm
         or  persecution  to  non-Arab  Dafuris  in  Khartoum,  absent   any
         political activities. She does not identify that objective evidence
         or make any findings upon it.

      5. The closest the Judge reaches in the provision  of  reasons  is  to
         note the contents of the August 2017 Country Policy and Information
         Note entitled 'Sudan: Non-Arab Dafuris '.  She then  no  more  than
         lists  paragraphs  2.3.9,  2.3.11,  2.3.15,  5.2.5,  5.2.8,  5.2.9,
         5.2.12, 5.2.13, 7.1.3, 7.1.4, 7.1.6, 7.1.7 and 7.1.9.  In doing so,
         she does not set out their contents. She  makes  no  findings  upon
         them. Her determination contains no analysis.

      6. Having noted the three paragraphs mentioned in  section  2  of  the
         CPIN, above, she referred to the criticisms of the Chief  Inspector
         about Home Office publications that combine (or confuse) statements
         of policy with country information. Having then found that  section
         2 is a statement of  policy,  it  must  follow  that  although  she
         'noted' their  contents  she  cannot  have  relied  upon  them.  In
         paragraph  37  she  states  that  the  CPIN  is  in  'robust  form'
         suggesting that description alone justified her  ability  to  place
         weight on it.

      7. There are circumstances in which it is possible in a  determination
         to advance a process of reasoning by referring to another  document
         without quoting directly from the source.  Needless  to  say,  this
         leaves the reader unable  to  understand  what  that  reasoning  is
         unless he has the source material available to him. In  this  case,
         this would mean the Country Policy and Information Note.  Sometimes
         a direct quotation from the source is rendered unnecessary if it is
         properly summarised. Hence, for example it is permissible to  refer
         to a ground of appeal without quoting from it  extensively  but  by
         summarising its gist. At the hearing, I was provided with a copy of
         the Country Policy and Information Note without which I would  have
         been entirely unable to understand  what  lay  behind  the  judge's
         approach.

      8. Bearing in mind the judge's self-direction that she was required to
         follow a Country Guidance case unless there were good  reasons  for
         departing from it, I do not consider that it is adequate  to  refer
         to certain passages in Home Office Country Policy and  Information,
         to do no more than note their existence. There has to be a  process
         of evaluation before the judge is permitted to  conclude  that  the
         material is sufficient to  depart  from  what  is  designed  to  be
         (albeit at that  point  in  time  when  the  Country  Guidance  was
         promulgated) an authoritative statement of risk.

      9. It may be that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was aware of impending
         Country Guidance designed to  shed  light  on  what  is  clearly  a
         divergence of view about the risk of harm on return to Khartoum  as
         articulated by the Tribunal in 2009 and the current assessment made
         by the Home Office. However, I  am  not  satisfied  that  this  can
         justify the failure to provide adequate analysis.

     10. I read the judge's determination as a two-stage process.  First  it
         deals with the risk on return to Khartoum. If such a  risk  exists,
         it is then  pointless  to  consider  relocation  to  Khartoum.  If,
         however, the appellant is at risk in  his  home  area  but  not  in
         Khartoum, then the analysis has to proceed to  a  consideration  of
         whether it is reasonable to relocate. Passages in the determination
         address both issues although the distinction between the two phases
         of  the  consideration  is  not  entirely  clear.  I  am,  however,
         persuaded by Ms Kotak that the question of internal relocation  and
         whether, in the circumstances of this appeal, it is  reasonable  to
         expect  the  appellant  to  relocate,  has  not   been   adequately
         considered. I was referred to a series of considerations that  were
         advanced by Ms Kotak in  her  skeleton  argument  which  the  Judge
         overlooked. Consequently, were it to be necessary to make  findings
         of the material facts on the  issue  of  internal  relocation,  the
         exercise will have to be revisited.

     11. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
         direct that the hearing is to be re-made. I see no  useful  purpose
         in an attempt to re-make the decision  until  the  further  Country
         Guidance has been published.  As  I  anticipate  this  may  require
         additional findings of fact, I remit the appeal to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

     12. At one stage in the argument, Ms Kodak suggested this appeal should
         be joined with those cases already before the  Tribunal  and  which
         will form the further Country  Guidance.  I  see  nothing  in  this
         appeal which justifies its being joined to the others. All the more
         so, when  those  other  cases  may  be  at  an  advanced  stage  in
         preparation and, indeed, hearings having taken place.

     13. I direct that the re-making of this appeal is to be held over until
         the publication  of  further  Country  Guidance.  The  parties,  of
         course, have liberty to apply to re-instate the appeal before  then
         but only if sound reasons are provided for doing so.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                            15 November 2018
