
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10561/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th June 2019                    |On 08 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                 Roshan [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Swain of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant born on 22nd April 1990 is a citizen of Sri  Lanka.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Swain of Counsel.  The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Walker a Senior Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant made application for asylum on 21st  February  2018  with
    his wife a dependant  upon  his  claim.   The  Respondent  refused  the
    Appellant's application on 22nd August 2018.   The  Appellant  appealed
    that decision and his appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Steadman sitting at Hatton Cross on 1st April 2019.  The Judge
    had refused the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. Application for permission to appeal was made and was granted  on  22nd
    May 2019.  Amongst matters raised it  was  found  that  the  judge  had
    arguably reached a conclusion on documents  by  drawing  on  references
    contained within documents and thereafter carrying out his own research
    in respect of those references.

 4. Directions were issued firstly for the Upper Tribunal to decide whether
    an error of law had been made by the  First-tier  in  this  case.   The
    matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Decision

 5. Mr Walker fairly and properly agreed a material procedural irregularity
    had occurred such that it resulted in a material  error  of  law.   The
    judge had conducted his own research  into  matters  without  providing
    notification to the parties or giving them the opportunity to  comment.
    It is difficult to  note  to  what  extent  that  independent  research
    affected his ultimate decision.

 6. A material error of law was made by the judge  in  this  case  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside and made afresh
    in the First-tier Tribunal before a judge other than Judge Steadman.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




