
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10674/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 16 July 2019                      |on 2 August 2019                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                DANIEL HABTOM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sills instructed by J D Spicer Zeb Solicitors
(Kilburn)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 11 April 2019 the Upper Tribunal handed  down  its  reasons  for
        finding a judge of the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  in  a
        manner material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal.  Directions
        were issues for the parties to provide further evidence upon  which
        they were intending to  rely,  to  enable  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
        substitute a decision to either allow or  dismiss  the  appeal,  no
        later than 4 PM 27 May 2019.
     2. Neither party complied with the direction although as a  result  of
        the nature of the evidence they were seeking to rely upon,  ability
        to exchange the same at the commencement  of  the  hearing  and  to
        enable further time for  all  parties  to  read  and  consider  the
        evidence, it was possible for the appeal to proceed on the day.



Background


     3. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born in 1994.
     4. A number of preserved findings arise from the decision of the First-
        tier Tribunal which are the appellant's membership  of  a  movement
        called Patriotic Ginbot 7 (PG7), the issue  of  an  arrest  warrant
        against the appellant in Ethiopia and his arrest as a  result,  his
        previous detention, the appellant's release following  the  payment
        of a bribe, and finding of real risk at the date the appellant left
        Ethiopia.
     5. The context of these findings is established by  the  appellant  in
        his witness statement dated 19 September 2018 at [14 - 20]  in  the
        following terms:


             14.  As a supporter in  Ethiopia  I  attended  meetings,  made
                  financial contributions and distributed leaflets. I was  a
                  member of a cell  which  consisted  of  five  people:  one
                  member and four supporters. Endalew was the member and the
                  cell leader. I would attend secret meetings with  my  cell
                  members once a month. The meetings were held in  different
                  houses in order to avoid  the  adverse  attention  of  the
                  Ethiopian authorities. We would keep our  numbers  to  the
                  minimum of five people. Endalew decides the  location  and
                  time of each meeting. During the meeting we would  discuss
                  the current situation and policies of the movement, how to
                  distribute pamphlets, how to recruit supporters and how to
                  challenge the Ethiopian  government's  propaganda  against
                  our movement. We would  also  raise  funds  to  cover  the
                  printing costs of leaflets. I would contribute 100 Bir per
                  month.


             15.  I distributed leaflets on  two  separate  occasions.  The
                  first was on 20 May 2016 around the coach station in Addis
                  Ababa. It was at night time. I distributed around 70 - 80.
                  The leaflets explain the aims and objectives of PG 7. They
                  explained that the Ethiopian people should not vote in the
                  general elections as the government always rigs elections.
                  They also explain that  the  Ethnic-based  federal  system
                  would destabilise Ethiopia, and that the ruling regime  is
                  unable and unwilling to bring about democracy and  justice
                  in Ethiopia. The second time was on 17 September 2016 near
                  a huge marketplace called Markato. I distributed around 90
                  - 100 leaflets.


             16.  On 23 April 2014 I participated in a  demonstration  held
                  at Mesqel Square, Addis Ababa. The protest was  called  by
                  the government to show solidarity with the Ethiopians  who
                  had been slaughtered  by  ISIS  in  Libya.  Around  10,000
                  people took part in the protest. Although the protest  was
                  called by the Ethiopian government a number of  opposition
                  parties seized the opportunity to oppose  the  government.
                  The protest was organised into groups where a single group
                  consists of about a thousand people. While I  was  at  the
                  front of one of the groups. I agitated the  protesters  by
                  shouting antiregime slogans. I accused the  government  of
                  being responsible for the death of innocent Ethiopians  in
                  Libya. The federal police used brute force to disperse the
                  protest. A number of protesters were injured. About 200 of
                  us, including myself, were  arrested.  We  were  initially
                  taken to Addis Ababa football stadium where we stayed  for
                  a couple of hours.


             17.  I was taken then to  Mehakelawi  police  station.  I  was
                  detained there for about 3 months and 20 days.  The  first
                  two weeks I was kept on my  own.  I  was  interrogated  on
                  daily basis during those two weeks. I was asked  to  admit
                  that I worked with PG 7. I was not involved with PG  7  by
                  then. The police claimed that PG  7  leaflets  were  found
                  amongst the demonstrators. They accused me of distributing
                  those leaflets. I was then transferred into  another  cell
                  where I was  locked  with  another  50  detainees.  I  was
                  released as they couldn't find any evidence against. I was
                  made to sign a declaration that confirms that  I  will  be
                  killed should I attend any anti-government  demonstration.
                  The interrogator put his hands around my neck and told  me
                  that he would strangle me to death.


             18.   On  30  December  2016  I  was  supposed  to  attend   a
                  prescheduled cell meeting at  4:00pm  at  a  cell  members
                  house. The day before  the  meeting  I  informed  my  cell
                  leader that I would not attend that meeting as my wife was
                  very ill and had to  take  her  to  the  hospital.  On  30
                  December 2016 at around 7:00 p.m. several  federal  police
                  came to my house. I had just come back from  the  hospital
                  with my wife. I was served with arrest warrant. I was told
                  that the government wants me for  enquiries.  The  warrant
                  clearly states that I was suspected of working with  anti-
                  peace elements. I was taken to the nearby police  station.
                  I was kept in a  cell  for  about  2  hours.  I  was  then
                  transferred to Mehakelawi detention  centre.  I  was  kept
                  detained there for about 3 months and 15 days.  The  first
                  week I was kept on my own in a  dark  cell.  During  those
                  days I was interrogated on daily basis. I  was  told  that
                  four members of my cell had been caught whilst holding  an
                  illegal meeting on the day I was arrested. I was asked  to
                  disclose the names of other PG  7  members/supporters  and
                  who introduced me to the movement. I  was  also  asked  to
                  reveal names of the  people  who  helped  us  financially.
                  During the interrogation I was tortured. I was hit with  a
                  metal bar repeatedly on my legs. I sustained a  number  of
                  injuries due to that. I still have scars on my legs. I was
                  also submerged into a container of cold dirt water.


             19.  I was then transferred to another cell  and  kept  locked
                  with another 30 detainees.  The  detention  condition  was
                  very  harsh.  The  cell   was   overcrowded   and   poorly
                  ventilated. I was allowed to leave the cell  only  once  a
                  day to relieve myself, and at any  other  time  I  had  to
                  relieve myself inside the cell in a barrel. I was only fed
                  once a day with a poor lentil soup and a piece of bread.


             20.  On 12 April 2017 a police officer called out my name  and
                  told me to follow him. He covered my head with a cloth. He
                  put me into a car  and  drove  me  out  of  the  detention
                  premises. We travelled for about half an hour, and then  I
                  was put into another car. My maternal uncle  was  in  this
                  car. My uncle told me that he managed to secure my release
                  by bribing a police officer. I  don't  know  how  much  he
                  paid. My uncle drove me to Tsion  Hotel  where  I  met  my
                  brother in law. My brother-in-law took me by  car  to  his
                  house in the town of Bahir Dar. I stayed  indoors  at  all
                  times. Whilst I was  hiding  the  authorities  visited  my
                  house repeatedly. They threatened my wife to  disclose  my
                  whereabouts. My brother-in-law arranged an  agent  for  me
                  who would take me to a safe country.


     6. The appellant travelled to the United Kingdom  via  Sudan,  Turkey,
        Greece and Belgium with the assistance of agents. On 28 March  2018
        the appellant entered the UK in the back of a lorry. The  appellant
        became a member of PG 7 in the United Kingdom.
     7. The respondent's  position  set  out  in  the  Country  Policy  and
        Information Note Eritrea: Opposition to Government October 2017, is
        that the onus was on a person to show that their position within an
        opposition  group  and/or  their  activities  are  such  that   the
        authorities are likely to view them adversely and subject  them  to
        treatment amounting to persecution or serious harm.
     8. The appellant asserts the relevant country guidance case is MB (OLF
        and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT  00030  in  light  of  the
        respondent's position that members  of  PG  7  are  in  a  position
        similar to members of the OLF.  In this case the Tribunal held:


           i) as at February 2007, the situation in Ethiopia was such that,
              in  general:-(a)   Oromo   Liberation   Front   members   and
              sympathisers; (b) persons perceived  to  be  OLF  members  or
              sympathisers;  and  (c)  members   of   the   Maccaa   Tulema
              Association; will, on return, be at real risk  if  they  fall
              within the scope of paragraph (ii) or (iii) below.
          ii) OLF members and sympathisers and those specifically perceived
              by the authorities to be such members or sympathisers will in
              general be at real risk if they have been previously arrested
              or detained on suspicion of OLF involvement.  So,  too,  will
              those  who  have  a  significant  history,   known   to   the
              authorities, of OLF membership or sympathy. Whether any  such
              persons are to be excluded from recognition  as  refugees  or
              from the grant of humanitarian protection by reason of  armed
              activities may need to be addressed in particular cases.
         iii) Given the proscription of the MTA and the  current  state  of
              tension  on  the  part  of  the  Ethiopian  authorities,  the
              Tribunal considered that MTA members will  also  be  at  real
              risk on return if  they  have  previously  been  arrested  or
              detained  on  suspicion  of  MTA  membership  and/or  of  OLF
              membership or are known or suspected  of  membership  of  the
              MTA. Despite the banning of the MTA,  the  Tribunal  did  not
              consider that the evidence was such as to show  a  real  risk
              where the extent of the authorities' knowledge  or  suspicion
              about an individual relates to something less than membership
              of the MTA.


     9. It is of note that MB was decided in 2007 and it is accepted by all
        parties that there have been significant changes in Ethiopia. These
        form the key elements of the submissions by the advocates, Mr Sills
        submitting that although there have been changes it is too soon  to
        ascertain whether those changes will make it safe for a person such
        as the appellant to return to Ethiopia, the  respondent's  position
        being that the changes are  fundamental  and  do  not  support  the
        appellant's contention he is entitled to be recognised as a refugee
        or any other form of international protection.




Current country conditions



    10. This is not a country guidance case, as it was never set up to  be,
        but country conditions are at the heart of this appeal.
    11.  Ethiopia's  ancient  system  of  feudal   government   experienced
        significant changes under Haile Selassie I who reigned  from  1930-
        74. The Derg took power  in  1974  and  instituted  a  Soviet-style
        government with a state president and a house of deputies that were
        answerable to a revolutionary council with a politburo at the  top.
        In May 1991 the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary  Democratic  Front
        (EPRDF) entered the  capital.  The  EPRDF  introduced  a  temporary
        constitution called the  National  Charter,  created  an  87-member
        assembly known as the  State  Council,  and  proceeded  to  form  a
        cabinet for the Transitional Government of Ethiopia (TGE). The  TGE
        endorsed the secession of Eritrea, realigned provincial  boundaries
        in  an  attempt  to  create  ethnic  homogenates,  demobilized  the
        national armed forces,  and  suspended  the  courts  and  enforcing
        agencies. The TGE was replaced by the Federal  Democratic  Republic
        of Ethiopia, which was established by  a  constitution  adopted  in
        1994. Under the constitution the government is a  republic  with  a
        powerful prime  minister  as  head  of  government  and  a  titular
        president as head of state.
    12. Following four years of street protests the EPRDF elected  Dr  Abiy
        Ahmed Ali Prime Minister on 2 April 2018. This is accepted  as  the
        relevant event and date from which the changes in Ethiopian  should
        be assessed.
    13. The need for elections arose out of the problems  within  Ethiopia.
        Protests that commenced in 2014 were  over  discrimination  against
        the Oromo, the largest  ethnic  group  within  Ethiopia,  but  also
        spread to other  groups.  Commentators  following  developments  in
        Ethiopia  throughout  this  period  attribute  this   reaction   to
        discontent with the difficult socio-economic conditions, the ruling
        party having been in power for 27 years, and its  domination  by  a
        small mostly Tigrayan elite.  It is also stated  the  party  itself
        was weakened by in fighting after the death of Prime Minister Meles
        Zenawi in August  2012  and  failure  by  his  successor  as  Prime
        Minister, Hailemariam Desalegn, who  in  October  2016  declared  a
        state of emergency. That brought temporary  calm  but  demands  for
        political reform  and  socio-economic  improvements  were  not  met
        leading to the Prime Minister resigning on 15  February  2018.   It
        was as a result of the Oromo People's  Democratic  Organisation,  a
        member of the EPRDF coalition,  with  the  support  by  the  Amhara
        National Democratic  Movement,  another  EPRDF  party,  that  Prime
        Minister Abiy was elected to power.
    14. It is not disputed that Prime Minister Abiy has made  a  number  of
        significant changes and reforms within Ethiopian.
    15. Of particular relevance  to  the  issues  in  this  appeal  is  the
        decision of  the  Ethiopian  Cabinet  in  Parliament  to  lift  the
        country's state of emergency in June 2018 which, along  with  other
        matters, is said to have been part of the steps being taken towards
        reconciliation within the country.
    16. In December 2018 a draft proclamation to establish a Reconciliation
        Commission was published by the Office of the President of Ethiopia
        as part of the reconciliation process. The recital to the draft  is
        in the following terms:


             WHEREAS, it is necessary  to  reconcile  based  on  truth  and
             justice disagreement that developed among peoples of  Ethiopia
             for  years  because  of  different  societal   and   political
             conflict;


             WHEREAS, it is necessary to identify and ascertain the nature,
             causing dimension of the repeated  gross  violation  of  human
             rights so as to fully respect and Implement basic human rights
             recognised under the Constitution of  the  Virtual  Democratic
             Republic  of  Ethiopia  and  international   and   continental
             agreements which Ethiopia ratified and since it  is  important
             for the reconciliation;


             WHEREAS, it is believed that providing victims of gross  human
             rights abuses in different time and historical  event  with  a
             forum to be heard and perpetrators  to  disclose  and  confess
             their actions as  a  way  of  reconciliation  and  to  achieve
             lasting peace;


             WHEREAS, it is necessary to  establish  free  and  independent
             institution  that  enquire  and  disclose  the  truth  of  the
             sources,  causes  and  extent  of  conflicts  and  that  takes
             appropriate measures and initiate recommendation  that  enable
             for the lasting peace and to prevent the future occurrence  of
             such conflict.


    17. One of the criticisms in the Human Rights Watch  reports  has  been
        the failure of the ruling party to comment upon or criticise  those
        responsible for previous abuses but it appears there is  a  genuine
        intention  for  such  matters  to   be   investigated   through   a
        Reconciliation Commission. However, words  in  isolation  will  not
        resolve the issues so far as the appellant is concerned.
    18. It is not disputed that based on previous experiences the appellant
        has a subjective fear of returning to  Ethiopia.  The  question  is
        whether such a fear is objectively well-founded.
    19. In relation to issues concerning political/opposition parties;  the
        leader of PG 7, a British citizen by the name of Andargachew  Tsege
        who had been arrested and detained on death row  in  Ethiopian  for
        four years,  was  pardoned  and  released  from  detention  by  the
        government in 2018. A  communiqu�  released  by  the  then  Foreign
        Secretary Boris Johnson MP on 29th May 2018 stated:  "Recent  moves
        by the Ethiopian government send a positive signal that they remain
        serious about following through with promised reforms  to  increase
        political space".
    20. In addition to releasing Mr Tsege he was also invited to and held a
        number of meetings with  Prime  Minister  Abiy,  post  release,  to
        discuss relevant issues.
    21. Further specific developments relating to PG 7 include  a  vote  by
        the Ethiopian Parliament to lift the classification of  this  group
        as a terrorist organisation in July 2018 as for others such as  the
        Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) and Ogaden National  Liberation  Front
        (ONLF). Earlier the PG  7  had  announced  a  unilateral  ceasefire
        suspending all armed operations with a  view  to  engaging  in  the
        political process.
    22. In September 2018 the Ethiopian government welcomed the  leadership
        of PG 7 back from their  base  in  Eritrea  to  Ethiopia,  with  no
        evidence  of  adverse  action  being  taken  against  them   since.
        Agreement has been reached with key  opposition  parties  regarding
        disarmament and demobilisation of former rebel forces.
    23. As time draws nearer to the  proposed  parliamentary  elections  in
        2020 PG 7 has declared an intention to join forces with three other
        parties, the Semayawi (Blue), Ethiopian Democratic Party (EDP)  and
        the former United Party to form a new political party  to  advocate
        for what it calls 'citizens based politics within  Ethiopia'.  Such
        merging of political parties is not new, for Prime Minister  Abiy's
        Oromo Democratic Party (ODP) has merged with the  Oromo  Democratic
        Front (ODF) and agreed in  principle  to  work  closely  and  solve
        differences with the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF).
    24. PG 7, ODF and OLF are all parties that previously operated in exile
        and only re-entered  Ethiopia,  became  engaged  in  the  political
        process, and agreed to disarm and  end  their  armed  struggle,  in
        response to ongoing democratic reforms championed  by  the  current
        prime minister.
    25. The government has also issued  pardons.  The  Human  Rights  Watch
        report dated 5 April 2019 records under Prime Minister Abiy:


             "Tens of thousands of political prisoners, including very high
             for profile prisoners, have been released from  detention  and
             many were pardoned. While  there  have  been  few  reports  of
             arbitrary arrests, there have been  a  number  of  arrests  in
             areas of  Omaria  where  there  have  been  conflicts  between
             suspected OLF members and the military.  In  September,  3,000
             youths were detained around Addis Ababa. Some of  them  ending
             up in "rehabilitation camps" although conditions in the  camps
             were reportedly not as  harsh  as  detainees  have  previously
             endured. There have been some reports of politically motivated
             arrests in other parts of Ethiopia, but far fewer than in  the
             past. While Human  Rights  Watch  continues  to  receive  some
             reports of beatings and mistreatment of detainees arrested  in
             the past year, the volume has dropped dramatically.


             As  some  steps  have  been  taken  towards   increasing   the
             independence of the judiciary, Human Rights  Watch  has  begun
             receiving reports of detainees being asked by judges about how
             they are treated in detention - which generally did not happen
             in the past".


    26. It is also the case that previous  detention  centres  where  those
        arrested on account of perceived opposition  to  the  ruling  party
        were detained and ill-treated have been closed.  In relation  to  a
        notorious detention centre known as Jail  Ogaden  in  the  Southern
        Somali  Region  of  Ethiopia,  human  rights  representatives   and
        journalists have been given access to the jail which is now  closed
        and empty. This development is significant  as  this  facility  had
        thousands  of  prisoners  many  of  whom  had  been  arrested   for
        criticising the government and included opposition figures who  had
        been detained for years, tortured and  ill-treated  including  rape
        and death. An example of the intent of the current  Prime  Minister
        to reform the security services is  demonstrated  by  the  fact  in
        August 2018 the Somali Regions President at the time, Abdil  Illey,
        was arrested. He had ultimate responsibility for regional  security
        forces in the region and was replaced by Mustapha Omer a known long-
        time activist and UN worker which is said to have  heralded  a  new
        era of human rights reform and hope in the Somali Region. It was Mr
        Omar who shut down Jail Ogden. Prime Minster Abiy also  replaced  a
        number of senior officials held responsible for past  human  rights
        breaches and acts of suppression and oppression under the  previous
        administration.
    27. A further development relates to the treatment of  the  press.  The
        Human Rights Watch  report  of  3  April  2019  under  the  heading
        'Freedom of Expression' records the following:

             "Significant progress  has  been  made  on  media  freedom  in
             Ethiopian. In one year, Ethiopia has gone from  being  one  of
             the leading jailers of journalists  in  Africa  to  having  no
             journalists in jail for the first time  since  2004.  Diaspora
             media outlets previously banned in Ethiopia operate freely and
             journalists report few threats from the government's  security
             services. Despite the progress, there's still a reluctance  in
             the  media  to  critique  the  government  or  ask   difficult
             questions. Hate speech on social media,  especially  Facebook,
             is a serious and growing problem,  although  the  government's
             proposed hate speech law raises concerns it  may  be  used  to
             stifle legitimate expressions of dissent.


        Under the heading 'Under Abiy' it is written:


             In June 2018 the  Abiy  government  unblocked  access  to  264
             websites, including blogs and news outlets, to  allow  for  "a
             free flow of information." OMN and ESAT were allowed back into
             the country, charges were dropped, and they are now  operating
             without  restriction.  All  journalists  in   detention   were
             released. Presently, there are no reports  of  journalists  in
             detention in Ethiopian - for the first time since 2004.


             However,  during  a  wave  of  protests  in   September,   the
             government shut down the Internet and mobile data in parts  of
             the  country  where  there  were  demonstrations,  restricting
             access to information. The government also announced plans  to
             pass a hate speech law in December. While  hate  speech  is  a
             serious problem amid growing ethnic  tensions,  especially  on
             social  media,  the  government  should  be  careful  not   to
             undermine efforts to reform repressive laws by drafting a  new
             hate speech laws that could be used  for  the  same  kinds  of
             abuse.


             State-run television, while now reporting regularly  on  human
             rights abuses committed  prior  to  the  formation  of  Abiy's
             government, rarely strays from  government  perspective.  They
             have broadcast  documentaries  about  alleged  corruption  and
             human rights abuses by previous  government  officials  around
             the same time as these individuals were charged.  The  use  of
             state television documentaries has been used in  the  past  to
             undermine defendant's rights to a fair trial by mobilising the
             public to support a judiciary that was far from independent of
             state control.


             Journalists have also reported being assaulted  when  covering
             sensitive issues. In March, 2 journalists working with  Mereja
             TV, one of the websites unblocked in June,  were  detained  by
             regional  police  on  the  outskirts  of  Addis  Ababa   while
             reporting on government's demolition of homes and  allegations
             of forced displacement.


             The journalists were  allegedly  asked  to  explain  why  they
             hadn't told the police they were travelling to  the  site  and
             was subsequently released after an  hour.  Upon  release,  the
             journalists were attacked by a group of young men, and one was
             beaten with sticks in plain view of the  police.  No  one  was
             arrested in relation to the assault.


             Whilst the Freedom of Mass Media and Information  Proclamation
             was one of the laws Abiy pledged to revise, any draft  of  the
             law is not yet available.


             In July, Abiy appointed new  members  to  the  boards  of  the
             Ethiopian Broadcasting Corporation  and  the  Ethiopian  Press
             Agency, including opposition members.


             Some journalists have reported to Human Rights Watch  that  it
             remains difficult to criticise  the  Abiy  government  due  to
             pressure from editors and peers.


             When Human Rights  Watch  visited  the  country  in  February,
             people were speaking very openly about sensitive  subjects  in
             public spaces, cafes, and minibuses, which is a marked  change
             from a country  once  consumed  by  fears  of  monitoring  and
             surveillance. A  press  conference  that  Human  Rights  Watch
             participated in was attended by dozens  of  journalists,  many
             from state media - something that would not have  happened  in
             the past.


    28. Despite the positive developments which show PG7  is  no  longer  a
        proscribed organisation, which supports Mrs Pettersen's submissions
        that the appellant will not face a real risk  of  ill-treatment  on
        return as a member/supporter  of  that  organisation,  there  still
        remain problems within Ethiopian which form the basis of  Mr  Sills
        submissions that it is too early for this Tribunal to find that  it
        is safe for the appellant to be returned.
    29. An example of the ongoing  difficulties  recorded  in  the  country
        information occurred in  September  2018  when  3,000  youths  were
        arrested in Addis Ababa in one weekend. The statement by the Police
        Commissioner for the city stated 174 were charged  and  that  about
        1,200 others will be detained at the  Tolay  Military  Camp  for  a
        "rehabilitation   education".   A   statement   by   the    Amnesty
        International Director for East Africa,  the  Horn  and  the  Great
        Lakes stated "the majority of people were  arrested  for  perceived
        offences  which  are  not  recognised   criminal   offences   under
        international law, such as smoking shisha or consuming  khat.  They
        must be either  charged  with  a  recognised  criminal  offence  or
        released. Those arrested for taking part in protests on the  recent
        ethnic   clashes   must   all   be   released    immediately    and
        unconditionally".
    30. A press conference given by the Police Commissioner for Addis Ababa
        had stated that the weekend raids by the security  forces  were  in
        response to rising criminality in the city and targeted robbers and
        thieves resulting  in  the  arrest  of  almost  3,000  people.  The
        Commissioner stated that more than half of them, 1,459 people, were
        arrested in bars and shisha smoking dens. 94 people  were  arrested
        for chewing khat and 31 others arrested in gambling houses. Some of
        those arrested for  chewing  khat  and  smoking  shisha  have  been
        arrested. Another 1,200 youths were arrested for taking part in the
        15th September protests and  the  ethnic  violence  in  Burayu  and
        transported to Tolay Military Camp in south-western Ethiopian.
    31.  Within  the  appellant's  bundle  is  a  press  release  from  the
        Association for Human rights in  Ethiopia  dated  21  October  2018
        reporting the release of a young attorney and  known  human  rights
        defender and friend on 20 October 2018, following their arrest  and
        remand by a criminal  court  accused  of  organising  and  inciting
        instability, and on the day of their court  appearance  over  1,000
        youths from Addis Abba who were amongst the 3,000  people  detained
        above being released.
    32.  Reference  was  also  made  by  Mr  Sills  to  additional  country
        information provided by  the  appellant  from  Human  Rights  Watch
        highlighting progress that had been made and  what  more  could  be
        done. In an article by  Human  Rights  Watch  dated  2  April  2019
        marking Prime Minister Abiy's first year in power it is written:


             "But for many others, Ethiopia has  become  a  more  dangerous
             place. As political space opened, Ethiopians were finally able
             to voice historic grievances that they bottled up for  decades
             under an authoritarian government. Many  of  these  grievances
             are related  to  access  to  land  and  complex  questions  of
             identity and governance. Many Ethiopians  have  settled  these
             scores,  often  among  ethnic  lines,  including  by  forcibly
             displacing people from land or engaging  in  violent  conflict
             with rival groups. This has occurred across many parts of  the
             country amidst a serious security breakdown and  a  vacuum  in
             local governance. Social media became awash with  hate  speech
             and insecurity has forced over 2 million people to flee  their
             homes, and it looks like the number  of  internally  displaced
             people is only likely to rise as tensions escalate.


             At  least  10  ethnic  groups   in   the   Southern   Nations,
             Nationalities and People's Region (SNNPR) have  petitioned  to
             form their own states, leading  to  the  possible  breakup  of
             SNNPR and increasing tensions in some areas there. Other parts
             of the country have  initiated  similar  processes.  In  areas
             along the Amhara and Tigray regional borders, a  proliferation
             of firearms and entrenched positions from regional  government
             officials  over  contested  borders  have  exasperated  rising
             tension. Long-standing debates over who  gets  to  govern  and
             manage the rapid growth of the capital, Addis Ababa, have  not
             been resolved, fuelling growing  frustration  in  the  capital
             region.


             The euphoria over Abiy's initial  reforms  are  fading  amidst
             this  backdrop,  and   frustration   is   growing   with   his
             government's lack  of  tangible  action  to  deal  with  these
             worrying  trends.  Any  transition  from  authoritarianism  to
             democracy is fraught with many challenges, and the actions, or
             lack thereof, that Abiy's government takes to deal with  these
             complex issues will go a long way in deciding Ethiopian's long-
             term commitment to human rights and democracy.  With  election
             scheduled for May 2020, the next year will be a critical  test
             of Abiy's commitment to democracy and his ability to unite  an
             increasingly fractured country, restore law  and  order,  calm
             tensions, and build on his early reforms that showed  so  much
             promise.


    33. The US State Department report for  2018,  published  on  13  March
        2019, notes it was widely reported  that  civilian  authorities  at
        times did not maintain control over regional security  forces  with
        rural local police and militia sometimes acting  independently  and
        extrajudicially although a strong trend towards  increased  respect
        for the rule of law began under Abiy whose assumption of office was
        followed by positive changes in the human rights climate.
    34. There is reference in a Norwegian Refugee Council article  dated  5
        June 2019 to intercommunal violence and  conflict  deepening  since
        2016 resulting in 2.9  million  displacements  within  Ethiopia.  A
        Voice of American news article of 24 June 2019 records  the  failed
        coup attempt in June 2019 in which the leader, a  General  Asamnew,
        Amhara States head of security was shot  and  killed.  It  is  also
        noted that hours later the Ethiopian army chief of staff was killed
        by his bodyguard at his home in Addis Ababa, events which are  said
        to be linked. It is said the cause and motive for the  attacks  was
        unclear although the coup leader is an Amhara nationalist  who  had
        been released from prison in 2018 after receiving  an  amnesty  for
        his role in a 2009 coup attempt.
    35. In addition to the above and other matters raised  in  the  country
        information, all of which is being considered, the appellant relies
        upon an expert report prepared by Professor Aguilar,  Director  for
        the Centre for the Study of Religion and Politics, University of St
        Andrews dated 12 June 2019.
    36. Having examined the  appellant's  background  and  changes  in  the
        country situation and Ethiopia, including  setting  out  at  length
        extracts from Human Rights and Amnesty  International  reports  for
        Ethiopia for 2017/2018, the author's conclusions  are  recorded  at
        [36] in the following terms:


             Conclusion 1:     Until we  see  further  changes  within  the
                           Oromia region and given  the  mass  arrests  that
                           have  taken  place  since  October  2018   asylum
                           seekers of Oromo ethnicity and members of  Ginbot
                           7 are at risk upon return to Ethiopia.


             Conclusion 2:     The data that we have  so  far  since  2016,
                           including after the  promises  of  the  state  of
                           Ethiopia during 2018 has not shown that the Oromo
                           and Ginbot 7 are not at risk of persecution  from
                           the state. This  persecution  comes  from  ethnic
                           persecution as  well  as  political  persecution.
                           Thus, the appellant is  at  risk  of  persecution
                           from the state if returned to  Ethiopia.  Indeed,
                           the  Ethiopian  government   released   political
                           prisoners and lifted the terrorism classification
                           on  Ginbot  7  but  has  continued   an   ongoing
                           persecution of the opposition parties.


             Conclusion 3:     I do not have  data  that  could  suggest  a
                           departure from the country guidance  that  stated
                           that members of the Ethiopian opposition were  at
                           risk of persecution  from  the  state,  and  such
                           country guidance would include Ginbot 7.


             Conclusion 4:     It is my  opinion  that  the  appellant,  as
                           somebody  who  was  already   detained   by   the
                           authorities, is at risk of arrest  and  detention
                           without trial if returned to Ethiopia.


             Conclusion 5:     Even though PG7 joined an alliance of  other
                           parties in May 2019 this does not mean  that  the
                           Ethiopian government has accepted the role  of  a
                           strong  opposition  that  could  win   the   2020
                           elections. Indeed, members of the PG 7 remain  as
                           part of the opposition and therefore part of what
                           I suspect would be a difficult road  to  an  open
                           democratic campaign. There is no recent  evidence
                           as to suggest that the  government  has  actually
                           accepted the demands of  free  elections  by  the
                           newly  formed  Ethiopian  Citizens   for   Social
                           Justice.


             Conclusion 6:     The dismantling of the PG 7 has been a  move
                           to join other political parties in  view  of  the
                           2020 general elections; it was not an end to  the
                           PG 7  opposition  movement  against  the  current
                           Ethiopian government. Thus, it is my opinion that
                           a former supporter and member of the PG 7 such as
                           the appellant  who  was  detained  for  a  period
                           remains at risk of detention on return because of
                           his   opposition   to   the   current   Ethiopian
                           government. The conditions of  political  freedom
                           for the Ethiopian opposition have not changed and
                           therefore  until  there  is   new   evidence   to
                           challenge this finding it is my opinion that  the
                           appellant  remains  at  risk  of  detention   and
                           torture if returned to Ethiopian as he  is  known
                           to the authorities.


    37. The basis of conclusion 2 is reference  to  a  January  2019  press
        release from OLF demanding that intimidation  and  imprisonment  of
        OLF officials and its members by the government  stop  immediately.
        The article accuses the ruling party of political  manoeuvring  and
        to immediately halt  its  intimidation  threatening  detention  and
        imprisonment of OLF members. The exact wording of conclusion number
        2 in the body of the report, at [21], is as follows:


             Conclusion 2:  The evidence outlined within  this  report  has
             not shown that the Oromo and Ginbot  7  are  not  at  risk  of
             persecution from the state. Thus, the appellant is at risk  of
             persecution from the state of returned to  Ethiopian.  Indeed,
             the Ethiopian  government  released  political  prisoners  and
             lifted the terrorist classification of Ginbot 7; however,  the
             leadership of all  political  parties  were  harassed  by  the
             state.


    38. It is noted there is evidence within the Human Rights Watch  report
        to PG 7 and OLF reporting challenges in  holding  rallies  in  some
        areas due to a lack of security and protection  and  also  to  some
        alleged OLF operatives refusing to disarm claiming this  was  never
        part of the agreement with the ruling party  and  conflict  between
        federal army and alleged OLF fighters causing  casualties  in  some
        parts of Oromia, areas in which security forces  conducted  regular
        arrests of politically active individuals;  although  human  rights
        watch was not aware of any of them being charged. The  same  report
        records that Human Rights  Watch's  own  Ethiopian  researcher  was
        granted access to the country for the first time in 8 years to join
        a workshop on rebuilding civil society.
    39. A further reference in the   US  State  Department  report  in  the
        section headed 'Elections in Political Participation'  records  the
        following:


               "Political  Parties   and   Political   Participation:   the
             government, controlled by the EPRDF, called on all diaspora  -
             based opposition groups, including those in armed struggle, to
             return and pursue nonviolent  struggle.  Virtually  all  major
             opposition groups,  including  OLF,  Oromo  Democratic  Front,
             ONLF, and PG7,  welcomed  the  request  and  returned  to  the
             country.


             On February 14, authorities released  Mamushet  Amare,  former
             leader of the All Ethiopian Unity Party, whom authorities  had
             detained on terrorism -related charges since March 2017.


             Constituent parties of the ERPRDF  conferred  advantages  upon
             their members; the party directly owned  many  businesses  and
             allegedly  awarded  jobs  and  business  contracts  to   loyal
             supporters. Opposition parties reported  they  rented  offices
             and meeting halls in the Amhara  and  Oromia  Regions  without
             difficulty.  There  were   reports   unemployed   youths   not
             affiliated with the ruling  coalition  sometimes  had  trouble
             receiving the "support letters" from their wards necessary  to
             obtain jobs.


             Registered political  parties  must  receive  permission  from
             regional governments to open and occupy local offices, with at
             least one major opposition party reporting it was able to open
             many offices during the year in advance of the  2020  national
             election. Laws requiring parties to report  "public  meetings"
             and obtain permission for public rallies inhibited  opposition
             activities."

Discussion



    40. The country information paints a picture of a country that has been
        ruled by an authoritarian oppressive regime until  the  appointment
        of the current prime minister, but which is now some way along  the
        path to reform. It shows Prime Minister Abiy is intent on achieving
        considerable reform which, in addition to the above, has included a
        peace  agreement  resolving  the  long-running   conflict   between
        Ethiopia and Eritrea.
    41. It is not disputed that the appellant was the subject of an  arrest
        warrant which was executed, resulting in his arrest and  detention.
        It is also the case that many were detained by the security  forces
        in different regions of Ethiopia, some local,  without  trial.  The
        appellant was, however, released albeit  he  claims  it  was  as  a
        result of his uncle paying a bribe.
    42. It was not established on the evidence that release on payment of a
        bribe was uncommon. Whilst the same could not be found to reflect a
        lack of interest in an appellant, per se, it is a relevant  factor.
        The appellant claims to have been detained for 3 � months and it is
        reasonable to presume that some record will have been made  of  his
        detention which would include a reference to his current status. It
        is not irrational to find  that  release  on  payment  of  a  bribe
        occurred because the authorities were of the view that there is  no
        good reason to detain the appellant  longer,  as  occurred  before.
        There is insufficient evidence to the contrary in this appeal.
    43. It is also the case the appellant was  arrested  under  the  arrest
        warrant and so if any adverse interest was  recorded  it  would  be
        that he was an escapee.
    44. In terms of the expert report, the contention that  the  leadership
        of PG 7 face a real risk of ill-treatment or ongoing persecution at
        the hands of the Ethiopian authorities  is  not  supported  by  the
        country information made available showing the  leadership  of  the
        organisation having returned to Ethiopia openly with the support of
        the government, including the security apparatus  in  Addis  Ababa,
        and being able to form a political party to oppose  the  government
        in 2020, with no evidence of ongoing persecution.
    45. It is, of course, not known what will happen if an opposition party
        wins the election and Mr Sills referred to  the  history  of  other
        African leaders having lost power  in  elections  but  refusing  to
        concede. The suggestion this might happen in Ethiopia to a  similar
        extent is, however, pure speculation.
    46. The driving force behind the reforms of the current Prime  Minister
        is a recognition of the poor economic state  of  Ethiopia  and  the
        need for reform to enable the country to avoid sinking any further,
        together with socio-political  aspects.  It  is  reflected  in  the
        country material that the government  accepts  that  a  multi-party
        approach to government is essential for the future of Ethiopia.  It
        is not just statements by Ethiopian politicians that have  recorded
        this but also by foreign governments and the United Nations. In the
        Human Rights report of 7 April 2019, relied upon by  both  parties,
        it is written:


             Prime Minister Abiy has expressed his commitment to  electoral
             reforms. He has consulted regularly with  opposition  parties,
             including December, when he held discussions "on  highlighting
             the reforms required to ensure the upcoming election  is  free
             and fair, and the shared responsibilities of all."  He  stated
             that  the  reforms  will  not  interfere  with  the  electoral
             calendar,  with  the  election  currently  scheduled  for  May
             2020.....


             ....


             Thousands of opposition members were released  from  detention
             or allowed to return from exile when Abiy came  to  power.  He
             has removed opposition  groups  from  the  list  of  terrorist
             organisations,  and  expressed  his   desire   for   political
             plurality, stating that the country had "no option" but multi-
             party democracy. Exiled opposition leaders were welcomed  back
             into Ethiopia and now operate  without  restriction,  although
             some opposition parties have reported difficulties in  holding
             rallies  in  some  areas  due  to  a  lack  of  security   and
             protection.


    47. It is not disputed there is evidence  of  difficulties  in  certain
        areas, but Ethiopia has the right to  enforce  its  laws  and  take
        action against those who may breach the same. The chewing of  khat,
        a narcotic substance, may not be contrary to international law  but
        may infringe the internal laws of Ethiopia. Individuals refusing to
        hand in weapons and to prolong the armed conflict are likely to  be
        the subject of a brutal response from the Armed Forces in  Ethiopia
        as they have been  the  past,  as  well  as  suppression  of  those
        elements.  Notwithstanding,  the   current   Prime   Minister   has
        reinforced the importance of the rule of law as part of the  reform
        process including access to the courts and judiciary and closure of
        prisons and detention centres. Indeed as recorded  in  the  country
        information judges are asking those  brought  before  them  whether
        they have been ill-treated in detention, a question they would  not
        have asked previously.
    48. It has not been shown that  the  issues  highlighted  by  Mr  Sills
        represent a return to the repression of  the  past  when  those  in
        opposition faced a real risk of persecution, forcing many  to  flee
        the country.
    49. Although Mr Sills refers in his submissions to the written evidence
        he seeks to rely upon regarding concerns in some areas of Ethiopia,
        he fails to show that the situation  that  will  be  faced  by  the
        appellant on return is similar  to  that  which  existed  when  the
        appellant left or prior to the appointment of Prime Minister  Abiy.
        It has not been made out that membership  of  an  opposition  party
        will entitle an individual to a grant of  international  protection
        at the date of the hearing of this appeal, per se.
    50. The appellant was a supporter of PG 7 in Ethiopia and joined the UK
        branch of the party. He is not a leader and not  a  person  of  any
        influence or who holds office within the party and not a person who
        is likely to be perceived as  posing  a  threat  to  the  state  of
        Ethiopia.
    51. PG 7 is no longer a banned party within  Ethiopia  or  a  party  in
        relation to which the information  relied  upon  by  the  appellant
        establishes a  real  risk  for  this  reason  alone  on  return  to
        Ethiopia.
    52. The fact the leadership of  PG  7  have  been  welcomed  back  into
        Ethiopia and are able  to  take  part  in  the  political  process,
        through the formation of a new party with the intention  of  taking
        part in the 2020 elections, openly indicates there is  no  evidence
        his membership will  prevent  the  appellant  from  continuing  his
        involvement with this political group and actively campaigning  for
        them, in a legal manner, in the future if he wishes to do so. PG  7
        have renounced violence and are no longer an armed group, resorting
        to persuasion and acceptable of political means. It is not made out
        the appellant will be detained on return or ill-treated  on  return
        for this reason.
    53. The appellant is from Addis Ababa the place to  where  he  will  be
        returned. He will not be returned  to  a  rural  area  where  other
        difficulties may be experienced.
    54. I do not find it  made  out  that  it  is  too  early  to  reach  a
        conclusion in relation to this appeal or that is necessary for  the
        matter to be put off until after the 2020 elections as  such  delay
        will be contrary to the overriding objectives.  The  material  made
        available  to  the  Tribunal,  including  the  submissions  by  the
        advocates, is greater than that referred to in the  expert  report.
        If find the available material, when considered as  a  whole,  does
        not support the experts view.
    55. I find on the evidence that the changes following  the  appointment
        of Prime Minister Abiy are real and substantial and  that  although
        the appellant's expert claims there is insufficient data to warrant
        departing from the country guidance case the evidence considered as
        a  whole  suggests  the  contrary  so  far  as  this  appellant  is
        concerned. The appellant fails to establish there are in  existence
        forces within Ethiopia with sufficient  strength  or  influence  to
        return the  country  to  the  previous  situation,  which  will  be
        contrary to the national interests.
    56. As noted above, the burden is upon  the  appellant,  to  the  lower
        standard applicable in a protection appeal,  to  establish  a  real
        risk  on  return  sufficient  to  entitle  him  to   a   grant   of
        international protection or leave to remain  on  any  other  basis.
        Having considered the evidence and  submissions  made  I  find  the
        appellant has failed to discharge the burden upon him to show  that
        he is entitled to a grant of international protection or  on  human
        rights grounds. I find, in addition, that based upon  the  evidence
        relied upon by Mrs Pettersen the Secretary of State has  discharged
        the burden upon him, so far as any burden rests upon the respondent
        to this action, to show the appellant can be returned  to  Ethiopia
        without the United Kingdom breaching its  international  protection
        obligations and in showing the appellant's return on  human  rights
        grounds is proportionate.


Decision

    57. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    58. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17 July 2019












