
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10037/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st January 2019                 |On 27th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                                    K.R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bulpitt promulgated on 22nd October 2018  in  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  protection  and
    human rights appeals.

 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim to asylum was on the basis  that  he
    says he fears the authorities in Sri Lanka. His case is that there is a
    warrant for his arrest as he was suspected of assisting the  Liberation
    Tigers of Tamil Eelam 'LTTE' during the Sri Lankan Civil War.   It  was
    argued that as a result of the warrant the Appellant is said to  be  on
    the airport "stop list" meaning that he would be detained upon re-entry
    and interrogated by the Terrorist Investigation Division TID of the Sri
    Lankan Police.  The basis of the arrest warrant,  the  Appellant  says,
    was his escape from the TID's detention on  12th  August  2010.   Judge
    Bulpitt noted that the  case  had  previously  been  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farmer in respect of an asylum appeal  on  19th  October
    2015 and refused, but the appeal against that decision  was  considered
    by the Upper Tribunal and was also refused.  In  March  2017  and  July
    2018 the  Appellant  made  further  submissions  which  the  Respondent
    treated as a fresh claim for asylum, which then formed the basis of the
    refusal considered upon appeal by Judge Bulpitt.   The  Appellant  said
    that the documents subsequently obtained supported  his  account  about
    the escape and demonstrated that he  would  be  persecuted  if  he  was
    returned to Sri Lanka.

 3. The learned First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly noted that the starting
    point in considering what is a second asylum  appeal  is  the  case  of
    Devaseelan (Second Appeals, ECHR, Extra-Territorial Effect)  Sri  Lanka
    [2002] UKAIT 00702.  Part of the  evidence considered by Judge  Bulpitt
    related to psychiatric evidence relating to symptoms both of  PTSD  and
    psychosis suffered  by  the  Appellant.   The  Judge  dealt  with  that
    evidence first at paragraph 23 of the decision when stating:

         "A series of letters concerning the appellant written by Dr  Martin
         Fuller an Associate Specialist Psychiatrist  are  included  in  the
         appellant's bundle.  The  latest  of  those  letters  is  dated  11
         September 2018.  In that letter Dr Fuller states that the appellant
         has been under his care since May 2017.  Dr Fuller states that  the
         appellant 'clearly reports symptoms of  a  psychotic  illness.   He
         describes  persistent  paranoid  persecutory   delusional   beliefs
         auditory hallucinations and occasional visual  hallucination'.   Dr
         Fuller says that the appellant told him he  feels  scared  all  the
         time but denied suicidal thoughts.  Dr Fuller says the  appellant's
         mental  health  problems  are  associated  with  previous  suicidal
         thinking including one previous attempt on his life in April  2017.
         Dr Fuller says that  the  appellant  is  currently  prescribed  the
         antipsychotic  drug  risk  risperidone   and   the   antidepressant
         sertraline.  In the event of the appellant stopping his  medication
         Dr Fuller says he would expect a deterioration in his mental health
         and an increased risk of suicidal thinking."

 4. The judge also considered the evidence of the Appellant's mental health
    at paragraph 37 of the decision and found that:

         "It was submitted to me that  the  psychiatric  evidence  which  is
         before the tribunal for the first  time  supports  the  appellant's
         account of what happened to him in Sri Lanka.  I find however  that
         there are alternative explanations  for  his  symptoms,  which  are
         equally if not more likely.  In this regard it is relevant that  it
         is believed that the appellant has symptoms of a psychotic illness.
          The psychiatrist's evidence of the appellant's symptoms  is  based
         on the history which  the  appellant  has  given.   The  suggestion
         therefore that the psychiatric evidence  supports  the  appellant's
         account is circular - the psychiatric evidence is dependant on  the
         appellant's  account.   I  therefore  find  that  the   psychiatric
         evidence does not assist in  determining  whether  the  appellant's
         account is true."

 5. Permission to appeal in this case was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McWilliam  on  28th  December  2018  who  although  finding  that   the
    Appellant's own Grounds of Appeal misrepresented the  decision  of  the
    judge and were insufficiently particularised and  simply  listed  as  a
    grievance in the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, nether  the  less
    found that it was arguable that the judge did not properly consider the
    medical evidence when assessing credibility and that there is  arguably
    a diagnosis of PTSD from the psychiatrist.  The judge therefore limited
    the permission to appeal simply to that one issue, as properly conceded
    by Mr Martin. Mr Martin has taken me to the medical evidence  that  was
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal, including  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Fuller, which included at page 128 of the Appellant's bundle  a  letter
    prepared by Dr Martin Fuller the Associate Specialist  Psychiatrist  at
    the Kingston & Richmond Early Intervention Service, which  letter  make
    it clear that the Appellant had been under the  care  of  that  service
    since May 2017 and their service specialises  in  treatment  of  people
    with first episode  psychosis.   Dr  Fuller  was  of  the  opinion  the
    Appellant's symptoms were consistent with two diagnosis,  as  specified
    by International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Relating to
    Health Problems 10th Revision, commonly referred  to  as  ICD10,  being
    both an unspecified nonorganic psychosis but also post-traumatic stress
    disorder 'PTSD'.

 6. Dr Fuller described how the Appellant had clearly reported symptoms  of
    a psychotic illness.  The Appellant had described paranoid  persecutory
    delusional  beliefs,  auditory  hallucinations  and  occasional  visual
    hallucinations.  The doctor also stated that the Appellant described  a
    history of trauma, avoidance of reminders of said trauma  and  repeated
    intrusive recollections of the same.  He went on to say  that  when  he
    saw the Appellant in May that year he had written  that  the  Appellant
    remained convinced that the Sri Lankan authorities wanted to arrest him
    in the UK and kill him.  The  Appellant  was  said  to  have  a  marked
    anxiety about this.  When the Appellant attended the Home Office  every
    two weeks he feared that they will report  the  information  that  they
    take about him to the Sri Lankan authorities.  It was stated  that  the
    Appellant was convinced he was sometimes seeing  Sri  Lankan  policemen
    there.  Dr Fuller noted  how  the  Appellant  found  groups  of  people
    difficult, believing they were talking about him and reporting that  he
    actually heard what they say. It was  stated  the  Appellant  found  it
    difficult to sleep at night and said that he sleeps under  his  bed  at
    night because he is worried about the Sri Lankan authorities coming  to
    his room at night and in the past he said he had seen them in his  room
    and he felt scared all the time, he felt tearful at times,  but  denied
    suicidal thoughts.   Dr  Fuller  said  that  the  Appellant  felt  this
    previously because he thought he was  going  to  be  deported  and  the
    Appellant had said he would rather take his own life than be  deported.
    It was stated the Appellant did not intend to act on suicidal thoughts,
    because his mother was a protective factor.  His  mental  problems  are
    said to be associated  with  marked  low  mood  and  previous  suicidal
    thinking, with one previous attempt on his life in 2017.

 7. I am also helpfully referred on behalf of the  Appellant  to  a  letter
    written by Dr Fuller to the Appellant's GP Dr Wolfson at  page  137  of
    the bundle, following clinic on 17th January and typed on 22nd  January
    2018, in which it  was  discussed  on  page  138  that  Dr  Fuller  had
    increased the  dose of Sertraline, with a view to increasing it further
    to 150mgs if there was no improvement  in  four  weeks  and  that  SSRI
    antidepressants were thought to be of  some  help  in  PTSD,  which  Dr
    Fuller stated  he  thought  was  the  core  problem  here,  whilst  the
    Appellant also has some depressed symptoms - low mood, poor  sleep  and
    appetite, previous suicidal ideas (none of latter admitted to now)  and
    that he went in paragraph 2 to state:

         "We can consider as  well  further  changes  to  his  antipsychotic
         medication in terms of a third antipsychotic.  I do  not  think  at
         this stage that we would be looking at Clozapine as I do not  think
         he has a diagnosis of Schizophrenia, rather that psychotic symptoms
         are driven by his PTSD".

 8. The evidence therefore before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  that
    the Appellant suffered both from psychotic episodes and also from PTSD.
     Ms Everett on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  quite  properly  and
    rightly conceded that in respect of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    consideration of the medical evidence, that the findings  made  by  the
    Judge at paragraph 37 cannot properly be supported or sustained.

 9. The judge, as Ms Everett quite properly conceded, has not at any  stage
    within his consideration of the  medical  evidence  actually  mentioned
    that the Appellant is suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder  in
    addition to a psychosis, despite Dr Fuller's evidence being that  there
    are two diagnoses here, not just the one.  As Mr Martin quite  properly
    says this is evidence being given by the treating  consultants  who  by
    that stage had had the Appellant under their care since May 2017.   The
    team was clearly of the medical opinion that it was not just psychosis,
    it was also PTSD that the Appellant was suffering from.

10. Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge says in paragraph 37 that  there
    are alternative explanations for his symptoms which are equally, if not
    more likely, and in this regard it is  relevant  to  believe  that  the
    Appellant had symptoms of a psychotic illness, that in itself does  not
    assist, because the Appellant was suffering  both  from  psychosis  and
    PTSD and the fact that he  suffers  from  psychotic  illness  does  not
    necessarily therefore explain the PTSD.  Posttraumatic stress disorder,
    both legal representatives agree, is caused by  some  sort  of  trauma,
    whether it is in terms of an event or a traumatic situation.  The judge
    has not  in  this  case  stated  any  other  traumatic  cause  or  even
    considered whether there is any other traumatic cause such as to  cause
    posttraumatic stress disorder in addition to psychosis.

11. Quite clearly, as the  judge  states,  the  psychiatrists  are  largely
    dependent upon a history  given  to  them  by  an  Appellant.  However,
    psychiatrists do not just rely upon what they are told,  they  exercise
    their own professional judgment and skill in  coming  to  a  diagnosis.
    Therefore, the suggestion by the judge that  the  suggestion  that  the
    psychiatric evidence supports the Appellant's account  is  circular  as
    the psychiatric evidence is  dependent  upon  the  Appellant's  account
    fails to take proper account of  the  fact  that  the  psychiatrist  is
    making their own diagnosis  not  just  based  on  the  Appellant's  own
    history, but also the  medical  history  and  also  upon  the  person's
    presentation  and  a  consideration  of  how  any   symptoms   manifest
    themselves. It was accepted by the psychiatrist that the Appellant  had
    PTSD from some traumatic event.

12. As Ms Everett agreed, the last sentence in paragraph 37 where the judge
    the found that the psychiatric evidence did not assist  in  determining
    whether the appellant's account was true, is wholly unhelpful.  Clearly
    the judge has to take all of the evidence in the round when considering
    credibility.  The judge has failed here to take  account  of  the  fact
    that there was a diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder in addition
    to a diagnosis of psychosis and failed to properly consider  that  part
    of the psychiatric evidence.  The  Judge  appears  to  have  found  the
    Appellant  incredible  before  taking  the  psychiatric  evidence  into
    account.

13. I do therefore find that there is a failure to properly take account of
    material evidence regarding the Appellant's psychiatric condition which
    I find does amount to a material error of law in this case.  This is  a
    case where credibility is in issue and although the judge gave  several
    other reasons  for  discounting  credibility,  credibility  has  to  be
    considered in the round, holistically, taking all of the evidence  into
    account. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  to  be  set
    aside in its entirety with no preserved findings of fact and  the  case
    remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  before  a
    differently constituted Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bulpitt does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside in its entirety.  The case  is  remitted  back
to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Bulpitt.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

There is currently an anonymity direction.  In light  of  the  circumstances
of this case and the nature of the  asylum  claim  I  do  find  that  it  is
important that there be an anonymity direction.  The  Appellant  is  thereby
entitled to anonymity in this case and no record or transcript  or  note  of
these proceedings may identify the Appellant either directly  or  indirectly
or any member of his family.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  may
lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 31st January 2019

R. McGinty
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty






