
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10838/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd February 2021                |On 9th April 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                    S A B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse, HS Immigration Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"),
      and as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that the direction
      continues. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the
      appellant is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall
      directly or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of her
      family. This direction applies amongst others to all parties. Failure
      to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
      proceedings.


   2. The hearing before me on 23rd February 2021 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  The
      appellant did not join the remote hearing, but Mr Woodhouse confirmed
      the appellant is aware of the hearing and he was content to proceed in
      the appellant's absence.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice
      Centre. I was addressed by the representatives in the same way as I
      would have been if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I
      was satisfied that no party has been prejudiced and that, insofar as
      there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is justified
      as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the
      interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding objective
      to proceed with a remote hearing because of the present need to take
      precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was
      satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with
      fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of
      the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated
      costs and resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was
      satisfied that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


   3. The appellant is a national of Iran.  She arrived in the UK on 10th
      November 2017 and claimed asylum. The appellant's claim for asylum was
      refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated 24th
      October 2019.  Her appeal was dismissed by FtT Judge French for
      reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 3rd February 2020.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge French


   4. The background to the appellant's claim for international protection
      is set out in paragraph [1] of the decision. Judge French noted the
      appellant had come to the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities
      previously on two occasions. The first was in 2007 when the appellant
      had been interviewed for 3-4 hours following a politicised acceptance
      speech at an awards ceremony.  The second was in 2009/10 when the
      appellant had campaigned against the Presidential election results.
      Judge French noted the claim made by the appellant that she had been
      arrested and was raped whilst in custody.  Drawing upon the evidence
      set out in the appellant's witness statement dated 1st August 2019,
      Judge French noted:


         ".. Her departure had not been prompted by either of these
         incidents as she confirmed in paragraph 54 of her statement darted
         1/08/19.  However she claimed that she felt compelled to leave Iran
         because of an adverse reaction by the authorities to a documentary
         project that she had worked on with her husband (paragraph 33
         witness statement dated 1/08/19).  This documentary was intended to
         highlight the exploitation of women. She said that her
         investigation had revealed that the son of a well-known Muslim
         cleric, had been involved with an underage girl.  It was said that
         her camera had been confiscated by the authorities as had her
         laptop, and an external hard drive, where she had stored previous
         footage. Whilst her husband had been interviewed, he had not been
         charged with an offence. However the appellant claimed that she
         decided that it would be unsafe for her to remain in Iran. She
         claimed that she had left Iran on about 22/08/17 and initially went
         to Turkey, and from there went to Germany. She claimed to have
         entered Germany on a fake passport even though she also had a
         genuine passport in her possession and that both passports were
         seized by the German authorities. She had been fingerprinted in
         Germany on 18/08/17 and claimed asylum there but did not await the
         outcome of her application...."


   5. Judge French refers to the content of the appellant's bundle at
      paragraph [3] of his decision and summarises the content of the expert
      report of Roya Kashefi that was relied upon by the appellant. He noted
      the appellant's bundle also includes an independently obtained
      transcript of the asylum interview and a translation of what purports
      to be a lease of premises, ".. which appear to be for domestic use
      since it refers to 2 bedrooms.".  Judge French goes on to say "..
      Moreover there is an oddity in that the lease is said to be for a
      period of 12 months from 6/11/16 to 7/11/16 (p.87 in the bundle)..".
      He also refers to a prescription for 10mg of amitriptyline dated
      November 2019 and generic material about conditions in Iran.


   6.  Judge French had the opportunity of hearing oral evidence from the
      appellant and her evidence is set out at paragraph [4] of the
      decision.  In her written and oral evidence the appellant sought to
      explain the discrepancies between the information she had provided in
      her screening interview, her asylum interview and her witness
      statement. The appellant confirmed that her camera equipment had been
      confiscated when she was interviewing an individual who I shall refer
      to as [N], and she did not have any copy of the footage.  Previous
      interviews were stored on a laptop which was also seized by the
      authorities. She explained that the work that she had done on the
      documentary had revealed information about [N's] relationship with the
      son of a Mullah, which would be embarrassing for the regime if it came
      out. She was not aware of any arrest warrant issued against her but
      remained adamant that her life would be at risk if she returned to
      Iran.   Before Judge French the appellant said that she was told to
      tell the authorities that her husband was in Turkey, although in
      truth, he had never left Iran. She confirmed that she was in regular
      contact with her husband and had spoken to him two days previously.
      She did not know how her husband was supporting himself financially
      although he had previously worked as a writer.  They had never talked
      about his work during their telephone conversations, but her "guess"
      was that he might be under surveillance.  The appellant also confirmed
      that she has a brother and sister in Iran, with whom she speaks on the
      telephone from time to time. Judge French also noted the appellant
      claims to have mental health difficulties, but the only evidence of
      treatment was a prescription for amitriptyline at a dosage of 10 mg
      ".. which is not a dosage that would normally be used for a mental
      health problem..".


   7. The parties submissions are set out at paragraphs [5] and [6] of the
      decision.  The Judge's findings and conclusions regarding the claim
      for asylum are set out in paragraph [7]. Judge French said:


         "In arriving at my decision, the first issue I needed to address
         was the credibility of the appellant. I take into account all the
         available evidence, whether or not I specifically refer to such
         evidence in this judgement. In making my assessment I bear in mind
         both the points made by the respondent in the refusal letter and
         the explanation given by the appellant solicitors, as to the
         misunderstanding and misinterpretation. I am also conscious that
         even where assertions might seem implausible, it does not
         necessarily mean that they are untrue. However there are a number
         of claims made by the appellant that I do not believe. I do not
         believe the appellant is in jeopardy from the Iranian authorities
         because of the work she had done in the preparation of the
         documentary, and the information she had uncovered about the son of
         [an Ayatollah].  The evidence of the appellant's expert is that the
         Iranian authorities are trying to close down the Chastity Houses,
         which are effectively brothels. They are not supportive of such
         establishments. Moreover the expert says that a person would be
         unlikely to suffer adverse consequences from the authorities of
         (sic) it were perceived that the motivation for the documentary was
         simple (sic) to highlight a women's rights issue. In those
         circumstances I do not believe that the fact that the appellant
         claimed to be working on the documentary in itself would have
         resulted in persecution by the authorities, critically bearing in
         mind, as the expert reported that "Film makers per se are not at
         risk". I have also taken into account that the appellant's husband
         ([AA]) was said to have been involved in the documentary project
         and yet he had only been detained for questioning for 3-4 hours.
         He had not been killed or subjected to inhuman treatment. As far as
         the appellant knew, her husband was not prohibited from continuing
         to work. It had not been contemplated that [the appellant's
         husband] would need to flee from the authorities. Since no action
         had been taken against [the appellant's husband], I find no reason
         to believe that the appellant would be at risk by returning to
         Iran. My belief was supported by the fact that there was no
         evidence that an arrest warrant had been issued for the appellant.
         I also bear in mind that the appellant had no remaining material
         relating to the documentary as a whole and in particular the
         interview with [N].  There was no indication that any information
         had leaked onto the Internet. [the appellant's husband] was aware
         of the allegations but the authorities had not considered that it
         was necessary to imprison him to suppress the information, so I do
         not consider that there is any reason for the appellant to be
         imprisoned. To be clear, despite the appellant's claims I do not
         believe that the appellant would be at risk by returning to Iran
         and therefore she did not qualify for asylum or humanitarian
         protection."


The appeal before me


   8. The appellant claims Judge French erred in his analysis of the
      evidence before the Tribunal.  The appellant claims Judge French
      mistakenly proceeds upon the premise that a lease relied upon by the
      appellant was for domestic use when it was for the "purpose of
      artistic and cultural company", and, erroneously stated that
      amitriptyline 10mg is not used for the treatment of mental health
      conditions. The appellant also claims Judge French misquoted the
      expert report which confirms the widespread existence of Chastity
      Houses and the involvement of ranking officials. It is said that the
      content of the expert report was entirely consistent with the
      appellant's account and in misquoting or selectively reading the
      expert report, the Judge has reached a conclusion that was not open to
      him.  Furthermore, the appellant claims that in considering the risk
      upon return, Judge French failed to consider the appellant's previous
      adverse dealings with the Iranian authorities and whether those
      dealings created an additional risk factor.


   9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bullpitt
      on 18th March 2020.  He said:


         "3.  The judge's assessment of the appellant's account is at [7] of
         his decision. The judge does not mention in this paragraph the
         appellant's claim of previous persecution, including rape by state
         authorities. It is arguable therefore that the judge has failed to
         make a finding about what is arguably a material matter and has
         failed to give adequate reasons for his findings. Permission is
         granted on this basis since it is arguable that there has been a
         material error of law.


         4.   Although the mistakes it is asserted the judge made in respect
         of the medical and expert evidence may well be immaterial in the
         context of the appeal as a whole, all grounds may be argued."


  10. Before me, Mr Woodhouse relied upon Grounds or appeal and the written
      submissions set out in the letter dated 12th August 2020 sent to the
      Tribunal by HS Immigration Consultants.


  11. Mr Woodhouse submits the Judge did not reject the appellant's account
      that she had preparing a documentary addressing the exploitation of
      women in Chastity Houses.  He submits Judge French selectively
      misquoted the expert report to give the impression that the expert's
      view is that the authorities do not support or have involvement with
      Chastity Houses.  However, at paragraphs [98] to [104] of the report,
      the expert confirmed the involvement of officials, and at paragraph
      [112] confirms, entirely consistent with the appellant's account, that
      clerics and well-connected officials are involved.  The expert
      evidence goes further than the summary provided by the judge in
      paragraph [3] of the decision and the appellant claims the expert's
      report is not properly reflected in paragraph [7] of the decision.


  12. Mr Woodhouse submits that in his assessment of the risk upon return
      Judge French should have considered the appellant's previous dealings
      with the authorities that he summarised in paragraph [1] of the
      decision, as being factors that are relevant to the appellant's
      profile. He failed to have regard to those adverse interactions with
      the authorities in his assessment of the risk the appellant would now
      face upon return.  The appellant did not have to be at on-going risk
      from the previous incidents.  She had an adverse profile that would be
      relevant and should have been considered when considering whether the
      appellant would be at risk, now.


  13. Mr Woodhouse submits Judge French erroneously considered that the fact
      that the appellant's husband had not encountered problems, also means
      the appellant would not be at risk.  He accepts that the fact that the
      appellant's husband has not been targeted by the authorities is
      relevant, but he submits, it does not follow that appellant would not
      be at risk.  The appellant's husband had no previous adverse profile.




  14. Mr Woodhouse acknowledges there was no further evidence before the FtT
      regarding the health of the appellant beyond the prescription for
      amitriptyline 10mg and it is not apparent why the Judge said at
      paragraph [4] that the dosage of 10mg would not normally be prescribed
      for a mental health problem.  Mr Woodhouse accepts any erroneous
      reference to the prescription for amitriptyline 10mg, and the lease,
      is not material to the outcome of the appeal.


  15. In reply, Mrs Aboni submits the Judge directed himself appropriately
      and engaged with the evidence before him.  She submits the
      determination demonstrates that Judge did adequately engage with the
      expert's report and the Judge was entitled to find, at paragraph [7],
      that the appellant was unlikely to suffer adverse consequences because
      the appellant was seeking to highlight a women's rights issue.  The
      appellant's husband had also been involved, but he had only been
      questioned once and had had no further problems.  There was no
      evidence that the appellant was of any ongoing interest to the
      authorities because of the events that occurred in 2007 and 2009/10.
      Mrs Aboni submits Judge French has given adequate reasons for his
      finding the appellant would not be at risk upon return now.





Discussion


  16. It is now well established that it is generally unnecessary and
      unhelpful for First-tier Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail
      or issue raised in a case provided the Judge explains in clear and
      brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can understand why they
      have won or lost. Those reasons need not be extensive if the decision
      makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.


  17. The assessment of the risk upon return and credibility of the claim
      advanced by an appellant is always a highly fact sensitive task. The
      ingredients of the story, and the story as a whole, have to be
      considered by reference to the evidence available to the Tribunal.
      The respondent had identified in her decision a number of reasons why
      the appellant's account of her activities in Iran were not credible.


  18. Taking the appellant's claim at its highest, Judge French did not
      believe the appellant is in jeopardy from the Iranian authorities
      because of the work she had done in the preparation of the documentary
      and the information she had uncovered.  In reaching his decision Judge
      French considered the expert report relied upon by the appellant.
      Paragraphs [95] to [107] the expert report deal with Chastity Houses.
       In answer to questions posed by the appellant's representatives the
      expert stated at paragraph [112]:


         "Based on my knowledge and wealth of information on the Internet
         more often than not a cleric or in the least a well-connected
         official was involved to provide protection for the setup. If
         arrested they can argue that all they were doing was engaging in
         the legitimate business of temporary marriage and providing a
         service through an introduction.


  19. At paragraphs [113] to [115] of the report, the expert confirms that
      running a brothel is illegal and efforts are made to close them down,
      although many turn a blind eye either because of the rank of the
      people engaged in the business or the fear of further giving it a bad
      name through the likely publicity.  The expert expresses the opinion
      that the fact that the clerics son used such places is highly likely
      to be resolved religiously, and the clerics son could argue that she
      was his 'Sigeh wife' during the times he was with her and as such
      nothing illegal had taken place.  It would not be hard to refute any
      claim that [N] had, since it could be argued that she was his 'Sigeh
      wife'.  However, public opinion and the backlash against the clergy
      would be most unwanted and anyone exposing such goings-on could
      potentially be charged with national security charges since
      challenging a powerful ayatollah is challenging the system.  The
      expert was asked what harm, if any, could come to the appellant as a
      result of her learning this information. Paragraph [116] of the report
      states:


         "It very much depends on what the authorities believe her
         intentions are/were at the time of making the documentary. If they
         believe that she intended to edit and produce a final version for
         distribution and she intended to expose the son of [an Ayatollah],
         judicial and extrajudicial threats to her safety and liberty would
         be greater and on a different level to say, if they believe her
         intention was to narrate the piece as a woman's right issue and did
         not expose him directly."


  20. I reject the claim that Judge French failed to have adequate regard to
      the expert report and misquoted it.  The appellant confirms in her
      witness statement that the project that she had in mind was to make a
      documentary and speak about the women who were involved in the
      Chastity Houses. She states ".. I wanted to find out their views and
      their stories and document how they reached the position they were
      in...".  The project was important to her because she wanted to
      highlight the plight of those women.  She does not claim that she
      intended to expose the son of [an Ayatollah].  At Question 120 of her
      interview, she explains that when asked whether she had permission or
      a licence to film or interview people, she said 'no because it is not
      going to be broadcast on TV'.  In any event, on the appellant's own
      account, any material that she had, was confiscated.


  21. On the evidence before the Tribunal it was open to Judge French to
      note that the expert says that a person would be unlikely to suffer
      adverse consequences from the authorities if it were perceived that
      the motivation for the documentary was simply to highlight a women's
      rights issue and that the fact that the appellant claimed to be
      working on the documentary itself, would not have resulted in
      persecution by the authorities.


  22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be read as a whole.
      Although the appellant's overall profile is important, Judge French
      noted what had happened in the past and considered whether the
      appellant would be at risk upon return now.  Here, a summary of the
      claim made by the appellant is set out by the judge at paragraphs [1]
      and [3] to [4] of the decision.   Judge French noted the appellant's
      claim that she had attracted the adverse attention of the Iranian
      authorities in 2007, and again in 2009/10.  I have carefully read the
      appellant's witness statements that were before the First-tier
      Tribunal.  On the appellant's own case, she had been able to return to
      acting in 2013, win an award for her performance in a play written by
      her husband in 2014 and to marry in 2015.  There was no evidence
      before the Tribunal that the Iranian authorities had any interest
      whatsoever in the appellant between 2010 and June/July 2017.  As Judge
      French properly noted, the appellant herself confirmed in her witness
      statement that her departure from Iran had not been prompted by either
      of the two earlier events.  She claims she felt compelled to leave
      Iran because of an adverse reaction by the authorities to a
      documentary project that she had worked on with her husband since
      around March 2017 and following the incident in June/July 2017 when
      she was approached by three local police officers who asked her if she
      had a licence for the filming and interviewing and had confiscated her
      camera.


  23. The appellant also claims her husband had been interrogated about the
      content of the videos, and he had been released pending investigation.
      Despite the passage of time, the Iranian authorities have not
      demonstrated any further interest in the appellant's husband and as
      the appellant accepts, there was no evidence of any arrest warrant
      having been issued against her.  It was open to Judge French to have
      regard to the fact that the appellant's husband was said to have been
      involved in the documentary project and appears to have suffered no
      adverse consequences.  The appellant is in regular contact with her
      husband and other members of her family and there was no evidence
      before the Tribunal that the Iranian authorities have shown any
      interest in the appellant since her departure.


  24. At paragraph [87] of the expert's report, the expert refers to several
      pages in Farsi associated with the appellant and her husband
      associated with a TV serial shown on Iran's state broadcasting.  Judge
      French noted, at paragraph [3] of his decision, that there was nothing
      to show that the screening that was to begin in December 2017 did not
      proceed.


  25. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at first
      instance, unless it really cannot understand the original judge's
      thought process when the judge was making material findings. In my
      judgement, Judge French identified the issues and gave a proper and
      adequate explanation for his conclusions on the central issues on
      which the appeal was determined. The findings made by the judge were
      findings that were properly open to the judge on the evidence before
      the Tribunal.  The findings cannot be said to be perverse, irrational
      or findings that were not supported by the evidence.  Having carefully
      considered the decision of Judge French I am quite satisfied that the
      appeal was dismissed after the judge had carefully considered the
      facts and circumstances of the claim, and all the evidence before him.


  26. It follows that in my judgement the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      French is not vitiated by a material error of law and the appeal is
      dismissed.


 Notice of Decision


  27. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   V. Mandalia                             Date     26th March 2021

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia









