
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10533/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2021                       |On 15 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                     MNS
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME OFFICE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present/unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant has appealed against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Davison sent on 15 January 2020, dismissing the appellant's appeal against
the decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim. First-tier
Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson granted permission on 14 February 2020.

    Preliminary Issue

The appellant failed to attend the hearing. I checked that the notice of
hearing had been sent to the correct address.  This was the address in
Gravesend that the appellant had used both in his appeal against the
decision of the Secretary of State to the First-tier Tribunal and also in
the application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The
appellant has not contacted the Tribunal to provide details of a new
address.  The Notice of hearing was sent on 9 June 2021 over three weeks
prior to the hearing.

The appellant also failed to join the case management hearing which was
listed to be heard remotely on 19 January 2021. Directions were issued on
the same date informing the appellant that he should inform the Tribunal
immediately if he were not able to attend the hearing. The appellant did
not respond to directions. There was no record of the appellant contacting
the Tribunal to request an adjournment.

I checked to see of the appellant had contacted the Tribunal, but he had
not. The clerk located a telephone number for the appellant but it has been
disconnected.

I waited for 15 minutes prior to deciding whether to proceed in the absence
of the appellant in accordance with rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the Procedure Rules').

I considered whether it was fair and in the interests of justice to proceed
with the hearing in the absence of the appellant. In making this decision,
I considered first the history of this appeal. The appellant has a history
of failing to attend appointments and failing to attend hearings. The
appellant failed to attend his substantive asylum interviews in 2019 and
the decision to refuse his claim was taken on the basis of a witness
statement he submitted to the Secretary of State. The appeal against his
original decision was originally listed for a pre-hearing review on 15
November 2019. On 8 November the appellant's then representative Louis
Kennedy Solicitors informed the Tribunal that they were no longer
instructed. The appeal was listed for 29 November 2019. On 14 November 2019
York Solicitors requested an adjournment on the basis that the appellant
wished to instruct a psychiatrist; they needed to obtain medical records
and because the appellant required more time to obtain evidence from
relatives in India. The representative asked for the appeal not to be
relisted until after the first week in January 2020.  The appeal was
adjourned and relisted on 8 January 2020.  The appellant did not submit a
bundle of evidence on which he intended to rely. On 7 July 2020 York
Solicitors sent a short letter confirming that they were no longer
instructed by the appellant.

The appellant did not attend the asylum appeal hearing on 8 July 2020
although he sent a short letter by email on the date of the hearing at
10.04 stating that he would not be present at the hearing because he was
unwell.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal concerns the lawfulness of the judge's
decision to not to adjourn that hearing and proceed in the absence of the
appellant. I note that the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal
following the dismissal of his appeal at the First-tier Tribunal was
swiftly prepared and submitted in fluent English.

Following the grant of permission by the First-tier Tribunal, directions
were issued on 20 March 2020. The appellant was directed that he might
submit further submissions by 17 April 2020.  On 22 June 2020 further
directions were issued. The appellant did not respond to either of these
directions. The case was listed for a remote case management hearing on 19
January 2021. The appellant failed to join the case management hearing on
19 January 2021 at the Upper Tribunal and failed to respond to the new
directions. The appeal was then listed for a face-to-face hearing before
me.

In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the appellant has failed to
cooperate fully with the asylum or appeals process and that his persistent
failure to attend court amounts to an abuse of process demonstrating little
respect for the UK court system or the cost to the public taxpayer in
vacated hearings.

I also consider that the avoidance of delay is one of the overriding
objectives of the rules. I do not consider that it is in the interests of
justice to delay this matter any further.

I take into account that this appeal concerns a claim for asylum and is
important to the appellant and that the appellant is unrepresented. I also
take into account his purported lack of English although in this respect I
note that the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal have been drafted in
fluent English, indicating either that the appellant does have a grasp of
English or that he has at least access to someone who can assist him.
However, I also take into account that the appellant has been given several
opportunities to pursue his appeal and has failed to date to submit any
evidence.  Given that his ground of appeal is that it was procedurally
unfair for the First-tier Tribunal to proceed in his absence one would have
expected him to make every effort to attend his appeal at the Upper
Tribunal or give an explanation for his absence and he has not.

Further and in any event, the substantive asylum claim has little merit
given that the appellant's fear relates to a third-party agent, namely
members his own extended family and at its highest the risk to him is
localised. The appellant has not provided evidence as to why he is unable
to relocate elsewhere in India which is a vast and populous country
particularly in the light of his ability to survive in the UK where he
remains unlawfully. Nor has he demonstrated that the authorities in India
would be unable to protect him. The appellant did not submit any evidence
of why he is unable to obtain medication or medical treatment in India.

Having considered all of these factors I am satisfied that the appellant
was on notice of the hearing and that it was fair to proceed in his absence
in accordance with rule 38 of the Procedure Rules.

Background

The appellant is a citizen of India born on 18 November 1984. He arrived
unlawfully in the UK on 23 November 2016. He was served with illegal entry
documents and released with reporting conditions. He failed to report. He
was encountered at a residential address on 9 August 2018 and detained with
a view to removal. He claimed asylum on 13 August 2018 whilst in detention
and had a screening interview on 22 August 2018. He was released from
detention on bail on 18 September 2018. He completed a questionnaire and
was due to be interviewed on 29 May 2019. On 28 May 2019 his legal
representatives sent in a psychiatric report and stated that he had a GP
appointment and was unable to attend. He did not attend the substantive
interview.  A further substantive interview was booked for 19 June 2019. On
14 June 2019 a phone call was received stating that the appellant could not
attend the interview because his medication made him drowsy. The respondent
agreed to give the appellant time to submit a witness statement and
consider the claim on the papers. The representatives requested an
extension of time in respect of the witness statement. The witness
statement was submitted on 10 July 2019. The claim was then determined on
the papers and refused on 16 October 2019.

The appellant asserts that he is at risk on return to India because there
is a land dispute between his father and his uncle and that he has been
attacked by various members of his family including his uncle and his
cousins.

The respondent did not accept his account because the appellant had
previously worked in Oman for four years and when initially encountered, he
stated that he had come here to work and did not wish to claim asylum.
Later, he also stated that he did not fear returning to India and that he
had also worked in Italy. His failure to claim asylum at the first possible
opportunity in the view of the respondent damages the credibility of his
claim. There were also inconsistencies in the appellant's account as to how
he raised the money to travel to the UK.

In any event, even taking the claim at its highest, the respondent
considered that the appellant had both the possibility of seeking
protection from the Indian authorities or relocating elsewhere in India.
The respondent considered that the appellant could not demonstrate that
there were very significant obstacles to his return to India and that there
were no exceptional circumstances which would render his removal unduly
harsh.  The appellant had not made out an Article 3 ECHR medical claim.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

On the day of the hearing, the judge received notification that the
appellant would not be attending the appeal. The judge then considered
whether to adjourn the appeal and having heard submissions from the
respondent decided to proceed in the absence of the appellant.

The judge dismissed the appeal against the decision to refuse the asylum
and human rights claim. The judge did not accept the appellant's account
and in the alternative, noted that there was both sufficiency of protection
and internal relocation options open to the appellant in India. The judge
found that his Article 8 ECHR claim was based on his private life and
medical issues. The judge found that the appellant had not adduced evidence
that the medication he takes is not available in India and that his health
condition did not engage Article 3 ECHR.  The judge found that the factors
at 117B do not assist the appellant who has worked illegally in the UK, not
paid for medical treatment and does not speak English.

Grounds of Appeal ('UT')

Procedural Unfairness

The appellant asserts that it was unfair for the judge to have proceeded
with the appeal in his absence because he was self-represented and did not
know he had to apply for an adjournment.  He managed to inform the court
that he was not well. He was suffering from severe backache and not well
enough to travel to court and was not able to get a letter from his GP. He
was unrepresented.  The respondent should not have looked up the drug
naproxen. The appellant was deprived of the right to present his case and
of the right to a fair hearing.

Permission to appeal

Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson on the
basis that is arguable that the appellant's attendance and any further
documentation which he may seek to lodge may have made a material
difference to the outcome of the appeal.

Discussion and Analysis

The respondent contends that the judge directed himself appropriately and
dealt with the failure to attend the hearing in a fair manner. The
respondent further submits that in his grounds of appeal to the Upper
Tribunal the appellant did not provide any further medical evidence to
support his claim that he was too unwell to attend and his grounds
demonstrate a good knowledge of English.

The judge dealt with the appellant's absence as a preliminary issue. The
judge first took into account that the previous hearing was adjourned in
order to obtain further evidence and that no further evidence had been
provided and that the representatives were no longer representing.

The judge noted that at [3]

      'On the morning of the hearing an email was received by the appellant
    stating ;

         I am writing to inform that I am unable to attend the hearing today
         as I am not well. I am attaching a copy of the prescription I got
         from White House Surgery Walking Centre as proof. I apologise for
         not attending and can you kindly inform the judge.

         The prescription was attached showed the appellant had been
         prescribed naproxen and he was to take one 500mg tablet at day'.

The judge properly noted that the appellant had not requested an
adjournment but had merely stated that he would not be in attendance.  The
judge then indicated that he would consider whether it would be fair to
adjourn the appeal and invited the respondent to make submissions. The
appellant's assertion that he did not know that he had to request an
adjournment is not made out in these circumstances because the judge
considered whether to adjourn the appeal on his own motion in any event.
Further, his claim that he did not realise that he had to request an
adjournment is not supported by the fact that on previous occasions he has
both requested his asylum interview to be delayed and asked the court to
adjourn the appeal.

The respondent looked up the medication and found that it was a pain
killer/anti-inflammatory and submitted that it did not explain why the
appellant had not attended the hearing. The respondent pointed to the
appellant's previous failure to attend two asylum interviews and to the
fact that the appeal had previously adjourned and that no evidence had been
submitted.

I am in agreement that the judge directed himself appropriately. The judge
at [5] referred to Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 000418 (IAC) and replicates the
headnote and other passages from this authority.

The judge was manifestly aware that the main issue for him to decide was
whether it was fair for him to adjourn the hearing.  The judge then
directed himself to the Presidential Guidance Note 1 of 2014 and referred
to fact that dealing with cases fairly and justly includes 'avoiding delay,
so far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues'.

The judge stated at [8]

         'Having considered all of the above and balancing the competing
         interests of fairness and avoiding delay, I decided to proceed to
         hear the appeal'.

From this I am satisfied that the judge took into account the appellant's
history including his previous absconding, his prior failure to attend his
substantive asylum interviews and the fact that the appellant's asylum
appeal had previously been adjourned in order to provide evidence and that
none was provided.  These were matters which were properly open to the
judge to consider.

Although it may have been beyond the remit of the respondent to look up the
medication, there certainly was no medical evidence before the judge which
provided a casual link between the appellant's prescription and his
inability to attend the hearing or his ability to attend a future hearing.
The prescription did not state that the appellant was too unwell to attend.
There was certainly no doctor's letter to this effect and in the covering
letter the appellant stated that he was 'not well' without giving any
further explanation. The appellant had some knowledge of English and was
aware that the hearing was taking place. The prescription was dated 8
January 2020 indicating that the appellant had been able to attend his
doctor on the day of the hearing.

The judge was entitled to take into account the avoidance of delay and
although not explicitly stated in the preliminary issue section, the judge
clearly had in mind that the asylum claim could not succeed even taking the
case at its highest.

I am satisfied that the judge took into consideration relevant matters, did
not take into consideration relevant matters, took account of the
overriding objective of the Procedure Rules and the duty to act fairly and
that the decision not to adjourn the appeal was not procedurally unfair or
unlawful.

Conclusion

It follows that the appellant's grounds of appeal are not made out and his
appeal is dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal is upheld.

Anonymity Direction

I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013, No 1. concerned with anonymity orders
and I observe that the starting point for consideration of anonymity orders
in this Chamber of the Upper Tribunal is open justice. However, I note
paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note where it is confirmed that it is the
present practice of both the First tier Tribunal and this Tribunal that an
anonymity direction is made in all appeals raising asylum or other
international protection claims. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the 2008 Procedure
rules I make an anonymity direction.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant  and  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


Signed  RJ Owens

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens                   Date  7 July 2021







