
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10956/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2019                              |On 02 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                   mr O I
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lambs of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Judge M R Oliver (the judge) dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against
    the respondent's refusal to grant him asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and on human right's grounds.

 2. The grounds claim the judge  failed  properly  to  apply  Appendix  FM,
    failed to make necessary findings of fact and failed to  decide  family
    life.  I will address them in turn:

Failed Properly to Apply Appendix FM

 3. The judge in concluding that there  was  no  family  life  between  the
    Appellant on the one hand and the appellant's partner and her  daughter
    on the other hand, had not correctly applied the law nor  did  he  make
    appropriate findings on the evidence before him.

Failed to Make Necessary Findings of Fact

 4. The judge had supporting evidence regarding  the  relationship  between
    the appellant and his stepdaughter including a statement from  her  and
    evidence from her mother,  the  appellant's  partner.   In  reaching  a
    conclusion that there was not a strong enough relationship between  the
    appellant and the child, the judge failed to  make  findings  upon  the
    evidence of both mother and daughter about that relationship.   He  did
    not explicitly either accept or reject that evidence which amounted  to
    a material error of law.

 5. The judge rejected in large part, the appellant's evidence as not being
    credible but that did not mean he should have not made findings on  the
    partner's and daughter's evidence, which was essential for the  Article
    8 consideration.

 6. The judge failed to make  findings  on  the  general  evidence  of  the
    appellant and his partner  that  they  were  cohabiting,  instead  only
    making findings on the basis of the council tax evidence.

Failed to Decide Family Life

 7. The judge did not correctly apply the findings he made to the facts and
    conclude whether or not  there  was  protected  Article  8,  family  or
    private life.

 8. Judge Gibb granted permission on 11 February 2019.  He said inter alia:

         "2.  The grounds which were in time, complain that the judge  erred
         in:

             (1)  finding  that  there  was  no  family  life  between  the
                  appellant,  his  partner  and  his  stepdaughter,  without
                  assessing the evidence of the partner and the child;

             (2)  limiting his consideration of cohabitation to council tax
                  evidence only; and

             (3)  not considering on the facts as found whether  there  was
                  family and/or private life.

             (4)  The grounds are arguable.  The judge's  consideration  of
                  the family life aspect was  brief  ([26  -  27])  and  the
                  reasoning was limited as a result.  It  is  arguable  that
                  relevant evidence was not assessed, particularly since the
                  appellant's  partner   gave   oral   evidence,   and   the
                  possibility that she was falsely  claiming  the  allowance
                  but in fact was living with the appellant does not  appear
                  to have been considered (witnesses may lie  about  certain
                  matters but nevertheless be truthful about others).   From
                  the last sentence of [27] it may  also  be  arguable  that
                  there  was  no  Article   8   proportionality   assessment
                  conducted following a pre-Agyarko  v  Secretary  of  State
                  [2017] UKSC 11 approach."

 9. The respondent filed and served a Rule 24 response on  12  March  2019.
    The respondent submitted that the judge directed himself appropriately.
     He said inter alia as follows:

             "......the grounds of appeal  are  utterly  unmeritorious  and
             simply argue that the FTTJ  could  have  found  the  appellant
             credible in respect of his relationship.   The  fact  that  he
             could have found the appellant to be in a genuine relationship
             does not mean it was not open for him to find it was not.

         4.   The grounds do not challenge the negative asylum  finding  and
             are therefore presumably content that it was open for the FTTJ
             to find the appellant not to be credible.  That is a factor of
             clear relevance when assessing the alleged relationship.

         5.   In addition the FTTJ has found that despite claiming  to  live
             together the appellant's alleged  partner  claims  the  single
             occupancy reduction  on  council  tax.   The  only  'credible'
             explanation for this was that the  appellant  and  his  spouse
             were defrauding the local authority to pay less  council  tax,
             in  which  case  it  hardly  supports  the  premise  that  the
             Immigration Judge has ignored potentially credible evidence."



Submission on Error of Law

10. Mr Lambs handed up a skeleton argument at  the  hearing  which  I  have
    considered.  He submitted that there was a clear lack of assessment  of
    the evidence before the judge relating to the relationship between  the
    appellant and his partner and stepdaughter.

11. Mr Lambs said that the judge was unclear as to exactly what he meant in
    saying that if the evidence before him meant anything, it was that  the
    appellant did  not  live  with  his  claimed  partner.   There  was  no
    assessment or no proper assessment of the evidence supporting a  family
    life.

12. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge was entitled to make the findings  he
    did.  The appellant and his partner could not come  within  the  Rules.
    At the time of the application they had not  been  cohabiting  for  two
    years.  The judge's finding was that they were not cohabiting.  In  the
    event that what the appellant's partner  had  been  telling  the  local
    authority was true, the appellant could make a  new  application  under
    EEA Rules.



Conclusion on Error of Law

13. The judge found the appellant to be wholly incredible  with  regard  to
    his asylum claim.  That decision  was  not  challenged.   The  evidence
    before the judge regarding the appellant's relationship with  [ZA]  was
    contradictory.  The appellant would have the  judge  accept  that  they
    lived together.  See [15] of the decision.  The evidence  of  [ZA]  did
    not corroborate the appellant's claim to be living with her.  The judge
    said inter alia at [21] with regard to Ms [A]'s evidence:

         "She confirmed she still received a discount for living as a single
         adult.  When she was pressed on this, she explained  that  she  had
         been asked if he lived with her, but he was staying with her rather
         than living with her."

14. The judge clearly took account of all of the evidence  put  before  him
    with regard to the claimed relationship.  The appellant said  he  moved
    in with Ms [A] in November 2016.  If that was true then  she  had  been
    carrying out a fraud upon the local  authority  since  that  time.   In
    cross-examination, she said he was staying with her rather than  living
    with her.  On the one hand, the appellant was  claiming  he  should  be
    granted  leave  to  remain  because  of  his  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with his partner, but on the other hand,  she  was  saying
    that he only stayed with her and did  not  live  with  her.   In  those
    circumstances, the judge was perfectly entitled to come to the decision
    that they were not cohabiting.  The judge took into account so  far  as
    he was able to in the  light  of  the  widespread  adverse  credibility
    findings and inconsistencies, that the appellant played  some  part  in
    the life of his partner's child.   The  appellant  had  claimed  to  be
    bringing the child up but given the judge's finding that they  did  not
    live together, he was entitled to reach his conclusion that he did  not
    have a genuine and subsisting parental role.  See [27].

Decision

15. The judge's decision contains no error of law and shall stand.

Anonymity direction continued.




Signed                              Date 28 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

