

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10823/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision issued             |
|On 27th September 2018                   |On 17th October 2018        |
|                                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    [Z G]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Brown & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against a decision
      by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lea allowing an appeal on
      protection grounds.  The appellant before the First-tier Tribunal is
      hereinafter referred to as "the claimant".

   2. The claimant is a national of Angola.  She is married to a hospital
      doctor.  Around 2016 there was an epidemic of yellow fever in Angola,
      from which children were dying in the claimant's husband's hospital.
      The claimant's husband asked contacts in Brazil and Portugal to send
      medicines.  He did not want the Angolan government to know he was
      doing this in case he got into trouble.  In October 2016 the
      claimant's husband told her that he and two of his medical colleagues
      had received threatening letters and texts.  In November 2016 one of
      his colleagues stopped coming to work and stopped responding to calls.

   3. On the night of 22nd December 2016 a gang of men came to the
      claimant's house.  They beat her husband and said he had been
      protesting against the government because of the problem with children
      in the hospital.  The men threatened to harm the claimant's children.
      Three of the men raped her.  Her husband was abducted.  The claimant's
      eldest daughter was hiding and phoned the police but the police did
      not come that night.  The next day the claimant reported the abduction
      and rape to the police.

   4. A week later a doctor who was a colleague of the claimant's husband
      was found dead in his car along with his wife and child.  The deaths
      were not reported in the media.  A friend of the claimant's husband
      told her she was in danger.  He arranged for her to hide and to travel
      to the UK with her children.

   5. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted the evidence of the
      persecution of the claimant and her husband at the hands of the
      Angolan government.  If the claimant were to return to Angola she
      would be a lone female with three children.  She would be vulnerable
      and subject to persecution.  Her case had not been publicised in
      Angola and the different branches of the Angolan authorities might not
      be aware of her situation.  Nevertheless, given her circumstances,
      including anxiety and high blood pressure, it would be unduly harsh to
      expect the claimant to relocate.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable the
      judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding the claimant's
      evidence to be credible and, in particular, failed to address the
      Secretary of State's reasons for taking the opposite view.

Submissions
   7. In her submission at the hearing before me, Mrs O'Brien relied upon
      the grounds set out in the application for permission to appeal.  She
      submitted that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal failed to engage
      with the challenges to credibility in the Secretary of State's reasons
      for refusal letter and with the background evidence.  The judge based
      her credibility finding on the consistency of the claimant's account
      without considering whether the events she narrated were likely to
      have occurred on the basis of what was known from external sources.
      The judge failed to address conflicts in the expert evidence on the
      likely actions of the Angolan authorities.  There was a lack of
      objective verification.  The claimant had sought the protection of the
      police after the alleged attack, although the expert evidence claimed
      it was implausible for her to have done so.  The judge accepted that
      in doing this the claimant was motivated by fear but this showed the
      inadequate treatment of the evidence.  In addressing the possibility
      of internal relocation the judge failed to consider the availability
      of medical treatment being given to the claimant.  The judge failed to
      consider any risk to the claimant in the long term and did not
      adequately consider the position of the children under s 55.

   8. For the claimant Mr Winter relied on a rule 24 response, accompanied
      by a list of authorities.  He submitted that on the basis of Shizad
      (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal should not be set aside unless the judge's
      conclusions were not reasonably open to her.  There was no reason to
      suppose she did not have all the relevant factors in mind.   The
      decision took account of the Secretary of State's reasons for refusal
      letter and the medical evidence.  The background evidence referred to
      censorship.  The judge addressed both the consistency and plausibility
      of the claimant's evidence.  The Secretary of State's refusal letter
      addressed credibility but did not address the issues either of
      sufficiency of protection or internal relocation.

Discussion
   9. As Mr Winter pointed out, the judge correctly referred to the low
      standard of proof in a protection appeal.  Even if the background
      evidence indicated that a particular event was unlikely to have
      occurred, it was still open to the judge to find that the event did in
      fact occur, provided adequate reasons were given for such a finding.
      The focus in this appeal must therefore be on the judge's reasons
      supporting her favourable credibility findings, as stated in the grant
      of permission to appeal.

  10. If the judge failed to engage adequately with the Secretary of State's
      reasons for disbelieving the claimant this would amount to an error of
      law.  The application for permission to appeal states that a "plethora
      of credibility points" were raised in the reasons for refusal letter.
      These include, for example, questioning how the claimant knew the
      threats were from the government; why her husband did not give her
      more information if he was trying to protect her; why the death of her
      husband's colleague was not reported in the media; if, as the claimant
      said the police were investigating the deaths of this colleague and
      his family, how were the government able to prevent media coverage;
      why would the police question people about the deaths if the
      government was behind them; why did the men who came to the claimant's
      house on 22nd December not find her children; why did the claimant
      wait until the next day before going to the police; why did the police
      treat the account of the claimant's husband's abduction as a missing
      person case when the police in Angola have had some success in
      tackling kidnapping; and what compelling reason did the claimant have
      for attributing events to the government.

  11. A feature of these criticisms of the claimant's account is that they
      are directed at plausibility rather than consistency.  It was largely
      undisputed that the claimant's evidence was consistent.  The question
      is whether the judge entitled also to find that it was plausible?

  12. The judge referred to an expert report by Dr Ingle Amundsen lodged on
      behalf of the claimant.  Clearly this was not before the Secretary of
      State when the refusal letter was written.  At paragraph 27 of the
      decision the judge summarises the report as follows:
"The report confirms that the Angolan government is very sensitive to
international criticism and reputational damage and that a doctor's
notification of a possible yellow fever epidemic to an international health
organisation would be seen as a possible reputational threat and perceived
as anti-government activity.  The expert report also refers to the
proliferation of private and semi-official security companies doing dirty
work on behalf of the government which is consistent with the Appellant's
description of a gang at her screening interview.  The expert report also
confirms that it is plausible that the Angolan government has prevented the
media from reporting on the suspicious death of the appellant's husband's
colleague as the Angolan government has a long record of indirect
censorship and coverups."

  13. At paragraph 32 the judge records the Secretary of State's view that
      the background evidence does not record any evidence of politically
      motivated disappearances.  The judge notes, however, that the expert
      report shows that this might be explained by the Angolan government's
      record of indirect censorship and coverups.  The expert report also
      refers to an Amnesty International report which states that
      intimidation, imprisonment and forced disappearances occur in Angola.

  14. At paragraph 28 the judge addressed the question of why the police
      would deal with the claimant's husband's disappearance as a missing
      person case.  The export report confirmed that a report of a missing
      person would not be accepted by the police until 72 hours after the
      disappearance but states that "high risk reports" are escalated
      sooner.  The judge expressed surprise that the police did not follow
      up the claimant's account of her husband being beaten and abducted
      more quickly.  The expert report states it would not be rational for
      the claimant to approach the police if she believed the authorities
      were responsible for her husband's abduction.  The judge pointed out
      that the claimant had been gang-raped and would not necessarily have
      been acting rationally.  In addition her evidence was that she was
      desperate and did not know what else to do.

  15. At paragraph 29 the judge refers to an apparent discrepancy over
      whether the claimant's daughter telephoned the police on the night of
      the attack, which was not mentioned at the claimant's interview.  The
      judge pointed out, however, that at her interview the claimant was
      asked only if she had gone to the police that night, not whether they
      were telephoned.  The claimant's explanation for not going to the
      police on the night of the attack, as recorded in the refusal letter,
      was that she did not want to go when it was dark.

  16. On the issue of why the police would investigate the death of the
      claimant's husband's colleague if the government was responsible, the
      judge recorded at paragraph 31 the claimant's explanation that the
      local police would not necessarily know of any government involvement.



  17. At paragraph 25 the judge records that it was put to the claimant in
      cross examination that the background evidence showed that there was a
      black market in vaccines and that the criminals targeting her husband
      had nothing to do with the government.  The judge commented at
      paragraph 30 that the claimant's "account of her husband being a
      paediatrician and he and his colleagues being concerned about the lack
      of vaccine for the yellow fever epidemic and approaching the
      international press to ask for help in obtaining medication is backed
      up by the background information showing that there was a yellow fever
      outbreak at this time and a lack of vaccines available in Angola."

  18. Overall the position is that while the Secretary of State considered
      at the time the refusal letter was written that the claimant' account
      was almost wholly implausible, the judge relied upon the expert report
      and other aspects of the background evidence to find that the events
      described by the claimant were not implausible.  The judge found that
      the claimant did not always have a rational explanation for her
      actions but this was not surprising under the circumstances.  On the
      evidence before her these were findings the judge was entitled to
      make.

  19. The judge did not respond to every issue raised in the refusal letter
      and was not required to do so provided she gave adequate reasons for
      her findings.  Not all of the questions raised in the refusal letter
      have been answered.  It may be inferred from the judge's decision,
      however, that the judge was satisfied that the claimant provided all
      the information she had and that even where some parts of the
      claimant's account were not fully explained this did not detract
      materially from its credibility.  I am not satisfied that there is any
      error of law in the judge's reasoning in support of her credibility
      findings.

  20. There are certain further issues raised by the Secretary of State
      which I should address.  The first of these in the application for
      permission to appeal states that there is very little medical evidence
      to support the claim of rape. It is not clear if this argument was
      aired before the First-tier Tribunal.  There is of course no
      requirement for corroboration.  The judge referred to a letter from
      the claimant's GP and a letter for the Glasgow Rape Crisis Centre.
      The Secretary of State pointed out in the application that these are
      both based on what the claimant had said.  The judge was nevertheless
      entitled to take this evidence into account in relation to the
      consistency both of the claimant's evidence and of her reaction to
      having been raped.

  21. The question of whether the claimant might re-integrate into Angola
      was raised before the First-tier Tribunal, though not in the reasons
      for refusal letter.  On this matter the judge had regard to the expert
      evidence and the claimant's particular circumstances.  The judge's
      reasons in this regard disclose no error of law.  Mr O'Brien submitted
      that the judge did not take a view on the prospect of re-integration
      in the long term but the judge was required to look at the situation
      now and in the immediate future.  The question of whether medical
      treatment would be available for the claimant in Angola was no more
      than a subsidiary issue and was not determinative.

  22. Mrs O'Brien also questioned whether the judge had adequate regard to
      the best interests of the children.  The judge referred to this test
      at paragraph 37 of the decision.  It was accepted by the Secretary of
      State in the refusal letter that the best interests of the children
      were to be with their mother.  The judge expressed doubt as to whether
      it would be in the best interests of the children to return to Angola
      given the claimant's vulnerable state and lack of support and this
      finding was open to the judge.

  23. Fundamentally in this appeal the Secretary of State disagrees with the
      judge over the plausibility of the claimant's account.  Having
      examined in detail the judge's reasons for accepting the claimant's
      evidence as credible, I am satisfied that these reasons are adequate.
      The judge was entitled to rely, in particular, on the expert report.
      I am not satisfied there is an error of law in the judge's decision.

Conclusions
  24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

  25. The decision allowing the appeal shall stand.

Anonymity
The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a direction for anonymity.  I was
not asked to reaffirm this direction and I am not satisfied of the need to
do so.

Fee order               (N.B. This is not part of the decision)
As no fee has been paid or is payable I make no fee order.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
          13th October 2018

